##### bho_pp2641-2653.html
5910. The BISHOP OF BAYONNE to LOUISA OF SAVOY
Is waiting for the resolution of the affair committed to his brother. We are not without hope that he will receive an answer to content you; but if his despatch had been what was so often committed to me, and promised to the English ambassadors at the treaty of Cambray, I would have dared to assure you of it, much better than now. He and his brother write more fully to the King. Houcstock (Woodstock), 1 Sept.
Fr., from a transcript, p. 1.
1 Sept.
Colbert MS. 468. v. p. 570.

##### bho_pp2641-2653.html
5911. BISHOP OF BAYONNE and LANGEY to FRANCIS I.
According to our letter of the 23rd ult. to the Grand Master, we came last Thursday to the King hither, where he has come to hunt. Langey declared his charge. He was determined to keep his friendship with you, and was pleased with your firmness, although you had been so urgently desired by Madame Margaret to treat separately. Found, however, many difficulties, when we came to the matters which we had to propose to him; but finally our answers contented both him and his council.
Some points, however, we could not get rid of promptly, for want of information about past matters. For instance, we are in great difficulty from not being able to show a copy of the last treaty, for declaration of which the bishop of London and More have been sent for. The former being ill, 
[Page 2643]
More came alone, and said, in presence of the King and his Council, that although he had found Madame and your Council, both concerning the last treaty and other things, ready to do all that a perfect friend could do, never-theless, when they came to the specification of the articles granted in the said treaty, they never could obtain a copy of it or hear it read, but were assured that Langey should bring it.
Henry does not seem quite satisfied at this, or at not knowing the time when your ambassadors will be with the Emperor for the ratification of the said treaty, that his may be there at the same time. Langey told him that the Admiral would be at Lyons on the 20th. He wished us to write, for perfect certainty, as he means to send an honorable ambassador, but it is not certain whom. He thinks of sending with another the Dean of the Chapel, to make the speech. He is a man of good learning and credit.
In spite of all this, and the difficulty about the indemnity and the penalty incurred for the marriage of the Princess with the Emperor, we are not without hope of obtaining your demand. The difficulty about the copy of the contract is of the greatest importance. We hope to have a final answer by next Monday. We have promised that you will send the copy of the treaty; and the sooner it comes the better. The King is going hence for three days; meanwhile his Council will try to clear up difficulties, and to find a copy of the treaty of Madrid, to which many things are referred.
Advises him to signify in his first despatch that he has heard of the good offices of Norfolk, Suffolk and Rochefort. Langey will return as soon as possible, but has been detained by these difficulties. Most of the Council were far away at their houses: the Legate is now at his house, and does not seem likely to come hither.
Whatever they have to discuss with us, they take great pains to repay us for the good cheer which has been given to their ambassadors in France. Houctok (Woodstock), 1 Sept.
Fr., from a transcript, pp. 4.
1 Sept.
MS. 5,499, p. 141. Bibl. Nat.

##### bho_pp2641-2653.html
5912. BISHOP OF BAYONNE to MONTMORENCY.
Has little to add to the King's letters. Thinks it very bad policy to leave men who have to manage affairs so ill informed. Was never pained so much at anything; and if the English are displeased, thinks they have some reason. After having so often demanded the communication of this treaty, and so repeatedly complained to the King and the Admiral, is it not natural that suspicions should be aroused when no notice is taken of it? "Je ne vous prierai, Monseigneur, d'avoir memoire de ce que par mes dernieres lettres vous manday, esperant qu'il vous en sera survenu. Sinon y adjousteray a ceulx que vous nommeraient Monseigneur de la Hargerie qu'il serait bien, comme il me semble, pour faire ce mestier." Woodstock, 1 Sept.
Bryan will return soon, and the son of lord Rochford and another go in his place.
Fr., from a transcript, pp. 2.
1 Sept.
MS. 5,499, p. 184. Bibl. Nat.

##### bho_pp2641-2653.html
5913. MONTMORENCY to the BISHOP OF BAYONNE.
Sends packets of letters, in accordance with the request of the king of England and Francis to see to whatever came from Rome addressed to the Pope's agents, that might concern his affair. You are to put the said packet in his hands. Francis and Madame are in good health, and leave tomorrow for Chantilly, from which they go to Paris. The Emperor is still at Genoa. Sends a packet delivered to the writer by Master Briant, to be delivered to the King. The Florentines have sent four ambassadors to Genoa, to en-
[Page 2644]
deavor to make an arrangement with money. The Pope desires to have the state of Florence in his hands. The prince of Orange has left Rome, and will pass through Florence with 4,000 lanceknights and 4,000 foot. Compiegne, 1 Sept.
When Francis arrives at Paris, he will stay there some time to take order about the liberation of his children. The Admiral will be at Lyons on the 15th to go and meet the Emperor. Francis is much pleased with the four fine ... and four "courriers" (coursiers ?) sent by Henry.
Fr., pp. 2. From a transcript.
[Sept.]
MS. 5,499, p. 143. Bibl. Nat.

##### bho_pp2641-2653.html
5914. The BISHOP OF BAYONNE to MONTMORENCY.
Has been very urgent with the King and Madame to obtain his congé, and they have requested him still to have patience, which he has the more readily agreed to, as the service he is doing here is chiefly to assist in the deliverance of the French king's children, and consequently in promoting peace in Christendom. You must, therefore, not expect me so early as I indicated by my last letters; since which the Commander and the sieur De Fontaines and Lannais have informed me that you have conducted yourself so honorably that I have reason to be satisfied. I beg you to continue from well to better. Being obliged to remain, I have ordered the sieur de Fontaines, whom I have sent into France, to sell some wood, which I would gladly have avoided. London.
Fr., from a transcript, pp. 2.
1 Sept.
Le Grand, III. 345.

##### bho_pp2641-2653.html
5931. MONTMORENCY to the BISHOP OF BAYONNE.
In accordance with his letter of the 1st inst., sends him a copy of the treaty of Cambray. Would have sent it sooner, had he not thought about the treaty of Madrid, according to which everything has been conducted in the conclusion of the peace. Has begun a copy of the latter, which shall be sent, if necessary. Madame's company are in good health, and have come hither on their way to Paris. The Admiral is to be at Lyons on the 18th or 20th at latest, to meet the Emperor, who is still at Genoa. There is still time for the king of England to despatch ambassadors, who may be there as soon as the Admiral. The Emperor, it appears, has chosen Mons. de la Chault to come hither for the ratifications._Has just heard that the Emperor has left Genoa, and may be now at Piacenza. Thinks he will have more work in Italy than he expects, for he has come at a very bad time. He caused the peace to be published at Genoa with very great ceremony. I do not write to your brother, because I suppose he has left on his return home. Escouan, 8 Sept.
Sends news of the Turk, who is advancing with great power.
Pp. 3, Fr., from a transcript.
10 Sept.
Suckling's Suffolk, II. 391.

##### bho_pp2641-2653.html
5935. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Begs credence for the bearer touching his congé. London, 10 Sept.
Forgot to speak about hackneys. Will send him four in six days, though it is difficult to get good ones. Men have been here four months choosing four for Francis.
Fr., from a transcript.
[12] Sept.
Vit. B. XII. 171. B. M. St. P. I. 343.

##### bho_pp2641-2653.html
5942. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Received yesterday his letters of the 10th inst., with this blessed treaty of Cambray, "qui tant s'est faict achapter," that now it would only serve to renew disputes; first, because it makes no special provision for what the king of England demands, although it is more advantageous for him than we were able to tell him, not knowing of the 26th article; and, secondly, because it does not speak of the penalty for the marriage, and (which is a hard hit to us) specifies almost definitely the sums we have promised, which, I think, do not amount to more than the obligations which I understand have been delivered at Calais. I do not see how to set this 
[Page 2652]
right again; for those here may say that we demand of them more than we are bound to give, and want to make a profit of the difference. So I had rather let the sleeping dog lie, and await the conclusions you have taken on my brother's arrival, before doing more.
My brother will have told you the great perplexity we have had from the article in the instructions delivered to him, stating that the 3rd, 4th, and 10th articles in the treaty of Madrid were to be followed, that this clause had been left out, and that other articles were to be changed. Think what they will say even now, when they see we have not communicated that article to them. I think that there never was such a despatch, and I trust you will set it right as soon as possible. It is true, that if you will grant this King what he asks through my brother, all will be readjusted. If so, the sooner the better, that I may be able to promote your affairs, and to sue that Master Boulant, when he leaves, which I think will be at Michaelmas, may carry you a good despatch.
As to what was written to me, "de par vous l'Esleu Berthereau," about the Legate, I thought I had done enough for the time to satisfy both the Admiral, you being at Cambray, and yourself, on the arrival of my brother here, when I spoke to you of the choice of an ambassador speaking French. I could not tell you particulars, for I did not wish suddenly to assure you of anything, of which I was not certain myself; for though I saw great appearance of it, I still see much matter of doubt. If I had found means to go to court before my brother's arrival, I could have informed you sooner, and more certainly. But though I have been crying daily to the Admiral and Robertet, as my letters show, I have only had two despatches in two and a half months, one of which you caused to be sent me when you went to Francis. I have, therefore, been compelled to leave everything till the departure of my brother. Yesterday I received letters from your ambassadors of Hungary, which I send you, having first looked at them to see if there was anything which could be of service here, and taken copies, which I am now sending to this King, along with the information sent by you from Venice about the Grand Turk. I have heard from Flanders that the said Turk was some time since at Buda, and news had just arrived that those of Nuremberg had sent to treat with him. I do not write to Francis, as I should not know what to say to him. I hope you have explained to him the reasons for which I have so often desired my recal. London, 14 Sept.
P.S.—Yesterday the Emperor's ambassador, who came here lately, left London. Today he goes with Wolsey and Campeggio to see the King, and endeavor to take his leave, as he has had his recal. I think he will obtain it, and be off as soon as possible. I must not forget to tell you that Master Bryant, leaving in such favor as he did, carried with him the finest gelding in this court, and he said he had one for you, such as I had described to you. This is not to put you in mistrust of receiving a stallion (ung entier), which I now send you. Meanwhile keep mine at Brethueil, fed on sheaves till Michaelmas, otherwise he will founder suddenly.
Fr.
14 Sept.
Le Grand, III. 352.

##### bho_pp2653-2664.html
5945. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
I write to prevent your being anxious, because I mentioned in my last that the Legate had desired me to come and see him. I did so next day, and found him and Campeggio determined to go to the King, for the despatch of the latter, who expects to leave within 10 or 12 days. I think they would like to treat him at his departure rather more graciously than they had intended to do, hoping that there may be some change at Rome, if the Emperor treat the Pope as badly as they expect he will; so that Campeggio might still be of use to them, or at least not do them injury, as he would if ill treated at his departure. Wolsey's object in sending for me was to have another conversation with me about the divorce, urging me most strongly, both on his own part and his master's, to help them to consult with the French divines. He begged I would find an opportunity to cross the sea on some other pretext, and consult with those who can help them, with the permission of Francis and Madame, using the same terms about it to me as he did to my brother. I said that, knowing their wishes, I had already asked leave to go and see my father, who was very ill, and wished my presence to make a division of his goods. He approved of this pretext, and begged I would petition for my congé, and arrange for some one to take my place, in whom I should have confidence. Incidentally, during two days that I was with him, he spoke of the practices of this court, not showing himself so much vexed with them as I am sure he is. I have less hope than before of his influence, from the conversation I have had with him, for I see he trusts in some of his own protégés (aulcuns faits de sa main), who, I am sure, have betrayed him (luy ont tourné la robe). I should never have believed that they would have been so wicked; and the worst is that he does not understand it.
Even if I had not the above occasion to ask for my recall, I should be 
[Page 2654]
obliged to press for it for another cause. Since my brother's departure the plague has broken out among my household; and, in spite of repeated changes of lodging, my principal servants being dead, I have been unable to refuse leave to the others to go home, so that I am now quite alone. Considering the intercourse I have already had with people, I am in no great fear, but you may consider yourselves as having no ambassador here at all. Besides, I was told yesterday by the Grand Esquire (Boleyn), who is to leave in 15 days, with the dean of the chapel (Stokesley), to go to the Emperor, that he does not think the King his master will let me speak to him for two months. It would be well, therefore, to send over at once him whom I suppose you have already chosen, with an answer to the despatch of my brother, and that he may come in post, and find me here, letting his train come after him, so that I may put him in the way with the King, and perhaps introduce him to some of the Council, if there are matters to discuss; which, however, I do not imagine, considering the assurance Wolsey has again renewed to me. The new ambassador need be in no fear of the plague, for the danger has much diminished, except in this neighbourhood, and I expect in 15 days it will have altogether abated. I have been this morning with the Emperor's ambassador, who has given me as good a reception as I could have asked for. I had previously asked Wolsey's advice about it. If his master conducts himself towards Francis in as honorable a manner as the ambassador promises, it will be well. London, 18 Sept.
P.S.—Enclosed is a memorandum of the sums furnished by this King, which he wishes to have declared in the despatch which he asks for, through my brother; in addition to which there is the part touching the fleur de lis, which they would like put with the others.
Fr. Add.
20 Sept.
R. O.

##### bho_pp2653-2664.html
5955. MONTMORENCY to the BISHOP OF BAYONNE.
Will say nothing more of the satisfaction expressed by Francis and Madame, or of the report made to them by Langeais. A little memorial is sent to him to be used as an instruction, if needful, though Du Bellay hardly requires it, to express the thanks of Francis to the king of England. You are to send an answer as soon as possible, after doing what you can to obtain what is expressed therein. The bishop of Paris is very ill, and cannot live long. Has asked for his bishopric for Du Bellay, which the King has willingly granted, along with the abbey of St. Mor.
Albany is about to go to England, which Francis is willing that he should do whenever Henry sends for him. Sends an extract from a letter sent from Mons. de Tarbe at Rome in cipher, showing what he has done in the matter of the king of England. Is to communicate to the King also an advertisement Francis has received from his ambassadors in the country of the Leagues, of the 16th inst., touching the news of the Turk. Paris, 23 Sept.
Has delivered 200 cr. to a man of the duke of Suffolk, to take to ...
Fr., from a transcript, pp. 3.
23 Sept.
MS. 5,499, p. 185. Bibl. Nat.

##### bho_pp2653-2664.html
5956. FRANCIS I. to the BISHOP OF BAYONNE.
Has learned on the return of De Langeais the manner in which Du Bellay has executed his charge. Is quite satisfied with all he has done. The answers made by Henry to all the points in Langeais' instruction show more than ever his indissoluble amity, and his desire to gratify Francis in everything. Du Bellay is to assure the King how strongly Francis feels his obligation to him, and that he will never feel at ease till he has an opportunity of showing it. Is to make answer on the point of which Langeais has spoken, according to a memorandum sent herewith. Paris, 23 Sept. 1529.
Fr., from a transcript, pp. 2.
[Page 2658]
24 Sept.
MS. 5,499, p. 184. Bibl. Nat.

##### bho_pp2664-2675.html
5982. The BISHOP OF BAYONNE to FRANCIS I.
On receipt of Francis' letters of the 24th ult., sent to Windsor to know the King's intention about the communication I had to make to him thereon. He desired me to wait till his Council came to London, and relate my charge to them, excusing himself, on the ground of the pestilence which has been in my house, from giving me immediate audience. Yesterday they 
[Page 2665]
met at Wolsey's lodging, and I declared to them the contents of your letters, and of the memoirs sent to me, especially touching the Emperor's fleur de lis, and the delay of the payment of the last quarter of this year. I was answered in the same way as my brother and I had been before, but after long discussion they pressed me to make a report of it, and everything should be done according to reason. Among the expedients they proposed to satisfy the Emperor about the fleur de lis, the least unreasonable is that of which my brother had already spoken, viz. that the Emperor should send a letter to Henry, promising to hold him quit if he delivered it into your hands. But I was by no means satisfied, telling them that the demand you would make to the said Emperor of the said letter would give them knowledge that there was no such love and confidence between you two as both had pretended to him. Thinks if the matter had been remitted to them you would have obtained this demand; and as to the delay of the payment of this quarter, they excuse themselves by the conference which is about to commence; at which they mean to make it plainly evident that neither your friendship nor theirs has been less fruitful than that of the Emperor has been injurious. The utmost I can hope in this matter is to gain a term of six months if possible, which perhaps might be expected if it did not require so many people to agree together, "ou que je puisse parler au maistre mesmes dont je suis prelaz, par tant qu'il luy plaira, et me doubte, considere sa nature, que c'est pour longtemps." (fn. 1) For this reason, as well as others which I have already urged on the Grand Master, you had better send another.
Mentions the explanations he gave to the English relative to the penalty for the marriage and the passage of Albany.
Fr., pp. 4, from a transcript. Dated in the margin at the head: Londres, 4 Oct. 1529 (?)
4 Oct.
Le Grand, III. 359.

##### bho_pp2664-2675.html
5983. THE SAME to MONTMORENCY.
You will see by the letters of Francis all that I have yet been able to do in the negociation committed to me by the last letter: in which I am astonished not to have a single word in answer to the request of this King carried to you in writing by my brother. I do not know what to answer. If I had known the intention of Francis, and had a letter to Master Boulan from Madame, or even something addressed to myself that I could have shown, I should have held my despatch for certain. And as he desired that letter, as I knew very well, and has not received it, he alone opposes me in this despatch; at least it is he who leads the dance expressly against the Dukes and Wolsey, whom I had so well persuaded that I thought I had gained my cause. I will see what is to be the issue (que ce sera) as soon as possible; but my hands are tied by this accursed pestilence, which has quite left the town, so that all the world is gathered here about the matter of the loan (en sorte que tout y est assemblé de la matiere d'emprunt); nor can I speak except through a medium talking to a few apart, which I have not yet been able to do.
As to my recall, I remit that and everything to your good will, but I beg you to consider the urgencies of my reasons. I am more and more pressed to it, especially now, when Dr. Stocles (Stokesley) is already despatched for the reasons mentioned in my other letters. And seeing things in this state I told them long ago that I would shortly set out. Consider, too, that after losing 12 of my household in four days, apart from those who have fled to the country, of whom I suspect some are lost, I have been compelled to allow the others to go back to France, as they did not know whither to go here. Not understanding the language well, I have been more than a month alone in another man's house, and I cannot honorably remain longer, especially now 
[Page 2666]
that all England has met together here, without having new attendants and furnishing a house once more, which is to me impossible. Besides I do not see that I can for a long time speak with the King, who at present takes the management of everything. My brother will have explained to you particularly other causes for the diminution of credit (mutation du credit), which occurs to me daily more and more. One thing good is, that, affairs being in such a state, and the goodwill here so great, you cannot send a man who will not be sufficient.
A paragraph touching a private matter,—the marriage of St. Mor at Paris. (fn. 2) London, 4 Oct.
P.S.—Boleyn leaves this in three days, along with Dr. Stokesley. His going is well arranged. Those who send him wish him to be received with more than ordinary honor. Penisson, whom you know, is sent to keep him company, and to "servyr d'addresse;" but I warn you that the reception given to him will be well weighed.
I forgot to tell you that I see clearly Wolsey is to lose his influence entirely in this Parliament (que par ce Parlement le Cardinal s'en va totalement). I see no chance to the contrary. I have stated my reasons in writing to Francis.
Fr. Add.
4 Oct.
Add. MS. 28,579, f. 178. B. M.

##### bho_pp2664-2675.html
6002. The BISHOP OF BAYONNE to FRANCIS I.
Has been able to obtain no other answer from Henry's Council but that which he sends; on which the King had already intimated to me his final resolution, before it was communicated. Thinks nothing could have moved him, but that he has been confirmed in it by the reason which Du Bellay lately mentioned to the Grand Master, as well as by others which he is writing to him in cipher. The cause of the delay has been that the King hardly made any stay here, but returned to Windsor, leaving his Privy Council, with whom Du Bellay has conferred twice upon this business. The Imperial ambassador has also been with them, to be interrogated (pour estre interrogé) if he had heard from his master that the jewel should be delivered to you to be kept for him. But as at his departure from Spain there was yet no mention of peace, he made no other answer, as he has told me, except that I must give him a copy (qu'il m'en fallait faire double), according to the treaty of Cambray; and he thinks this demand pretty considerable to come of a good understanding. Thinks, however, the Emperor will make the answer Francis requires, and without much loss of time, considering the assurance given me by those here, that on the arrival of the said answer, and of the commission from Francis to whoever is to receive the jewel, they will at once deliver it. As to the postponement of the payment of this last quarter, on speaking to some of the principal councillors, I was in some hope of obtaining it, but at last no order has been taken by which anything can be done. You will see by the comment sent you in writing on the subject of Albany's voyage, how little desire they have for it; at which I have been much disappointed, after the show they made of wishing for it. Has been obliged to go back to his old opinion, which he had laid aside, owing to the urgent request made to Francis by Bryan, and the goodwill he sees in some of them. Thinks, however, they do not wish to give up faith in their prophecies. One of them casually remarked, touching their reply, that they thought it strange that on Bryan pressing you for information about Albany's commission, and what he proposed to do in Scotland, you would vouchsafe no answer, which they considered rather suspicious, and that this was what had made them change their purpose.
In the reply by Scotland (par Escoce) which my brother brought you, it is said in the end that you ought to get the treaty of Cambray reformed by the Emperor, according to the form and manner therein set down. The Council here expressed themselves very glad that you would promise Henry to do so; and since my brother's departure Wolsey has expressly repeated this to me; but latterly I can see clearly that Henry's intention is that you should get the treaty speedily reformed by the Emperor, and that he does not mean to grant you what he did grant you when my brother was here, nor to deliver the jewel to you until the said reformation is made. Does not know what medicine to apply to the case, especially as they have asked him whether Francis had granted him the conditions, and have twice expressed astonishment at my being in the "said company," and not having spoken to them of it. Was only able to reply that they need not be anxious about conditions, or anything else that depended on Francis, whose friendship might be thoroughly trusted; but on his coming to the King, Henry insisted that it was not enough to grant the conditions, but the contract must be immediately reformed. This he said several times, but Du Bellay pretended not to understand, and addressed his discourse to others.
Fr., pp. 4. From a transcript, dated in the margin at the head: Londres, 12 Oct. 1529.
[Page 2672]
12 Oct.
Le Grand, III. 364.

##### bho_pp2664-2675.html
6003. THE SAME to MONTMORENCY.
I have not yet been able to obtain my despatch as I desired, nor has any order been taken about it, till now. You will see what has been done, by my letters to the King, and by the answer they have given me in writing. I write you in cipher what I think of it. The delay in the payment you asked for has not been advanced by what Francis said to Master Bryant, in speaking of the deliverance of the children, viz., that he would never disburse what he ought to pay for their deliverance, and that he had no such sum in ready money to meet unexpected cases; for upon Bryant pressing him further, saying it was a thing which it would be difficult for him to obtain, Francis answered him, that he had no anxiety about being unable to do it, as he could easily obtain the sum by taking a chalice from every church in his kingdom. Consequently Bryant judges that we have no occasion to press them so hard for money; and I understand, on good authority, he has made good use of this admission. Things being in their present state, as I have nothing more to do here, I hope soon to receive orders to remove, which I trust you have already despatched. It would be well that my successor should arrive before his train, as he will require less ceremony, and I will keep (fn. 6) him company till his train arrive. Nevertheless, I am provoked to go the whole length of this town every day to visit these Lords, with two varlets after me. I promise you my ears are filled with mockery as I pass, which is a great discredit to my master, especially when all England is beginning to meet for this Parliament.
Campeggio, of whose despatch I wrote to you long ago, is now well on his road. He was very well treated at his departure. This King will be very glad that he should be well received. But I think about the marriage they now speak soberly to him, although he is not over well pleased with the Emperor, for a couple of good turns he has done him anew, of which the least would catch the hare. (fn. 7) He will ask Francis for a power to resign a small abbey in Brye to his son; which I think he ought not to be denied, as it will be the best way to prevent its falling void in the court of Rome; but there will be no harm in showing him that it is an unusual favor. This King is now sending his relative Poul (Pole), one of the most learned men known, to visit the country (France), and continue his studies. He will pay his respects to you and Francis, according to his instructions. He and his relations, who are great lords, have asked me to recommend him to you. Since my brother's departure the said lord (Henry) has applied to me, by those of his council, for the delivery of certain camlets taken by those of Dieppe, which belonged to his domestics. I have written several times to the Viconte of Dieppe, who alleges that the vouchers shown to prove the property was theirs are forged. He is wrong, for Dominique Lomelin is one of the worst (des pires, q. pirates ?); and, besides what appears by the books and countermarks, the Dukes have sworn to me that they know it for certain. An Englishman, who had taken some of our men at sea under color of a letter of marque, has been made prisoner, and the goods restored, so that we ought to be satisfied. I hear that complaints have been made of it to you, but the English have begged me that a commission may be given to my successor about the depredations which have been made for some time, for they expect that great complaints will be made about them by the people at this Parliament. I forgot to tell you that I did not wish to speak about the matter of a loan upon jewels, as I was denied other things more reasonable. You will do them a pleasure by informing them more frequently of affairs in 
[Page 2673]
Italy. I assure you, both the King and Council have the smallest possible friendship for the Emperor. London, 12 Oct.
P.S.—Campeggio is still at Dovor, and I have just heard that, on pretence of want of ships, they will not let him pass, without consulting about it, for fear he carries off the treasure of the cardinal of York.
Fr. Add.
R. O.

##### bho_pp2675-2688.html
6011. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
This despatch has been delayed, as it has been needful to write and rewrite several times the letters I send you, and by the repeated going and coming of the Dukes to Windsor, whence at this moment they have sent them to me in the form you will see by the copy. They trust it may be excused if they are not found satisfactory, as they have not yet got into the way of managing with the King; but they swear they will do marvels in future, and are so confident that I can hardly help believing them.
I have visited the Cardinal in his troubles. He is the greatest example of fortune that one could see. He represented his case to me in the worst rhetoric I ever saw; for heart and tongue failed him completely. He wept, and prayed that Francis and Madame would have pity upon him, if they found that he had kept his promise to be a good servant to them so far as his honor would permit. But at last he left me, without being able to say anything more to me than his countenance did, which has lost half its animation (qui est bien descheu de la moitié de juste pris). His case is such that his enemies, even though they be Englishmen, could not help pitying him, yet they do not desist from persecuting him to the last; and he sees no means of safety, unless Francis and Madame will help him. He does not desire legateship, seal of office, or influence,—is ready to give up everything, to his shirt, and to go and live in a hermitage, if this King will not keep him in disfavor. I have consoled him as well as I could, but I have been able to do little. He has since sent to me, by one whom he trusts, to show what he would wish done for him, saying that it would not hinder Francis if he at 
[Page 2676]
least wrote to this King that there is a great rumor in France that he had removed Wolsey from his presence and from his good favor, so that he was in danger of being destroyed, which Francis could not readily believe, and hoped Henry would not suddenly take up a bad impression against those who have seen that he was the instrument of this perpetual amity, so renowned throughout Christendom; and that if, perchance, he had fallen into his displeasure, he hopes the King will moderate his anger, which he is sure he will be counselled to do by those about him who have the management of his Grace's affairs. This was the most reasonable of all his requests; in which I hope I am not obtruding my advice if I say that such a letter ought not to be taken ill by any man here, especially when they consider, as they do, that they are compelled to take your part more than ever.
Moreover, I assure you that the greatest advantage they have ever had of him, and what has served most to put him in discredit with the King, was, that at my coming he declared too openly his wish to go to Cambray. The others persuaded the King that this was only to escape from being at the expedition of the marriage; and I can tell you, that without him they were terribly near bringing the King to break off the peace negotiations. So I wrote to you at the time; but I left ten times as much to say, which I must keep till I see you, and which I am sure you will find very strange. If the King and Madame think this advisable, they will have withdrawn a faithful servant from the gates of hell. But he begs above everything that this King be not informed that they have been asked to do it; for his enemies insinuate that he has always had, both in peace and war, secret intelligence with Madame, from whom during the war he received large presents, and that this was the reason why, when Suffolk was at Montdidier, he did not help him with money, which would have enabled him to take Paris. This they talk of in a whisper, that I may not be apprised of it. As to the said presents, he hopes Madame will not do him an injury if it be spoken of. In all other things he recommends himself to her Grace. These Lords intend, after he is dead or ruined, to impeach the state of the Church, and take all their goods; which it is hardly needful for me to write in cipher, for they proclaim it openly. I expect they will do fine miracles. I have also been told by your great prophet with the brazen face, that this King will hardly live more than ..., to whom, as you know, so far as I see by his writings, he has allowed no further term than the monster (monstre) of May.
I must not omit to say that if Francis and Madame wish to do anything for Wolsey they must make haste. The letters will never be here before he has lost the seal. But he no longer cares about that. They will help for the rest. Also they should give my successor, whom every one is expecting here in a few days, charge to speak about it. The worst of his evil is that Mademoiselle de Boulen has made her friend promise that he will never give him a hearing, for she thinks he could not help having pity upon him. London, 17 Oct.
Fr. Add.
19 Oct.
R. O.

##### bho_pp2675-2688.html
6018. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Would be glad to grant to Wolsey the request which he made to me secretly by an Italian servant, the only one who has remained faithful to him. On Tuesday (fn. 1) the great seal was taken from him, and an inventory was made of his goods, and commands were issued to every one who had been in his service these 20 years to render an account of all that they have touched. This they have found difficult, because, not a sixth part being found of what was expected, they are well assured to have many "tours de corde." He was also ordered to reply before the King or Parliament, and thinking, what is quite true, that the Bishops had already chosen judges after their own liking for the said Parliament, he preferred to put himself in the mercy of the King; of which nevertheless he hoped less than nothing, being used with such severity that, in addition to the loss of all his goods and honors, he expects to be perpetually imprisoned, and that neither the King nor Parliament will ever revoke his sentence. The points of which he is accused are robberies and exactions, but these would not be mortal offences. They say at Amiens he agreed to admit the duke of Ferrara into the League, without the knowledge of the King; that he delivered to Francis a bond under his hand without authority; that he made intimation of war to the Emperor, &c. The least of these things, they say, will cost his head; and I fully believe that if Francis and Madame do not help him in all diligence, he is in great danger. He would like Francis and Madame to send a gentleman hither in all diligence, by whom they would represent what you wrote on the 16th, without specifying further, or giving the least intimation that it was at his request, otherwise it will be immediate death to him. He begs Francis, for the mercy of God, thus to protect him from the fury of his 
[Page 2679]
enemies, who would bring his old age to the most shameful and miserable end. For my part, though I have no business to meddle further, or to give my advice, I will say little, knowing that where affection and pity reign the judgment is apt to be biassed. The duke of Norfolk was (is made ?) chief of the Council, &c.
The remainder is contained in the fragment printed by Le Grand, of this date, but in somewhat different order.
Fr., pp. 3. From a transcript, dated in the margin at the head: Londres, 22 Oct. 1529.
22 Oct.
Le Grand, III.
377.

##### bho_pp2675-2688.html
6019. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
(The beginning of the letter is in cipher, undeciphered.)
While writing, I have heard that Wolsey has just been put out of his house, and all his goods taken into the King's hands. Besides the robberies of which they charge him, and the troubles occasioned by him between Christian princes, they accuse him of so many other things that he is quite undone. The duke of Norfolk is made chief of the Council, Suffolk acting in his absence, and, at the head of all, Mademoiselle Anne. It is not known yet who will have the seal. I expect the priests will never have it again; and that in this Parliament they will have terrible alarms. I expect Dr. Stephen will have a good deal to do with the management of affairs, especially if he will abandon his order (jetter le froc aux horties). But I am not so much disgusted but that, if any one offered me Paris and St. Mor, I would take them, and be at the charge of being your bishop. I am, however, compelled to tell you that I am here in the greatest dishonor, which will increase when the whole Parliament shall meet, especially seeing I must ride on a mule for fear of the plague, which has visited the animals; and I do not think that you wish me to renew my train, and refurnish my house, which you know is impossible. London, 22 Oct.
P.S.—They are vexed at not hearing news from you more frequently, and are very anxious to hear some to the disadvantage of the Emperor, either by means of the Turk or otherwise.
Fr. Add.
23 Oct.
Le Glay,
Négoc. II. 712.

##### bho_pp2675-2688.html
6027. MONTMORENCY to DU BELLAY.
You will see by the letters sent by Francis what he has said to La Chault about the ratification of the peace, which has been sworn in accordance with the last treaty. Advises him not to show the letters. Has received his packet of the 17th, to which answer will be made in two or three days. Your brother or some one else will be sent in your place. Meanwhile the bailly of Senlis will be ordered to come, to whom I am writing again to send him immediately afterwards from thence. Paris, 25 Oct.
Assures him that he shall not remain more than three weeks in England. Wishes for his presence as soon as possible in case the Bishop die.
Fr., pp. 2. From a transcript.
26 Oct.
R. O.

##### bho_pp2675-2688.html
6030. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Not much has happened since my letters of the 23rd. After the Cardinal had been deprived of the seal, and all his goods placed in the King's hands, which are valued at 500,000 crowns, he was ordered to retire to an episcopal mansion, eight leagues hence, to await the King's pleasure. Norfolk has been made chief of the Council, and in his absence Suffolk, who has had his mules, and Master More, chancellor, leaving the Chancery of Lancaster to Master Feuvillem (Fitzwilliam). They are beginning to assemble for the Parliament from all parts of the country, during which the King will occupy the house which belonged to the Cardinal. He is coming to see it today to arrange for his residence. I think the King will leave him York, with a portion of his goods, and not treat him worse. If it be so, and if these Lords do not agree, as I expect they will not, it is not improbable that he will regain his authority, so I think it will not be bad policy to grant his request, which in no case can do harm. I forbear to urge again my recall, feeling sure that you have done your best for me; but I am astonished that since I began to urge it. you have given me no answer. London, 27 Oct.
French. Add.
27 Oct.
Rym. XIV. 349.

##### bho_pp2688-2704.html
6041. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Besides what I have written to Francis, I need not say much to you, especially considering the assurance you give me of my seeing you so soon, which is as great a blessing to me as if I were elected your bishop. Not that I am weary of serving, here or elsewhere; for if I have endured to see most of my servants fall dead before me, expecting every hour the same fate myself, (for the danger was much greater than I was willing to write to you, for fear of creating too great alarm,) it is not to be supposed but that I would have endured a little longer inconvenience. But as I hear that the urgency with which I have asked for my recall has not been well taken, I mean to have the first word when I get back.
You will see what I have written to Francis about his affairs; of which I wish to send information, although I am hourly expecting my brother, principally to intimate that this King is not without some suspicion at seeing you enter into closer relations with the person whom he loves least in the world; while, on the other hand, before his own people, and especially in much company, in speaking of Francis he justifies all his acts, and says all he possibly can. To me, privately, however, he always makes some little 
[Page 2689]
degree of complaint. I think our Dukes desire to keep their master in goodwill, and wish it to be known that they have not in past time behaved towards you in such wise as they suppose Wolsey has given to understand; but, on the contrary, it was he who, in spite of his master and all the world, led you into the labyrinth in which you have been so long. One day, when they came to see me, they regaled themselves a whole supper time and four hours more, with such discourses, alleging to me various reasons, some of which I know to be true, and others very probable. In short, they are anxious that people should have as much confidence in them as they had in the Cardinal; and although I doubt not but my brother will have enough of credence to report to them, I think it would be well that Francis by his first despatch should make it appear, by letters to me, that I had given him information of it, and that he instructed me in return to thank them with many good offers. That would be of more effect than a credence, which they think might be forged on the anvil of an ambassador, and would occasion less jealousy to the others than if letters were addressed to themselves. I do not speak of my lord of Rocheford, who is, as it were, one with them, nor of his daughter; for I imagine that as to them you have provided in my brother's despatch, so that there would be no need of reply. And if, on his return from here, you had served them with the meat which I believe he told you of, you would have expedition of everything which you demanded there. I do not see now any means of obtaining it, for they will not do the deed and undo it (?) (car ils ne vouldront faire le faict et le deffaict), knowing the nature of the man with whom they have to deal, who is not so easy to manage as is supposed. I expect that by the time the despatch of which I have spoken arrives, I shall have already left. But it will be all one, as the letter can be shown by my successor. The new Chancellor and Fitzwilliam also profess that they will do wonders about this amity, and it seems they have a good mind to it. London, 2 Nov.
Fr. Add.
S. B.

##### bho_pp2104-2119.html
4865. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Yesterday evening I had audience of Wolsey, who spoke a great deal of the affairs of the King (Francis); but as to the contribution, I found him terribly cold. He alleged that the said contribution was arranged for their part of the maintenance of 30,000 men of war for six months. He had always had a great deal to say about this number, and now more than ever, finally declaring that a great abatement would have to be made in it. This is what I always expected, as I wrote to you on the 17th (fn. 1), when I spoke of the coming of Montpezat. Had a good deal of discussion with him, and at last he said he would pay (fn. 2) me, but not as being bound to do so, and that he must speak again to the King his master, who, till now, did not expect that affairs would take this turn. I took no notice of this, that I might not be under the necessity either of confessing the debt or concluding nothing, but merely loaded him with reminders of the benefits we have received from him, and turned the conversation until an opportunity should offer to recur to the subject. At this moment he has promised to despatch me in five or six days, complaining, however, that he had not received an acknowledgement, as demanded, of what he had delivered of the first quarter. This, he says, is a serious inconvenience to him, adding that although, at my urgent request, he was content with the commission I had, it was a great trouble not to have it according to his intention, which might have been done just as easily. I have promised him that he shall have it in the very form he demands, praying him, nevertheless, to be satisfied with the above commission. It is merely a matter of style, and he has given me his word to despatch me on my promise, just as he did before, but I shall give him no rest about it, though he is as busy now as can be.
For the rest he made me a long story, beginning about the affairs of Francis in Italy and elsewhere, stating that Silvester had not yet had an answer from the Emperor, who had shown himself at first somewhat inclined to peace, all the more so as he had heard that his herald had not been able to obtain a safe-conduct, by which the affair of the combat had been brought back to such terms that there would be no obstacle; but since his herald had passed he had pretended to be very much piqued, and to have changed his mind. This Silvester reported to the bp. of Winchester and the Almoner, who were commanded to keep away from the Emperor, and were very ill treated. The Emperor had, moreover, asked Silvester if he had a commission from Francis; who replied that he had not. With regard to which Wolsey says Francis ought, if he has not done it already, to have a commission ready at Bayonne, as agreed at the departure of Silvester, in case matters take such a turn. Wolsey had also been informed that the general of the Cordeliers, (fn. 3) that good prophet whom our Holy Father has made a cardinal, has agreed with the Emperor, in the Pope's name, to enter into alliance with him; without, however, being bound to take arms on his account, or to help him in anything, unless he be attacked in Naples; that the Emperor gives up to him Civita Vecchia, and whatever he may still keep from him, and delivers the Cardinals, whom he holds as hostages; that when the bishop of Pistoye arrived in Spain, he had news of this treaty, and with it, of the revocation of his commission by the Pope, which was to make a totally different agreement, as he had confessed to the English ambassadors, at whose request he returned immediately to the Pope, in order to keep him right before the arrival of the said general.
Pistoye complained much that he was stopped in France when he was going into Spain, because he was expressly charged to exhort the Emperor to a reasonable peace, according to the articles offered to him, which would have made proceedings against him sure, if he had refused. Wolsey thinks 
[Page 2105]
that there is something more unreasonable concealed in these negotiations, which ought to be carefully guarded against by making those overtures to the Pope, which he knows Francis has despatched, viz., that signor Hercules should be put in the duchy of Milan, with instructions to make a composition about Reggio and Modena; that the Pope has heard of these overtures, and is waiting to see what they will say to him. Wolsey thinks Ravenna and Cervia should be added, without which the Pope will never do anything to the purpose, as he knows well by cardinal Campeggio; also that great diligence should be used to surprise the said general, either by sea or land, to learn from him more fully the whole story of the negociations. This would even be a greater satisfaction to the King, his master, than to himself.
The reason why the affair of his marriage does not proceed quite according to his demand is, that he promised the Pope before his liberation that he would never pass this point. (fn. 4) I did not fail to put before Wolsey's nose the fine demonstration of his good will, which the Pope had made in these acts; but he said we must not be too much surprised, considering the treatment he has received at our hands, not only in the way we have always spoken of him, but in the arrest of Pistoye, and other things, showing extreme distrust of him, against which Wolsey has a thousand times protested; that he had been reduced to despair, seeing his acts were always taken in bad part; and that if we had taken Wolsey's advice at the coming of Gambara, matters would not have been in their present condition. He warned me at great length that if Francis do not pay better attention to his own interests, and to the support of his friends, he will bring an irreparable ruin upon his affairs, and wondered that in France you do not see clearly what is proclaimed by all the world; and he earnestly hopes Francis will use his own good sense according to what he showed him at Compiegne.
Such was part of our conversation, during which his countenance betrayed the utmost possible anxiety, tears sometimes coming into his eyes. I took great pains to excuse all the mischief that had been done, but I promise you he did not take all my excuses for payment, but alleged plenty of other things, e.g., as to Naples; that if Lautrec had been in time, and been sufficiently supplied with money, his enterprise would have had a different issue. He also assured me of the treaty of Gueldres in such terms as I wrote to you on the 17th, adding the restitution of all the Duke had lost, and a pension from the Emperor of 20,000 florins. This Wolsey attributed to Gueldres not having been included in the truce, and took me to witness how he had urged that he ought to be; that if it had been spoken about at first he would have had more power to accomplish it, but that when it was mentioned the Flemings saw that matters were so far advanced that we were obliged to accept their conditions.
Returning to the subject of Ravenna and Cervia, he said the King his master was in the greatest perplexity to find himself so disdained by his good brother, in whom he had placed his entire confidence, and who should have acted in this matter very differently, even if the advice given him had not been so equitable and so much for his own advantage; that if he had proceeded without dissimulation the Venetians would not have made the slightest pretence for refusing, and that some of the Venetians themselves knew the state of matters to be so; that this had been a great vexation to Henry, both by retarding his marriage, and by diminishing his reputation, considering the assurance he had given to all the world that his good brother would deny him nothing; that the Pope had evidently been led to 
[Page 2106]
think that the union between the two Princes was by no means so firm as pretended, or that they both abused him,—an impression very damaging to their common interests, and tending to a complete breaking off of the said marriage. This, Wolsey says, even counting the loss of the Pope as nothing, is a matter of such importance as any man can easily see when it is known that the first terms of the divorce were set forth by him, in order to separate for ever the houses of England and Burgundy, which was what he meant when he said to my Lady at Compiegne that if she lived one year she should see a perpetual conjunction on one side, and disjunction on the other, as great and as well assured as she could desire; bidding her take note of this word, to remind him of it thereafter.
Wolsey thinks you should recommence negotiations with Gueldres by indirect means, as by Mons. de Lorraine, so that when he has recovered and fortified his towns, he may take occasion to show that what he has done was under compulsion, and that meanwhile he may do nothing against us. He begged for one more interview before I wrote to Francis; but as I see he is so busy, and will be all this week (for the King comes tomorrow to his town house, whither Campeggio will go to meet him), I thought it best to write to you now. Campeggio can hardly yet leave his bed, although he is somewhat better. London, 21 Oct.
Fr. Add.
22 Oct.
[Cal. E. I. II.?] I. 209. B. M.

##### bho_pp2104-2119.html
4879. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
I trust you require little assurance that it is not owing to my remissness that I do not get money. The more I touch upon the subject, the more I am convinced of the truth of the conjecture which I have two or three times written to you; and at this moment I know the very seat of the malady. It is true Wolsey is wonderfully busy, and more than he ever was in his life; but I declare I have sought so frequently for my despatch, without anything gained, that I have need of patience. However, after all dissimulations, they will do it; but this coming of Montpezat is my ruin. God bring him soon, but another time when you have to pluck the iron from the loadstone do not add to its force by such means.
On Thursday last Campeggio was brought to do reverence to the King, and Wolsey took him into his house upon the way. We were all called to be present. His secretary made a fine oration, in which, after deploring the ruin of Rome, and after great expressions of gratitude for the great offers made to the Pope, both before and after that event, by the Defender of the Faith, and some exhortations to peace, he promised on behalf of his Holiness that both in general and in particular, and especially in the affairs which he had mentioned to him, all that a good son can and ought to expect from a most indulgent father, as he would be informed more particularly by the two cardinals there present sent by his Holiness for those causes. A reply was made by Dr. Fouques (Foxe), the same who made the oration at St. Paul's; "bien assailly, bien deffendu." They entered the King's chamber, and were a long time together. The King has several times since come privately to visit the Cardinal, the Queen also has been once, and the Legate is there almost every day. Yesterday began the approaches. The two Cardinals came together towards the Queen, who was at no loss for an answer, complaining much, without the least degree of anger, that they came to question her upon a matter so high, and so nearly concerning her, without giving her notice beforehand, or allowing her time to take counsel, especially she being a woman and a foreigner. They went on, and were a long time together, having called to them the bp. of London, the Cordelier bishop (Standish), the abp. of Canterbury, and another. This day there has been a pause, and Wolsey has been closeted with the King for most part of the time. They appear to have enough to do, though some say they will go on, and do the most they can. I believe Campeggio would like to delay, but the matter is too hot. (Here occurs in the original a long passage in cipher).
Hopes at last to have his despatch shortly, or at least that when Montpesat comes it will help him to get money. Writes nothing of what Campeggio has said to him, for it was only about the Pope's good intentions. As to the present matter, for all his professions of friendship I do not mean to trouble him. Sometimes he touches upon it to me, but I shut my ears. The Imperial ambassador came to him this morning, I understand, not without making some protests.
Forgot to mention that the Florentine ambassador left yesterday. Advises that he should be well received in France. London, 28 Oct.
French. Add.
28 Oct.
Laemmer,
Mon. Vat.,
p. 29.

##### bho_pp2089-2103.html
4851. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Wrote on the 6th of the arrival of Campeggio, which did not take place next day in the way expected, for he was so tormented with gout that he could not endure to be borne in his litter. He was taken to Suffolk's lodging, and next day passed secretly by water to the bishop of Bath's, where he is at present confined to his bed. Wolsey has paid him three visits, and 
[Page 2096]
had on each occasion a long conversation with him. Knows not what will be the issue. Expects that those who manage this business will have to use all their understanding to conquer the difficulty. Those of this country talk plentifully, but if that be the only obstacle they will go on, for the whole thing is well arranged. A good number of the lords of the kingdom are assembled here, and shortly there will be others, more than have been seen for a long time, and it will not be the fault of the one party if the affair is not despatched very soon. The other makes such cheer as she has always done in her greatest triumphs, nor could one perceive anything, looking at the two together, and to this hour they have but one bed and one table. I have been to see Campeggio, who is much gratified by his reception in France, and speaks wonders of the Pope and his good will, not forgetting to speak about Ravenna and Cervia.
Received on Wednesday morning the packets of my lord of Bath, sent me by the bailly. I sent them to him, and went to him yesterday to learn what he had to say about the contribution, about which I am much vexed to see the despatch dragged on to this hour, after having written so long ago that the affair was ready. More than four times since my last letters I have sent to Wolsey for an audience, but have been quite unable to obtain it. This I showed to my lord of Bath in as gentle manner as I could, and he has promised to represent the matter to Wolsey, and get me an answer by Sunday. He excuses the delay by the great complication of affairs at present, which will in that time be a little cleared up.
"Or, Monseigneur, il fault que je vous en dye ma fantaisye, la chose estant baillée pour preste de maniere que je pensoye dedans deux jours toucher deniers, Maistre Bryant va venir, dict que pour affaires de consequence, et mesmes pour mettre sur le bureau nouvelles deliberations et entreprises, Montpezat devoyt bientost venir decza." From that time, although I did not at once perceive it, I have been continually put off. I know what they want to do, but I think they will try to put off till Montpezat's arrival, that they may always have some excuse to put before you, and, if asked to grant anything for the future, may always pay you with present things. I have warned you sometimes, when sending a gentleman hither, not to notify it so long before; and for this I had my reasons, for I have found by experience it only makes the despatch of business more difficult.
As to news from Spain, my lord of Bath says no answer has yet been made to the offers of Silvester, which are the first he had to propose, but that the Emperor continually puts him off for want of leisure to read them. At the very time that Silvester was writing, Andrea Dorea had agreed with the Emperor, at which they were making great rejoicings. His conditions were only what the others report, viz., the maintenance of so many galleys, with a large pension assigned in Naples, and assurance of the liberty of Genoa, including the town of Savona. It is said Gueldres has agreed with the Emperor, having been surprised in one of his towns without provisions; but I doubt this report, especially as the ships which brought Mons. de Reu are now upon the coast waiting for wind to go to Spain, and in them are several Spaniards going back with him. Among them also are three Portuguese vessels. London, 16 Oct.
P.S.—I wrote lately of the arrival of a brother of the earl of Angus at this court. He has come to complain of the Earl's treatment, who has been banished from Scotland, while they say the Queen has taken another husband, who is a still finer fellow than himself. On the Borders great inroads are made on both sides. The Legate will no longer be their neighbor, for he has this taken the bishopric of Winchester, the richest hereabouts, and will give up Durham. The Imperial ambassador speaks much about the affair of Mons. de Gueldres, even showing a copy of the 
[Page 2097]
capitulation, which bears that he has agreed with the Emperor to be friend of friends, and enemy of enemies, leaving the Emperor his heir should he die without children. The Spanish ships have come, and the merchants say that the Emperor has caused 200,000 ass-loads of corn to be brought from Andalusia into Biscay, apparently intending to seize a new opportunity of making war in that quarter.
French. Add.: Mons. le Grand Maistre de France.
16 Oct.
Vesp. C. IV. 262. B. M.

##### bho_pp2120-2134.html
4899. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
I have taken no small pains to speak with the Legate again, who has given me to understand that he has been persuaded to await the arrival of Montpezat before seeing me. I have pressed him so far that at last I have compelled him to save himself in the rampart of the said arrival, after he had exhausted all evasions to my remonstrances, both good and bad, hard and gracious. For these difficulties I think I am partly indebted to my lord of Bath, to whom I found it perfectly useless to go from one end of the town to the other to make suit about this affair; I being a bishop like himself, and, although of not so great a bishopric, ambassador of the king of France. God be praised, I have done nothing that he does not think quite due to himself, and perhaps more. Moreover, I still expect that I shall have money [only] when they think proper, and I assure you I bite the end of my fingers to be obliged to have so much patience. It would be tiresome to tell you all our disputes about it. I ought to return tomorrow or Tuesday; for yesterday evening at my audience Wolsey did not wish me to depart (?) (que depeschasse) with so cold a countenance as I had on leaving him, and desired me to wait till he had made answer of this matter, and of all others, of which I should make him a memorandum. This I did that night, and this morning I sent early to salute him, but I expect that today all the souls in Paradise, and tomorrow all those in Purgatory, will come to his assistance, so that on the days following he may be able to get rid of some business of his master; I have, therefore, set myself to pen you a little despatch about this and other matters. I assure you the Legate will have to do this time with the most impudent beggar that ever carried a wallet. I hope you will take care that before it is time to begin again, another will come to do as much.
I have reported to you at length the Emperor's reply, which arrived, or perhaps was dated, 13th ult., in the long letter (legende) the Legate commanded me to write in answer to yours of the 20th. The purport of it is, that if the king of England will first make peace with him, so that he 
[Page 2123]
may have honorable cause to trust him, he will afterwards do marvels. Wolsey thinks it would not be bad if the peace were made on condition that it should not be valid if the Emperor do not pass articles of peace with you such as he shall have approved beforehand. Wolsey and the Council also think that if the overture of Salviati appear favorable it might be followed, though they prefer the other way.
The divorce is at present in this state. After the Queen's answer to the Cardinals, of which I told you, and some remonstrances which they may have made to her on the part of the Pope to enter into religion, it was found that she was determined to stick to her opinion. She has been given the choice of the whole counsel of England, that is, of my lords of Canterbury, Bath, Rochester, Ely, Exeter, and the Cordelier (Standish), the dean of the chapel, and others, with liberty to call an advocate from Flanders, a procureur and a counsellor, but she is not to be at liberty to summon any from Spain, on the ground that they are at war with Spain. Already a safeconduct has been sent into Flanders for the said counsellor and advocate. This is the way the matter stands, but it must be kept perfectly quiet. Rochester and London, I understand, are of the Queen's opinion, and also the dean of the Chapel; but I think they will lose their cause, for I hold the same opinion as when I wrote last. All things considered, I hold that even if all the Cardinals had, both in the past time and the present, approved the marriage, that they could not have [made it valid], it being proved, as they say it is, that the late King (fn. 3) and she have lain together, for God has long ago himself passed sentence on it. (fn. 4) 
I make no answer to your letters of the 26th ult., except that I will make the best use I can of the breaking off of Montpezat's mission, of which I wish I had never said a word in England. London, All Saints' Day.
Fr. Add.
1 Nov.
Vit. B. X. 127.
B. M.

##### bho_pp2120-2134.html
4915. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Since I wrote to you on the 27th (28th?) ult., I have done all that the most importunate and troublesome fellow in the world could have done to get money, and in spite of all hindrances presented myself three times to the Legate. On one of these occasions he kept talking to me a long time about the great letters I sent, the second time he asked to see them (l'autre à les voir), and each time I pressed the matter of the money as much as I could. My cause being well pleaded my good right prevailed, with the good will which I believe Wolsey really feels, though he never spoke frankly to me till yesterday, when he went to the King expressly about this matter, and, so far as I can see, had some discussion about it. I know he took with him all the letters and papers which could be of use to show the expences you have been at in Italy. Mark that in this, as will be the case in everything in which we shall have to do with him, matters have turned out quite according to the long letter to which I have so often referred you. I had written one word, finding myself so much hindered, to my lord of Bath, and spoken to some others who might have helped to lay the evil wind. Finally, Wolsey has assured me on his life that I shall be despatched in three or four days.
Wolsey told me yesterday the King and he approve of your proposal for "practising" the peace by means of the Pope. To say the truth, I used to see clearly that Wolsey preferred his own, and no wonder, but now I see he frankly agrees to the Pope's plan, and, in fact, is already thinking of sending some one to Rome to join with your ambassadors that they may negociate in good earnest; for which they desire to know the intentions of Francis as soon as possible. I fancy they are beginning to see that in the present state of the divorce question they must not wait assurance of it on their side, and as the Pope much desires this honor, they are willing to gratify him. And really Campeggio preaches so continually of the Pope's great good will, and what he is resolved to do and endure for this end, that I can hardly help believing something of it.
Yesterday Wolsey, after being very angry at my importunity about the 
[Page 2133]
money, (though we afterwards came to agreement,) asked me if I had thought about what he one day before had requested me to consider, viz., if I could find that the King's marriage never was valid, the Pope never having had power to dispense. Mark, Monseigneur, that after many disputes that very day we came upon this subject of the divorce, he showing the great rupture with the Emperor which will come of it, and the perpetual confirmation of our amity, which will be quite according to his plan. And he desired me, as one of my master's most faithful councillors, whom he regarded as his friend and brother, to consider the state in which they were, sc. what I wrote to you on the 29th, for I had learned it on good authority. He had also heard that I was a great theologian, and was anxious for my opinion on this point, as it was that on which they chiefly relied. Although I told you four days before what I thought of this, after some excuses of my age and little knowledge I said that I had never thought well about it, and could not easily answer. However, he pressed me much to think over it, and declare my mind simply according to Scripture, apart from the opinions of doctors. In the end I could not refuse, and told him my conscientious opinion, which, if I had thought otherwise, I would have withheld. I will send it you next time, for I have not had time to copy it, having had but one day of term. M. de Bourges will understand it better than you, and will translate it to you. This last time I was with the Legate, so far as he had had leisure to look at it he seemed pleased, and, after many thanks and praises, prayed me, in behalf of his master, to write surely and secretly to Madame, as I am doing. His reason for making this request to her, he says, is to convince Campeggio that not only the English but learned men abroad also agree in this opinion; for he has no doubt that when the matter has taken the form I wrote to you, the Queen, who has demanded counsel, will make great remonstrances to Campeggio, especially as he understands she has long been prepared for it. He has therefore asked me to take an opportunity, in conversation with Campeggio, to show him the arguments which occur to me in this matter, knowing that the Cardinal would value my opinion; and that he may see that what is sent from France is genuine. Wolsey would like it to be signed by those who draw it up (des ouvriers). I paused to think what could make him say this to me. It is certain that some of those here who do not like the business say, that in any case he who marries the Princess will be king of England hereafter; and I suspected, for all his apparent frankness, he wanted to get us by indirect means to acknowledge the marriage as null, in case the marriage of Mons. d'Orleans should go further. This you will have to consider about. For my part I thought I must satisfy him. I have signed nothing; and, even if I had, my opinion is quite informal, not being founded on a commandment or will of the master; so I delivered to him my conscientious judgment.
That you may be able to form a judgment I give you full information of what I see. They are certainly much perplexed, as I wrote before, especially because few of their doctors agree in their opinion, "et si ne sont pour y condescendre, encores qu'ils pensassent le povoir faire et devoir, pour les causes qu'aultrefois vous ay mandées." The Cardinals have full power to take cognizance of it, and, I think, with the clause jointly or separately; but even if the English cardinal can do it, he would never do it without the other; for, the matter being so far advanced, it would be a great injury to the cause hereafter, if the other on some pretext had not likewise given sentence; and of him they do not hold themselves sure, for he maintains he will follow the judgment of his conscience, and only if he can acknowledge that the divorce is lawful will he take the leap. This may be the cause why they ask your aid. If there be any other hidden reason, I do not know it. In any case, if you wish to please the King and Wolsey, keep the matter secret. I believe you know what they say they will do with the Princess if the divorce proceed, viz., give her a good marriage, 
[Page 2134]
leaving her, as far as they can, no claim to the succession. I enclose the articles on which you must get the opinions.
Wolsey has asked me to write to you to make arrangements for the passage of couriers in Lombardy. I believe that one has been killed, which is an obstacle to the common affairs. As to the colors you asked for, there are some of two kinds. I suppose you do not want the common ones. Those most liked are black, yellow and violet. I do not say yellow gilt. I would have sent them sooner, but did not like to make a dispatch without better assurance of money. This is why I kept the King's great letters so long to show to Wolsey. I showed them to him on the morrow of All Saints. I send you a copy of the last letters received from Viterbo. There is a report here of a great mutiny at Milan, in which the Spaniards have been illtreated, and Anthony de Leva killed. The Imperial ambassador told it to some one yesterday in secret, but the King got wind of it, and made great rejoicings at it. I assure you he makes greater demonstration of friendship than ever. Nothing is yet known of the man Babou wrote about. They spoke of sending him to Spain. London, 8 Nov.
Fr. Add.
8 Nov.
R. O.

##### bho_pp2134-2150.html
4942. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Received, on Thursday last, the King's letters and yours of the 1st, which I did not show to Wolsey, as I thought it unadvisable to spur him too much, for several reasons: (1) because I had already got assurance of the money; (2) because I had shown him your advertisement of the 28th ult., touching the mutinies which appeared to be brewing in France (par là), and an article in the King's letters came as if directly to prick him, saying that, thank God, his kingdom was quite united,—which might have been construed as a reproach, so soon after the other matter was announced to them. Communicated, however, the substance of the rest of the letter, and touched pretty sharply on the loss of Gueldres,—on which he made no comment; and I passed on, that I might not appear to seek a quarrel. I then justified Francis touching Ravenna and Cervia, and made overture to him to send some one to the Pope, if he desired it, with the despatch contained in the King's letter, showing that, although Francis might run some risk of losing the Venetians, and had lost one of his best friends by abandoning him in the truce, at the instance of the King and Wolsey, which he would not have done for all the world besides, he was nevertheless willing to run that risk, if the King's interests required it, provided arrangements were made that if so important an ally was lost another should be obtained, if not as great, at least somewhat to their advantage, viz., that the Pope should enter the league beforehand. To this Wolsey answered that he would consult with the King his master. I think the alternative set forth is not a bad one to present to them, to show them that the wrong is not on your side; and, if it is so offered to the Pope, no doubt he will accept it. "Si tiendray terriblement et verray qu'ils m'en respondront."
I told Wolsey that having been informed by me of the Spaniards who held all this sea, and destroyed all the Frenchmen they found, you had not thought proper to write to me anything of such weight, excepting in cipher, which was the reason I did not show him my letters. Wolsey thanks you in his own name and the King's for the good affection you show them. They have weighed much your advertisement, intending to use such diligence as the case requires, but they beg you to spare no expence to sift the thing to the bottom; and, if you can ascertain anything more, to send secret word of it through me, promising not to divulge from whom the information proceeds.
They will shortly send Dr. Allen to the Pope, with a commission to treat for peace with your men, if matters are favorable. He has lately been made chancellor and vice-legate of Ireland, with a good archbishopric in 
[Page 2145]
that country. I expect he will despatch the matter along with Wolsey's bishopric, and that he will have some charge about the matters which are in treaty, for he is a man who understands them. Wolsey does not easily find means to supply him with money there, and he has asked me to inquire of you truly, in what time and by what means you will remit to seigneur Rene. You will do him a great pleasure if you can convey to him there safely 15,000 or 16,000 crowns. The interest demanded by the banks is enormous, for they say there is no ready money at Rome. Here follow some private money matters.
As to this marriage, they are waiting for the counsel from Flanders, of whom I wrote to you, which consists partly of Spaniards. I have had a long talk with Campeggio about it, who shows himself obstinate, and I fancy few people know how matters stand (où l'on en est). We had a long discussion, he showing me the difficulties, and asking my opinion at every point. At last we came to this: he said that my opinion was invincible, but the other quite capable of being maintained; but to say that the Pope could not have dispensed, would be to subvert his power, which is infinite; as though he feared that they would take up the matter "par là" (upon that ground?) Wolsey, therefore, seeing this, desired that this should be put to him stiffly, so as to compel him to declare the dispensation ill grounded, rather than fall into the other awkwardness. Whatever I do in this matter I shall not put myself too forward.
On Sunday week (fn. 6) the King made a great representation of this affair to the lord mayor and council of London, who were all assembled, with those of his Privy Council, and a greater part of the lords of the land, and other personages having charge of his affairs in different places. He spoke of the good turns done him by the Emperor, both in the present and the past; and, on the other hand, of the great friendship shown him by Francis, declaring that the scruple of conscience he has long entertained has terribly increased upon him since a French bishop (De Tarbe), a learned man, who was then ambassador here, had spoken of it in his council in terms dreadfully plain,—so that he was anxious to secure the succession of his realm, and wished to learn from his good subjects and friends what was to be thought of it in law and reason; that he was determined to follow entirely what was reasonable, and that if meanwhile (cependant, qu. ce pendant?) any man should speak of it in other terms than he ought to speak of his prince, he would let him know that he is master. I think he used this expression, that there was not a head so dignified (si belle) that he would not make it fly.
A few days ago the Queen said to a familiar servant that they would leave Francis and the king of England alone, and at last the Emperor would come to terms, but in any case they might be sure that what he did would be only to attain his end more easily; which is very much the same language she held once before. Now, six days ago it was reported that Francis and the Emperor were making an agreement, and leaving England in the lurch; but I imagine this is not certain. Another rumor is that you have made truce in Italy and in Spain; also that Mons. de St. Pôl is in France, which people cannot understand, unless it is true about the truce. I believe that in consequence of the threats of the Flemings it is proposed to send to Calais my lord Fennastre (Fitzwalter?) (fn. 7) as lieutenant. As to matters here everyone is shaking. There is some war going on, on the borders of Scotland, for the earl of Angus, whom the King is helping to replace in his lands. A great meeting was to take place at Berwick between ambassadors of both sides at All Saints. Wolsey says be would neither encourage nor discourage Francis to make the overture about don Hercules, and that what 
[Page 2146]
he had said about it was only by way of warning (avis), and that the reasons alleged by Francis were very good. He thought you must already have given charge to lay the matter before the Pope.
Yesterday the King returned to Greenwich, (fn. 8) whither the Queen had gone six days before. She appears much more depressed than she was, but remains firmly determined to make no compromise, and consults much about her matters. I have not yet obtained a quittance from Wolsey for this year's pension, which he is bound to give me, as I do not wish to give him an opportunity for more discussions (pour ne luy bailler au pourchaz d'icelle àquoy s'attacher). London, 27 Nov. (fn. 9) 
Fr. Add.
17 Nov.
R. O.

##### bho_pp2134-2150.html
4944. THE SAME to WOLSEY.
To the same effect; begging him to use his services in this affair, and give the above the benefit of his aid. Malines, 17 Nov. 1528. Signed.
Fr., p. 1. Add. Endd.
17 Nov.
Galba, B. IX. 136. B. M.

##### bho_pp2134-2150.html
4954. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
Is writing to the King of this treaty, about which Wolsey is more urgent every day. He trusts the assurance you have given him. I write more fully by Castillon, who is to leave tomorrow. Yesterday I wrote by another gentleman, who is returning to France. Pray do not forget my bargain for 100 muits, though, no doubt, you will have many other applications. London, 20 Nov.
Castillon will tell you how much your departure is regretted here.
Fr. Add.
 Cal. E. I. II.?]
55. B. M.

##### bho_pp2531-2548.html
5741. The BISHOP OF BAYONNE to FRANCIS I.
Has received his letters of the 21st and 25th inst., which he communicated to Wolsey, and afterwards to the King, who came to visit the Cardinal at his lodging. Henry expressed the greatest satisfaction at the contents of the first, as showing the great affection of Francis, and his resolution not to treat of anything which is not quite in accordance with his pleasure; but on learning by those of the 25th that Madame was going to Cambray without further delay, notwithstanding the remonstrances of Suffolk and Fitzwilliam, he showed himself displeased, seeing that it would be impossible for him to find ambassadors in time, as Du Bellay has already pointed out by his letters of the 21st. He paused a long time in considering whether the ten days, commencing on the 25th, at the end of which time it was resolved to allow Madame to treat with Madame of Savoy, would be sufficient to allow the ambassadors he had chosen, viz., the bishop of London and Master More, to be present in proper time; and finding that it was not possible, considering the instructions that had to be made out, and that the matter affected all the treaties he had ever had with the house of Burgundy, and moreover that, considering the age and quality of the ambassadors, they could not be expected to travel in post, he requested me to ask you to delay the proceedings till his ambassadors should arrive. They are to be despatched on Friday at the latest. I showed him the difficulty you might have in waiting so long, considering the great importunity made to you by Madame 
[Page 2543]
of Savoy, both for the coming of Jean de Saulx towards you, and for that of my Lady to Valenciennes. Could make no impression on the King by his remonstrances, who insisted upon the request, as if half a kingdom depended upon it, and said that Francis had not only promised Suffolk and Fitzwilliam to wait these ten days, but since then had agreed that if he heard from Henry within five or six days he would put the matter off for some days longer. Represented to the King the great expence that Francis had been obliged to bear, and requested him for a sum of money in consideration not only of the treaties but of their mutual amity. Has not been able to obtain any definite answer, but he assures me that if the negotiations for peace should fall through, he will not fail to assist you with all his power, not on account of the treaties, but from friendship.
As it appears by the conversations Francis has held with Suffolk and Fitzwilliam, that he considers Henry bound to the contribution, the King has referred the matter to his Council, who, on examining the articles of the treaties, consider him in no manner bound. Gives their reasons for this opinion. The King thanks Francis for taking so much to heart the matter of his marriage, and for the despatch of Monseigneur de Tarbes. He hopes to succeed, especially if the Pope do not revoke his commission, as he cannot honorably do. The cause was called on again yesterday, when the King's proctor appeared, and the Queen was a second time put in default for non-appearance. The bishop of Rochester, however, who is accounted one of the best and most holy divines in England, especially in his opposition to these last heresies of Luther, was there with other councillors, but not as her proctor, only to remonstrate with the judges, offering to prove that she had a good cause, by a little book, which he had thereupon made jointly with his companions; which he then presented, enlarging upon the Queen's cause with many wise words. A rather modest answer was made by the judges, that it was not his business to pronounce so decidedly in the matter, as the cause was not committed to him. The dénouement will take place on Monday next, and from that time pleadings will be held three times a week, when not interrupted by holidays. The Queen's agents at Rome obtained at a public audience a commission, which the Pope may have ignored or passed over, to cite the parties;—which they did; but no further proceedings were taken under it; and I think the Pope will take care that it go no further, as it is impossible to hinder the affair which is here commenced.
French, from a transcript, pp. 7.
30 June.
MS. V. 5499, p. 139, Bibl. Nat. Le Grand, III. 333.

##### bho_pp2531-2548.html
5742. [DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.]
If what Montmorency wrote on the 25th about the health of Mons. de Bouddeaulx (Bordeaux ?) be true, would advise Francis not to trouble himself to heal the scrofulous any more.—Church affairs.
You will see by the King's letters part of that which I could inform you. I assure you that if the duke of Suffolk has had a face of marble, the King has had one of alabaster, seeing what you wanted to propose; but this has not been without speaking. However, I pardon him in my opinion that he is a little timid, for he is dying of fear lest on the Emperor's coming to Italy the Pope should revoke his commission, "que diroit que j'eusse envi fait; quand je suis avec luy il avoit grand envie de mentir." I may tell you, that if he do not do anything you may wish, it will not be owing to the Cardinal, who is wiser than he is, nor any servant that he has. Think a little, "comme il vous maine ses gens; c'estoit de la menée du duc de Norfolc que le duc de Suffolch estoit allé vers vous, pensant luy faire un Carsal (Cardinal ?) Dyort à Amiens." When Du Bellay arrived here, the Cardinal wanted to break off their journey, and go immediately to Cambray. He saw that the King objected; he yielded, but he rendered their commission worthy of Master Bryan. Afterwards, by good means, he recalled them 
[Page 2544]
so that they should not be at this assembly; and do not you believe that he is most deeply vexed if all this be concluded before the arrival of those who are going thither, whatever he pretends, provided nothing is done to this King's prejudice.
To return to the marriage. I had written to you that there would be great delay, but I see that since the arrival of Stephen and Bryant, bringing, as I certainly think, [news] of the falsity of the brief, Campeggio is half conquered. In short, for several reasons, unless the Pope quickly recall the commission, you may expect the thing will be done within a month, if nothing else occur, and perhaps sooner. If anything prevent Campeggio, I think it will be his fear, groundless as it is, that Francis and the Emperor will agree, leaving England, and consequently him also, in the lurch. I do in this good service, but without putting myself too much forward. I have asked him on the part of Francis to hasten the matter, saying that I had a letter, and this has already helped them. By the by, Wolsey requests that Francis will write a word with his own hand to Campeggio, begging him to expedite the affair, which he would regard as a favor to himself. To say the truth, I see nothing more likely to help their cause, which being ended cannot but be much to your advantage, as it will be a means to bring this King on his knees to you in future. Perhaps it might not be advisable that the King should write so openly. A letter remains. There would be no need of a date, but to refer the remainder to what I shall have said to him last, "suivant ce qu'en avois dechargé par mes lectres." Your ambassadors will leave on Friday, and will go by long stages. I expect this will be the return of matins (i.e., a mischief done by surprise). I did not wish to send you a courier express, in order that six days might elapse after the arrival of the packet. In sending Wolsey's letters to Dr. Benet [qu. Kenet, i.e. Knight], excuse the delay, that my courier hurt his foot upon the road, and sent the packet to another. They will believe it, for I have provided for that, otherwise they would see that I have purposely occasioned this delay. London, 30 June, "à la Haye."
French. The original is entirely in cipher. The passages quoted from Le Grand are corrected from a transcript.
30 June.
Masters' MS. f. 251.

##### bho_pp2509-2523.html
5688. FRANCIS I. to the BISHOP OF BAYONNE.
Since writing last, has heard from l'Esleu Bayard of the good and honorable overtures made to him by Madame Margaret at his arrival in Flanders, and her great desire for peace. She told him that if she did not think matters ripe for conclusion, she would give neither herself nor Madame the trouble of coming to Cambray, nor run the risk of losing reputation by failing in such an enterprise. Has communicated this to the duke of Suffolk, in order that he may inform the King his good brother, and wishes Du Bellay to do the same to him and Wolsey. Madame has accordingly proceeded hither upon her journey, where she has stopped for three or four days. She leaves today for Compiegne, to go further if necessary, having meanwhile despatched the sieur De Humieres to secure lodgings for her. Preparations for war, however, must not be relaxed in consequence of these proposals. Francis caused the ambassadors of the League to be asked, in Suffolk's presence, what they would do to keep it up; and they replied that every one of them would do his part. On which Francis recounted to them, especially to the Venetians, their past faults, in which they have continued till now, both in not supplying the number of men to which they are bound, and the consequences which ensued from their neglect, as it was notorious that the League would otherwise have carried everything before them in Lombardy. These matters I caused to be discussed before Suffolk, that he might see how affairs had gone, and what forces I had still in Italy, and those which the League had also at the siege before Milan, which by their confession are much fewer than mine. Notwithstanding which I wish them to understand that to prevent them falling into the Emperor's devotion, I would use my utmost power, short of engaging my own person, which I was compelled to reserve by the advice of the King my good brother; and for this reason I had just despatched 4,000 lanceknights, come from Germany, with the 
[Page 2518]
force under St. Pôl, amounting to 9,000 or 10,000, and hoped to chase the Imperialists out of Italy.
Has determined to send a person to Rome, as Du Bellay has suggested, to promote the affairs of the King his brother, with instructions simply to do everything that the English ambassadors desire. Has chosen De Tarbes for this office, as the person who understands Henry's interests best. He will start in a day or two, after communicating with Suffolk and his colleague here. Du Bellay is to communicate any other instructions which are thought advisable. Paris, 17 June 1529.
French, pp. 6, from a transcript.
MS. 5,5499, f. 156, Bibl. Nat.

##### bho_pp2502-2509.html
5679. DU BELLAY to MONTMORENCY.
What I say in the King's letters of recapitulation is that I could not have sufficiently shown for the satisfaction of this King all the matters of which he has given me charge, but I have made no other despatch. You will see their terms; consider about your own, in which, if you do not make haste, it will be more to your disadvantage, quite apart from the risk arising from delay. For the present all goes well; that is to say, they do not wish to provoke you. But you may be sure they are in great pain, especially from the great suspicion they entertain of the passage of the Emperor, agreed as he may be with you; which, if it take place, they expect the Pope will revoke his commission; and they fear you only offer them comprehension in the peace, and not the honor of being principal contrahents. This they con-
[Page 2509]
sider as no small beating and diminution of their reputation. I think, therefore, it would be well if you can do anything to satisfy them on this matter, as I wrote to you on the 11th.
I have sent by the bearer some hackneys for Fitzwilliam upon his journey, in order that he may make less diligence. I doubt not that on his receiving the present you will be pretty far gone into the country. It will not be so soon as I could wish, and I declare that I am half dead with the continual rude beating that I am subjected to; but you know I have a good and firm opinion, and will not give up the place easily. Also I have communicated to Wolsey, I think with some adroitness, the will of Francis as you wrote to me, and I am sure I have got him to approve of it. I believe that whatever the others do, the end will be as I have written to you. He is too subtle for them. (Il est trop fin pour eux.) It is true that if at this moment your affairs be concluded, they not being the principal contrahents, the people will cry out upon him as a traitor and a Frenchman, as they already give him to understand. He assures you it is an injury to him that this assembly takes place without him. I have written to you, ever since my arrival, all the language he has used about it. You will know from what source it proceeds. I do not say this to excuse it; but, I will answer for it, he would speak otherwise if he dared. So far as I can learn, Fitzwilliam has made good report to his master of the affairs of England, "et a trouvé les propos du Roy totalement confermans les moyens (? myens)."
Yesterday evening the Court arrived here. The King, coming by water, landed, in passing, at my lord of Rocheford's, with a small company of ladies and gentlemen, where he waited for the tide, and then went to Greenwich. The Queen had already passed by land, and had seen Campeggio. Friday (fn. 1) is their day. I much fear that for some time past the King has come very near Mademoiselle Anne, therefore you need not be surprised if they want to hasten it; "car si le ventre croist, tout sera gasté." I have heard lately, on good authority, that the king of Scotland has sent to treat with the Emperor, principally for his marriage. In Ireland there were some practices going on by those of the country, to which a stop has been put in good time. I think they are going to send Master Mour thither to treat with them. London, 15 June.
P.S.—I hear they are sending the prothonotary [Lazarus] De Bayf as ambassador to Venice. I think, whoever has made choice of him, it is much to his credit, and that when he has had a little experience he will do great service to the King. The ambassador here complains that the letters of his correspondent are withheld from him.
Fr. Add.
15 June.
R. O.

