B 

337 

-8 

/U 

v.f 


TRI-STATE  UNIVERSITY 


3  9322  01001481  2 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2019  with  funding  from 
Public.Resource.Org 


https  ://arch  ive.org/detai  Is/writi  ngsofjoh  nq  u04wort 


WRITINGS 


OF 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


WRITINGS 

OF 

JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


EDITED  BY 

WORTHINGTON  CHAUNCEY  FORD 


VOL.  IV 
i 8 i 1-1813 


perry  t.  ford  memorial 


TRI-ST 

ANGOl 


LIEGE 

IANA 


GREENWOOD  PRESS,  PUBLISHERS 
NEW  YORK 


Originally  published  in  1914  by  the  Macmillan  Company 


Reprinted  from  a  copy  in  the  collections  of 
The  New  York  Public  Library,  Astor,  Lenox 
and  Tilden  Foundations 


First  Greenwood  Reprinting,  1968 

Library  of  Congress  Catalogue  Card  Number:  68-30993 


PRINTED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA 


CONTENTS 


1811 

January  27.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  . 

Conduct  of  Captain  Arnold.  Situation  of  American 
vessels  in  Baltic  ports.  French  influence  and  the  Rus¬ 
sian  tariff.  Protest  by  Count  Romanzoff.  American 
commerce  favored. 

February  5.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

Pending  release  of  detained  American  ships.  French 
charge  that  all  are  English  vessels.  Forged  letter  in 
the  Moniteur.  Question  of  a  reply.  Papers  from  French 
consuls  in  America.  Interview  with  the  French  am¬ 
bassador.  American  consul  at  Gothenburg. 

February  12.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

Action  taken  on  detained  American  vessels.  In¬ 
creasing  coolness  between  the  cabinets  of  Russia  and 
France.  Arrest  of  General  Hitroff.  Matters  of  differ¬ 
ence.  Russia’s  indecision. 

February  19.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

French  ambassador  on  the  consular  certificates  and 
Russian  protection  of  American  commerce. 

February  26.  From  the  Secretary  of  State 

A  suggestion  on  his  return  to  the  United  States.  Has 
been  appointed  to  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United 
States. 

March  19.  To  Joseph  Pitcairn . 

Regulation  of  Russia’s  commerce.  Independence,  real 
and  nominal.  Rumor  of  his  going  to  Paris. 


PACK 

I 


6 


12 


17 


18 


20 


V 


VI 


CONTENTS 


March  19.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

Constitution  of  the  corps  diplomatique.  Duke  de 
Mondragone.  Count  Einsiedel.  Chevalier  de  Bray. 
Chevalier  Six  d’Oterbeck.  Count  Stedingk.  Count 
St.  Julien  Wiggers.  Chevalier  Navarro  d’ Andrade. 
Caulaincourt. 

March  22.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

A  dinner  at  the  French  ambassadors. 

March  26.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

Admission  of  American  ships  and  cargoes.  Case  of  the 
Eliza .  Recall  of  the  Duke  de  Vicence.  His  services 
and  influence. 

April  3.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  ..... 

Speyer  as  commercial  agent  and  the  situation  at  Goth¬ 
enburg.  Navigation  in  the  Baltic.  Russia,  France  and 
Oldenburg.  Denmark  condemns  vessels. 

April  10.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams  .... 

Education  of  his  children.  Distribution  of  his  Lec¬ 
tures.  Literary  intentions  on  his  return.  Death  of  Jus¬ 
tice  Cushing  and  the  succession. 

April  13.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

French  consular  certificates  of  origin.  Napoleon’s 
complaint  against  Armstrong. 

April  22.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Contest  between  Russia  and  France.  Napoleon’s 
marriage.  Mission  of  Metternich.  Prospect  of  war. 
Preparation  by  Russia,  and  her  generals. 

April  29.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Treaty  of  commerce  between  Russia  and  Portugal. 
Commercial  interests  of  the  United  States.  War  at  hand. 


PAGE 

22 

27 

34 

39 

43 

48 

54 

59 


CONTENTS 


April  29.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams  . 

Poor  prospects  for  profitable  trade  with  Russia.  The 
missions  to  France  and  Denmark.  Foster’s  mission. 

May  13.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams  . 

Procession  on  May  day.  Opening  of  the  waters. 
War  between  Russia  and  France.  Arrival  of  Count 
Lauriston.  American  news.  Policy  of  neutrality.  A 
letter  from  his  son,  George.  Copley’s  portrait  of  John 
Adams.  Gilbert  Stuart’s  misconduct. 

May  6.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Threatened  war  between  Russia  and  France.  The 
question  of  Oldenburg.  Attitude  of  the  Russian  Em¬ 
peror.  Champagny  out  of  office  and  the  attack  on 
Chernicheff. 

May  12.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

The  French  consular  certificates.  Chernicheff’s  mis¬ 
sion.  Rupture  with  France  deferred.  Position  of  Aus¬ 
tria.  Arrival  of  Count  Lauriston. 

May  19.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Navigation  of  the  Baltic  and  Danish  privateers.  The 
system  of  licenses.  British  trade  with  Russia. 

May  26.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

War  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain. 
Napoleon’s  speech  to  his  Council  of  Commerce.  In¬ 
fluences  round  the  Emperor  Alexander. 

June  2.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Acknowledges  dispatches.  A  treaty  of  commerce. 
The  Emperor’s  interest  in  the  relations  between  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain.  Hazard’s  commis¬ 
sion.  Ministerial  organization. 


Vll 

PAGE 

63 

6S 

72 

76 

81 

84 

89 


CONTENTS 


•  •  • 

Vlll 

June  3.  To  the  President  of  the  United  States  . 

Reasons  for  declining  the  appointment  to  the  Supreme 
Court.  Judge  Davis.  His  return. 

June  7.  To  John  Adams  . 

The  appointment  to  the  Supreme  Court.  Why  he 
could  not  accept  it. 

June  9.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

The  proposed  commercial  treaty  with  Russia.  Views 
of  Count  Romanzoff.  The  Portuguese  Convention. 
Ministerial  organization  and  RomanzofPs  retirement. 

June  15.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Count  Romanzoff  on  the  relations  between  Russia 
and  the  United  States.  Count  Pahlen.  England  and 
the  United  States.  Navigation  in  the  Baltic.  Grain 
trade  of  the  Black  Sea. 

June  18.  To  George  William  Erving  ..... 

Home  politics.  Consequences  of  the  cabinet  change. 
British  finance. 

June  22.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Outrage  committed  on  an  American  ship,  the  Horace, 
by  a  British  armed  vessel,  the  Plover .  The  cargo  liable 
to  seizure  in  Russia.  Russia’s  interest  in  American 
trade.  Case  of  the  Hercules .  Peace  with  Turkey. 

June  25.  To  John  Adams . 

First  American  arrival  and  departure.  Glutted  mar¬ 
kets.  Publication  of  letters.  Embarrassments  likely  to 
arise.  Speculations  upon  government.  Balance  in  the 
Constitution.  Praise  and  censure. 

June  29.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Action  of  the  government  on  American  vessels  and 
cargoes.  Orders  in  Council  and  licenses  favor  the  com¬ 
merce  of  the  United  States.  Napoleon’s  speech  and  war. 
Arrival  of  a  Portuguese  minister. 


2>AGX 

93 

98 

102 

106 

hi 

112 

117 

122 


CONTENTS 


IX 


PAGE 

June  30.  To  Abigail  Adams  .......  126 

Interest  in  the  Massachusetts  election.  Involves 
peace  or  war  with  England.  Quincy  and  disunion. 

July  5.  To  William  Jones . 129 

Claude  Gabriel  and  his  employment  by  the  Russian 
Emperor. 

July  6.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 13 1 

Napoleon’s  speech  to  the  legislative  assembly  of 
France.  His  intentions  in  Spain  and  Portugal.  Spanish 
venture  unpopular  in  France.  Russia  and  Great  Bri¬ 
tain.  The  appointment  of  a  successor. 

July  10.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams . 135 

Learns  of  his  service  to  the  state.  Review  of  his  Lec¬ 
tures  in  the  Portfolio.  Writings  of  Walsh  and  his  English 
leanings.  Visiting  Americans. 

July  13.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 138 

Commission  delivered  to  Hazard.  The  Courier  on 
English  and  Russian  relations.  No  prospect  of  a  north¬ 
ern  coalition  against  France.  Emperor  Alexander  pre¬ 
served  the  peace  of  Europe.  Hope  of  a  peace  with  Tur¬ 
key.  Return  of  Count  Stedingk. 

July  21.  To  John  Adams  . . 142 

Markets  in  Russia  glutted  by  Americans.  His  own 
ambition  and  the  Supreme  Court  appointment.  Politi¬ 
cal  activities.  The  administration  of  justice  in  the 
United  States.  Removal  to  a  country  seat.  War  be¬ 
tween  England  and  the  United  States  imminent. 

July  22.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 148 

The  President’s  appointment  of  a  successor.  Naviga- 
iton  in  the  Baltic.  Stagnation  in  commerce  and  its 
causes.  Conquest  of  Spain  by  France.  Equivocal 
negotiations  with  Russia.  Victory  over  the  Turks. 


X 


CONTENTS 


July  28.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Hazard’s  exequatur.  Count  Romanzoff’s  position  and 
possible  retirement.  Pahlen  to  be  sent  to  Brazil.  Affair 
of  the  President  and  the  Little  Belt .  The  Turkish  cam¬ 
paign. 

July  29.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

Deaths  of  Francis  Dana  and  William  Emerson.  Their 
characters.  Dana’s  intended  reply  to  Mrs.  Warren’s 
History . 

July  31.  To  thomas  Boylston  Adams . 

His  excursion  into  Maine.  War  with  Great  Britain. 
The  non-intercourse  law.  Review  of  his  own  political 
conduct.  Capture  of  one  of  his  letters. 

August  2.  To  The  Secretary  of  State  .... 

Hazard’s  office  recognized  by  the  Russian  government. 
Francis  Dana  had  been  vice  consul.  No  exclusion  of 
American  commerce.  Seizure  of  Greek  ships.  Russian 
confidence  in  her  strength  and  friendliness  to  America. 
Appointment  of  Daschkoff. 

August  9.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  1 

The  Thorndike  ships.  A  commercial  treaty  with 
Russia.  Little  prospect  of  a  general  peace.  Relations 
between  France  and  Russia.  Religion  in  France 

August  13.  To  George  William  Erving  .  .  . 

Success  of  his  special  mission.  Politics  in  the  United 
States.  Burr  and  Randolph.  Policy  of  the  Perceval- 
Wellesley  ministry.  France  and  Russia. 

August  16.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

The  Rhenish  confederacy.  Calming  assurances. 
French  ambassador  wishes  war  between  the  United 
States  and  Great  Britain.  The  case  of  Captain  Marks 
and  forged  ship’s  papers. 


PAGE 

153 


157 


160 


165 


170 


174 


177 


CONTENTS 


xi 


PAGE 

August  20.  To  John  Adams . 181 

Plans  for  the  future.  Further  service  in  Europe. 
Passion  of  Americans  for  office.  Quincy’s  speech.  His 
own  position. 

August  23.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .  .184 

Captures  by  a  French  privateer.  Two  instances  of 
forged  papers.  English  convoys. 

August  24.  To  William  Eustis . 187 

French  policy  a  snare  for  America.  The  non-importa¬ 
tion  law.  His  own  position  and  prospects.  Political 
changes  in  the  United  States  obscure.  The  European 
situation. 

August  26.  To  George  William  Erving  ....  192 

French  privateer  and  Danish  weakness.  Violation  of 
correspondence.  France  and  Russia.  English  advances 
for  a  reconciliation. 

August  28.  To  Benjamin  Waterhouse  ....  195 

“Leolin’s”  letters  to  Otis.  Pickering’s  “ Letters. ” 
Danger  of  being  drawn  into  European  complications. 
Republican  Massachusetts.  Activities  of  Waterhouse. 

August  30.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  ....  199 

The  manufactured  letter  of  the  Duke  de  Cadore. 
Outline  of  its  history.  English  efforts  for  harmony  with 
Russia.  Reception  given  to  Captain  Fenthan.  Visit  of 
Prince  Lubomirski. 

August  31.  To  John  Adams . 204 

The  constitution  and  the  admission  of  Louisiana. 
Treatment  given  to  his  proposed  amendment.  Question 
settled  beyond  recall.  Quincy’s  arguments.  Power 
under  the  Union 


CONTENTS 


•  • 

xu 

September  8.  To  William  Plumer . 

Events  show  an  approaching  crisis. 

September  1-8.  To  George  Washington  Adams 

The  Bible. 

September  14.  To  John  Adams . 

The  history  of  the  Cadore  letter.  England  ready  to 
continue  the  war.  The  Bonaparte  panic.  Use  of  his 
name. 

September  25.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams 

Robert  Smith’s  defense.  Censure  of  Pickering.  Ques¬ 
tion  of  oaths. 

October  2.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

Self-distrust.  His  own  experience.  Smith’s  contro¬ 
versy  with  Colvin.  His  country  residence.  Count 
Strogonoff’s  garden  and  the  tomb  of  Achilles. 

October  3.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

American  vessels  sailing  from  Cronstadt.  The  French 
ambassador  on  war  with  England.  American  and  Eng¬ 
lish  trade  with  Russia.  Admission  of  ships  from  English 
ports. 

October  11.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

Napoleon’s  discourse  to  the  Russian  ambassador. 
Call  for  troops.  Confidence  of  Napoleon.  Effect  of  war 
on  American  commerce. 

October  14.  To  John  Adams . 

A  navy  as  a  remedy  for  the  public  ills.  Dangers  in¬ 
volved,  and  the  cost.  Demands  of  commerce  for  pro¬ 
tection.  Smith’s  vindication.  Seizure  of  letters. 

October  15.  To  George  William  Erving  .... 

Visit  from  S.  A.  Wells.  Smith’s  vindication  and  his 
character.  Claims  of  Colvin.  Navigation  in  the  Baltic. 


PAGE 

210 


21 1 


218 


224 


226 


232 


236 


240 


245 


CONTENTS 


Xlll 


PAGE 

October  16.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  ....  249 

Arrival  of  American  ships.  Interference  with  Russian 
commerce.  War  between  the  United  States  and  Great 
Britain.  Russian  export  interests.  Colonial  merchan¬ 
dize  deemed  English. 

October  26.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  ....  253 

Disquietude  of  Prussia  and  offer  of  mediation.  Offi¬ 
cial  version  of  Napoleon’s  address  to  the  Russian  ambas¬ 
sador.  Russia  and  South  America. 

October  21.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams  ....  257 

Russell  to  take  J.  S.  Smith’s  place  in  London.  Bar- 
low’s  chances  of  success  in  France.  Change  in  England’s 
policy  probable. 

October  26.  To  William  Eustis . 259 

Similarity  of  views  in  letters  and  Smith’s  vindication. 

No  satisfaction  to  be  obtained  from  France.  Pickering 
and  war  with  England.  True  policy  for  Congress.  Im¬ 
pressment  as  a  cause  for  war. 

October  31.  To  John  Adams . 263 

A  fellow-pupil  at  Passy,  Mr.  David.  Political  treason 
and  rebellion.  Littleness  behind  the  movement.  Possi¬ 
ble  results  of  a  civil  war.  Has  much  exercised  his 
thoughts.  His  return  to  America. 

November  2.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  ....  268 

An  early  winter.  American  ships  and  cargoes  at 
Cronstadt.  English  participation  in  the  trade.  French 
agents  in  German  custom  houses.  The  Turkish  cam¬ 
paign. 

November  6.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams  .  .  .  272 

Congress  and  the  European  situation.  The  French 
decrees  and  tariffs.  The  non-importation  act. 


Xiv 


CONTENTS 


November  9.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

Crew  of  the  Hercules.  Sale  of  Danish  prizes.  The 
Turkish  defeat.  Franco-Russian  position. 

December  10.  To  the  Secretary  of  State 

French  orders  on  Baltic  trade.  Difference  with 
Sweden.  Visit  of  Prince  Lubomirski  to  England. 
Poland’s  grain  interests.  Peace  between  Russia  and 
Turkey. 

December  22.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams 

Napoleon’s  opposition  to  colonial  sugar  and  coffee. 
American  carriers.  Cotton.  Foreign  exchange.  Ef¬ 
fect  of  war. 


1812 

January  1.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

Comparative  weakness  of  the  United  States.  Rights 
must  be  defended  by  force.  European  policy  imprac¬ 
ticable. 

January  12.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

Russian  peace  with  Turkey.  Threatening  prepara¬ 
tions  in  France.  Labensky  not  permitted  to  go  to  Brazil. 
Sweden  leaning  towards  England.  American  consuls  in 
Russia.  Commendation  of  Sylvanus  Bourne. 

January  24.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams  .... 

The  correspondence  on  the  Chesapeake.  Is  doubt¬ 
ful  of  complete  reparation  by  England.  Barlow  in 
France. 

January  25.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .  . 

Uncertainty  in  Russia’s  relations  with  France.  Nego¬ 
tiating  for  the  favor  of  Austria.  Prussia’s  dangerous 
situation. 


PAGE 

275 


277 


28l 


284 


287 


290 


292 


CONTENTS 


xv 


PAGE 

February  29.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  ....  295 

Count  Romanzoff  on  the  possible  war  with  France. 

The  Prince  Regent’s  speech.  Rumored  negotiations  be¬ 
tween  France  and  England.  Napoleon  and  commerce. 

Not  a  man  of  peace.  Grain  scarcity.  Count  Pahlen’s 
removal  to  Brazil.  The  South  American  countries. 
French  intrigues. 

March  30.  To  Abigail  Adams . 302 

Congress  and  war  with  Great  Britain.  Erroneous 
ideas  of  policy.  An  adequate  force  and  revenue.  Pros¬ 
pect  of  a  new  war  in  Europe 

March  31.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  ....  305 

Beginnings  of  hostile  operations.  Negotiations  still 
continued.  Profitable  commerce  involved.  England 
will  not  benefit  by  war.  Disconcerting  course  of  Sweden. 
Banishment  of  officials. 

April  10.  To  Alexander  Hill  Everett  .  .  .  .310 

English  opinion  on  America.  Comparison  with  condi¬ 
tions  in  Great  Britain.  Why  the  Orders  in  Council  are 
maintained.  The  Edinburgh  reviewers  and  their 
methods.  Death  of  the  Anthology . 

April  28.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .  *314 

Count  RomanzofTs  inquiries  on  the  relations  between 
England  and  the  United  States.  Measures  of  Con¬ 
gress  of  defense.  Perceval  and  the  Catholic  question. 
Russia  and  the  approaching  war.  Total  exclusion  of 
commerce. 

April  30.  To  Abigail  Adams . 318 

Non-importation  and  supply  of  bread.  Want  in 
France.  The  United  States  must  fight  for  the  neutrality 
of  the  ocean.  Trade  with  Russia  and  profits. 


XVI 


CONTENTS 


May  9.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Austria  and  Prussia  to  act  with  France.  Uncer¬ 
tainty  of  results.  Neutrality  of  Sweden.  Divisions  of 
the  Russian  army. 

May  13.  To  William  Plumer . 

American  reviews.  Talents  of  Walsh.  Policy  of  a 
war  with  England.  Neutral  commerce. 

May  22.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams  .... 

Want  of  American  newspapers.  The  Massachusetts 
election.  The  British  Orders  in  Council  and  the  harvest. 

May  24.  To  William  Gray . 

Exchange  on  England.  His  cotton  sent  to  Vienna. 
Possible  failure  of  the  speculation.  House  of  Raimbert. 

May  27.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Possible  visit  of  John  Henry.  Course  of  Sweden.  Her 
relations  with  France  and  neutrality. 

May  28.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

Reasons  for  returning  to  America.  The  education  of 
his  sons.  Jefferson  on  British  policies. 

June  4.  To  Levett  Harris . 

Has  misunderstood  his  statement  on  some  American 
ships. 

June  4.  To  the  Crew  of  the  Monticello  .... 

Advice  as  to  wages  and  shipping. 

June  4.  To  Levett  Harris . 

Refuses  to  give  written  statement  of  differences. 

June  4.  To  Levett  Harris . 

No  accusation  made.  The  case  of  the  seamen  of  the 
Monticello. 


PAGE 

323 

327 

330 

334 

336 

340 

343 

344 

344 

345 


CONTENTS 

June  ii.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Gathering  of  the  hostile  forces  and  movements  of  in¬ 
dividuals.  Position  of  Count  Romanzoff.  Influence  of 
Baron  Armfeldt.  Events  in  Sweden. 

June  12.  To  John  Adams . 

His  letter  read  in  England.  The  common  law.  Libel 
in  Massachusetts.  His  Lectures. 

June  25.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Passports  refused  to  ambassadors.  Agreement  be¬ 
tween  Russia  and  England.  French  demands  on  Russia. 

June  29.  To  John  Adams . 

Warlike  news  from  the  United  States.  Effect  of  the 
assassination  of  Perceval.  Hostilities  opened  in  Poland. 
Attitude  of  Russia.  Henry’s  mission  and  letters.  Works 
of  Fisher  Ames. 

July  11.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

A  correction.  Reception  by  Napoleon  of  Russia’s 
demand.  Tone  of  Russian  opinion.  Stoppage  of  mails. 

July  13.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

Prospect  of  wars.  Orders  in  Council  revoked.  Ap¬ 
pearance  of  insincerity.  Fear  of  precipitate  action. 

July  13.  To  John  Adams . 

Massachusetts  election.  Conduct  of  the  extreme 
federalists.  Truckling  to  England  for  war  with  France. 
Separation  or  a  navy.  Quincy  and  Lloyd. 

July  14.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams  .... 

Intercepted  letters.  Indolence  against  toil.  Russia 
involved  in  war.  Probability  of  war  between  Great 
Britain  and  the  United  States.  Debate  in  the  House  of 
Commons. 


xvii 

PAGE 

347 

352 

355 

358 

362 

366 

369 

373 


XVlll 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

July  25.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 376 

Departure  of  foreign  representatives  by  land  and  by 
sea.  Sweden’s  negotiations.  Relations  with  Spain. 

July  31.  To  Benjamin  Waterhouse . 379 

John  Henry  and  the  faction  in  Massachusetts.  Er- 
skine  and  Foster.  Admissions  by  the  British.  Harvard 
Board  of  Overseers  and  politics. 

August  1.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .  .382 

Latest  intelligence  from  the  armies.  Proclamation  of 
Emperor  Alexander.  The  Turkish  peace.  Prohibition 
still  on  English  vessels.  Arrival  of  the  Emperor.  Swe¬ 
den  makes  a  treaty. 

August  4.  To  George  Joy . .  385 

Reparation  for  the  Chesapeake  affair.  Berkeley  un¬ 
punished.  Does  not  despair  of  peace. 

August  10.  To  Abigail  Adams . 388 

Repeal  of  the  Orders  in  Council  and  war.  Approves 
the  conduct  of  the  American  government.  Peace  may 
be  restored. 

September  30.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .389 

The  Emperor  offers  his  mediation. 

October  2.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  ....  392 

His  wish  to  return  in  the  spring.  His  removal  from 
St.  Petersburg. 

October  4.  To  John  Adams . -393 

Progress  of  military  courts  uncertain.  Impressions 
produced  on  the  public  mind.  Napoleon  at  Moscow. 

No  peace  with  the  French  in  Russia. 


CONTENTS 


xix 


October  12.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  . 

Sends  official  documents  on  the  war.  Russia  on  the 
defensive.  No  fit  time  for  negotiation.  Russia  and 
Sweden.  Appointment  of  foreign  missions. 

October  17.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Russell  has  left  England.  The  Russian  offer  of  media¬ 
tion.  Offer  to  be  made  through  Daschkoff. 

October  19.  To  the  Count  de  Romanzoff 
On  the  application  of  Robert  Fulton. 

October  19.  To  Robert  Fulton . 

Has  made  application  for  a  concession  by  the  Emperor. 

November  24.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams 

Progress  of  the  war  in  the  United  States.  The  ac¬ 
quisition  of  Canada.  Weakness  of  Great  Britain.  Dis¬ 
aster  to  the  French  invasion.  Universal  monarchy  im¬ 
possible. 

November  27.  To  Robert  Fulton . 

His  privilege  granted  under  a  condition.  Will  accept 
no  remuneration. 

November  30.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

Total  reverse  of  Napoleon’s  fortune.  His  disastrous 
retreat.  Revolts  against  his  domination. 

December  11.  To  the  Secretary  of  State 

Has  communicated  to  the  Count  Romanzoff  the  rea¬ 
sons  for  war  with  Great  Britain.  Relations  with  Russia 
not  to  be  affected.  Emperor’s  wishes  and  objects  in 
proposing  mediation.  Opinions  on  France  to  be  com¬ 
municated  to  Great  Britain. 


PAGE 

396 


401 


402 

405 

406 


409 


41 1 


413 


XX 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

December  1 6.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .  418 

New  Russian  levy.  Results  of  the  recent  campaign. 
Count  Romanzoff  still  in  office. 

December  31.  To  Abigail  Adams . 419 

News  from  the  United  States.  Surrenders  in  Canada. 
Situation  of  Napoleon  the  Great.  Success  of  the  Fabian 
method.  Cold  of  the  season. 

1813 

January  12.  To  John  Adams  . 424 

Possibility  of  being  forgotten  by  his  countrymen. 
Canning  and  Liverpool’s  hostility  to  the  United  States. 

Their  expectation  of  peace.  Russia  the  arbitress  of 
Europe. 

January  31.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams  ....  427 

Impressment  the  cause  of  the  war.  Captains  should 
cheer  men  going  into  action.  The  Guerriere  and  Mace¬ 
donian.  The  line  of  battle  ship  and  frigate. 

February  2.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .  430 

Russia  has  gained  the  position  of  arbitress  by  land  in 
Europe.  The  fall  of  Napoleon.  Measure  of  his  genius. 
Conduct  of  Russia. 

February  18.  To  Abigail  Adams . 433 

Increasing  rigor  of  England  against  the  United  States. 

All  parties  that  support  the  war.  Dismemberment  of 
the  Union  the  real  object.  War  against  impressment  a 
righteous  war.  Influence  of  peace. 

February  15.  To  John  Adams . 437 

Opportunities  for  sending  letters.  Little  hope  for 
peace.  The  presidental  election.  Policy  of  the  British 
ministry.  Peace  in  Europe. 


CONTENTS 


xxi 


February  16.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  . 

Explanations  given  of  Barlow’s  journey.  His  death 
at  Cracow.  The  archives  of  the  legation  at  Paris.  Pro¬ 
gress  of  the  Russian  army. 

February  27.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

Direction  for  letters.  Death  of  Barlow. 

February  28.  To  R.  G.  Beasley . 

Volatile  popular  voice  in  England.  No  doubt  where 
justice  stands.  Size  of  ships.  Spirit  of  English  parties 
against  the  United  States. 

March  22.  To  John  Adams . 

Arrival  of  d’lvernois  and  Madame  de  Stael.  Sum¬ 
mons  from  the  latter  and  a  visit  to  her  salon.  Her  con¬ 
versation  with  the  English  representative.  Her  Amer¬ 
ican  investments.  Discussion  on  politics.  Questions  on 
America’s  position.  Napoleon.  British  pretensions  to 
sea-control. 

March  25.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

The  election  of  President  and  the  candidates.  Madi¬ 
son  and  the  war.  Randolph’s  statement  of  a  religious 
motive.  Example  from  Russia.  Hope  of  returning 
within  the  year. 

April  3.  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams . 

Education  of  his  sons.  Remembrance  of  infancy. 
Affection  for  country  and  her  cause.  Madison’s  re- 
election  and  the  difficult  questions  to  be  met.  Counter 
revolution  in  Europe. 

April  7.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

Breaking  open  of  letters.  Prospect  of  his  return. 
Example  of  Count  Stedingk.  National  spirit  of  the 
British.  Napoleon  and  France. 


PAGE 

441 

445 

446 

450 

455 

46O 

463 


CONTENTS 


xxii 

April  io.  James  Monroe  to  John  Adams  . 

The  mission  to  London  to  be  offered  to  his  son.  Ap¬ 
proval  of  his  conduct  and  the  Russian  offer  of  media¬ 
tion. 

April  19.  James  Monroe  to  John  Adams  .... 

The  special  missions  for  a  peace  and  treaty  of  com¬ 
merce. 

April  19.  To  John  Adams . 

Sir  Francis  dTvernois.  Lord  Cathcart’s  politeness. 
Doctor  dTvernois  and  his  republicanism.  His  opinion 
on  the  war.  Perceval’s  statement  disproved.  Madame 
de  Stael  in  Sweden. 

April  20.  To  John  Speyer . 

Difference  between  young  Barlow  and  Warden  on 
Paris  legation  records. 

April  22.  Commission  for  Treaty  of  Commerce 

April  26.  James  Monroe  to  John  Quincy  Adams 

Mediation  under  Russia  and  a  treaty  of  commerce 
with  Russia.  Reasons  for  giving  effect  to  the  media¬ 
tion.  Approval  of  his  conduct.  The  English  mission. 

April  29.  To  R.  G.  Beasley . 

Law  excluding  foreign  seamen  from  American  vessels 
and  impressment.  No  concession  should  be  made.  Dis¬ 
position  to  chastise  America.  The  Catholic  question. 

> 

May  1.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

The  unfortunate  war.  Uncertainty  of  his  movements. 
France  stripped  of  her  power.  Napoleon  and  the  Bour¬ 
bons.  The  United  States  to  be  chastised  into  submis- 


PAGE 

468 

468 

469 

474 

475 

476 

478 

483 


sion. 


CONTENTS 


XXlll 


June  5.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

The  presidential  election.  Clinton  and  Union.  Ef¬ 
fects  of  the  naval  and  land  battles.  Fate  of  France  and 
of  Napoleon.  Death  of  Prince  Kutuzoff  Smolensky. 

June  24.  To  John  Speyer . 

England  not  inclined  to  peace. 

June  26.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Appointment  of  ministers.  Reply  of  the  British  gov¬ 
ernment  to  proposed  mediation.  The  armistice  of 
Plaswitz. 

July  14.  To  the  Secretary  of  State . 

Letter  from  Gallatin  and  Bayard.  Acknowledges  the 
new  appointment.  Great  Britain  not  likely  to  ac¬ 
cept  mediation.  Treatment  of  the  United  States 
peculiar. 

July  19.  To  Abigail  Adams . 

The  mission  and  the  probability  of  success.  Prospect 
of  a  general  peace.  Position  of  France. 

August  9.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .... 

Prospects  of  mission  not  flattering.  His  further  con 
tinuance  in  Europe. 

August  10.  To  John  Adams . 

Does  not  apprehend  divisions  among  the  commis¬ 
sioners.  A  congress  of  peace.  War  will  probably  re¬ 
commence.  A  short  campaign. 

August  11.  To  Benjamin  Waterhouse . 

Moreau’s  arrival.  Spirit  of  faction  in  Boston.  Re¬ 
fusal  to  supply  militia.  Armistice  did  not  lead  to  peace. 


PAGE 

486 

490 

491 

493 

495 

498 

499 

502 


XXIV 


CONTENTS 


PAGS 

August  13.  To  William  Plumer . 504 

Russia’s  offer  of  mediation.  Attitude  of  American 
people  towards  war.  Allegiance  and  protection.  Fight¬ 
ing  for  a  principle.  English  finance.  War  to  be  renewed 
in  Europe. 

August  19.  To  the  Comte  de  Romanzoff  ....  508 

On  the  concession  to  Robert  Fulton. 

August  28.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .  .510 

Russia  renews  the  offer  of  mediation.  Aversion  of  the 
British  government.  A  proposition  to  negotiate  in 
London  without  mediation.  Lord  Walpole’s  arrival. 

September  3.  To  John  Adams . 512 

Status  of  the  mission.  English  not  inclined  to  treat 
under  mediation.  Regard  the  war  as  a  family  quarrel. 
Impressment  of  general  concern.  A  warning  to  Great 
Britain.  War  renewed. 

September  8.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .516 

American  news  through  English  gazettes.  An  attempt 
at  a  corrective. 

September  9.  To  R.  G.  Beasley . 518 

The  Courier  and  Cobbett.  The  problem  of  allegiance. 
Advantages  of  the  United  States. 

September  21.  To  Abigail  Adams  .....  520 

Death  of  General  Moreau.  Success  as  a  standard  of 
virtue.  Napoleon  against  Europe. 

October  14.  To  Abigail  Adams . 524 

Obsequies  of  General  Moreau.  Intentions  of  Galla¬ 
tin  and  Bayard.  Medal  for  the  campaign  of  1812. 


CONTENTS 


XXV 


PAGE 

October  24.  To  Benjamin  Waterhouse  ....  526 

The  western  states  and  Yankees.  Little  prospect  of 
a  peace. 

October  25.  To  Abigail  Adams . 528 

The  Massachusetts  resolutions.  Morals  and  heroic 
actions.  The  Senate  and  the  peace  missior . 

November  15.  To  William  Harris  Crawford  .  .  .  530 

British  government  refuses  to  treat.  Prince  Kurakin’s 
chapel  furniture. 

November  22.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .532 

England’s  refusal  to  negotiate  and  mediation.  Will 
yield  nothing  on  impressment. 

December  30.  To  Abigail  Adams . 533 

Awaiting  the  official  notice  of  England’s  rejection  of 
mediation.  Willingness  to  treat  directly.  Gallatin’s 
powers.  His  own  position. 

December  30.  To  the  Secretary  of  State  .  .  .  536 

Battle  of  Leipzig  and  retreat  of  Napoleon.  Progress 
of  affairs  in  Europe. 

December  31.  To  Robert  Fulton . 540 

His  application  for  a  concession  and  possible  opposi¬ 
tion.  Advice  of  Betancourt. 


WRITINGS 

O  F 

JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


. 


' 


WRITINGS  OF  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  37.  [Robert  Smith] 

St.  Petersburg,  27  January,  1811. 

Sir: 

I  have  the  honor  to  enclose  herewith  a  translation  of  the 
official  note  which  I  have  sent  to  the  Chancellor,  Count 
Romanzoff,  after  receiving  your  instructions  contained  in 
your  favor  of  2  September  last,  in  relation  to  the  complaint 
made  in  February  last,  by  order  of  the  Emperor  against  a 
certain  Captain  Arnold  for  a  very  outrageous  act  of  defiance 
to  the  laws  of  this  country,  committed  at  Cronstadt.1 

A  few  weeks  before  I  had  the  honor  of  receiving  your  letter 
I  had  been  informed  that  this  Captain  Arnold  had  sailed 
with  his  vessel,  the  Carmelite ,  from  the  United  States  during 
the  existence  of  the  embargo  laws,  and  in  violation  of  them. 
This  circumstance  was  of  itself  sufficient  to  have  mentioned 
as  raising  a  probability  that  he  would  not  place  himself 
personally  within  reach  of  the  judicial  tribunals  of  the 
United  States.  But  as  your  instructions  appeared  to  con¬ 
sider  it  as  an  obligation  of  candor  to  allude  to  the  defect  of 
jurisdiction  in  the  United  States  for  the  trial  of  the  precise 
offence  against  which  the  Russian  government  had  com¬ 
plained,  I  felt  myself  bound  to  do  so  in  general  terms.  I 
have,  indeed  from  the  time  when  I  received  Count  Roman- 
zofPs  note  on  this  subject,  very  strongly  regretted  what  I  did 

1  Vol.  III.  410. 

1 


2 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

then  apprehend,  that  there  was  no  jurisdiction  in  the  United 
States  competent  to  try  the  man  for  an  act  which  every 
civilized  human  being  must  pronounce  deserving  of  ex¬ 
emplary  punishment.  And  I  am  not  positively  sure  that  the 
Emperor  who  could  not  forbear  taking  a  strong  interest  in  a 
transaction  thus  characterized  and  which  took  place  almost 
before  his  eyes,  will  be  altogether  satisfied  with  the  intimation 
that  we  have  no  authority  that  can  take  cognizance  of  the  of¬ 
fence.  I  hope,  however,  that  it  will  in  no  unfavorable  manner 
affect  his  friendly  sentiments  towards  the  United  States. 

The  papers  of  the  American  vessels  which  arrived  at  the 
out  ports  on  the  gulf  of  Finland,  and  on  the  Baltic  after 
the  closing  of  the  navigation  at  Cronstadt,  which  by  an 
express  order  of  the  Emperor  were  taken  from  the  Com¬ 
mission  of  Neutral  Navigation,  and  referred  for  a  special 
examination  to  the  Imperial  Council,  have  not  yet  been 
returned,  though  in  my  letter  of  27  December  I  informed  you 
that  Baron  Campenhausen  had  assured  me  that  the  decision 
was  in  favor  of  their  admission,  and  that  I  might  write  of  the 
matter  as  entirely  settled.  You  will  perceive ,  however ,  by 
reference  to  my  letter  of  that  date  that  I  was  aware  of  an  ob¬ 
stacle  which  might  still  remain ,  as  it  actually  did  and  still  does . 

At  the  time  when  the  demands  of  France  to  this  government 
were  answered  by  denial  I  had  every  reason  but  one  to  expect 
that  this  denial  would  be  supported  by  effectual  and  ultimate 
perseverance ,  and  that  one  was  that  I  saw  the  power  of  ultimate 
compliance  was  carefully  retained.  Since  then  the  diplomatic 
communications  between  France  and  Russia  have  assumed  a 
tone  of  mutual  dissatisfaction ,  not  to  say  of  asperity.  The 
annexation  of  the  Hanseatic  towns  to  the  French  empire  has 
brought  France  into  immediate  contact  with  the  Baltic  Sea.1 

1  The  decree  or  project,  without  date,  is  in  Annual  Register ,  1810,  505.  The 
French  flag  was  raised  in  the  Hanse  cities  January  1,  1811. 


18 1 1] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


3 


The  frontier  of  Russia  on  the  side  of  Poland  has  been 
strengthened  by  additional  fortifications,  and  troops ,  and  artil¬ 
lery;  the  levy  of  90,000  to  recruit  the  Russian  armies  has  been 
followed  by  a  conscription  of  120,000  to  reenforce  those  of 
France.1 

The  new  tariff  of  duties  and  prohibitions  of  importation 
has  in  the  midst  of  this  fermentation  been  issued  here,  and 
it  is  generally  considered  as  specially  pointed  against  the 
commerce  with  France.2  This  commerce  which  has  of  late 
been  carried  on  almost  entirely  by  land  is  extremely  dis¬ 
advantageous  to  Russia,  inasmuch  as  it  consists  chiefly 
of  importation  in  articles  of  the  most  expensive  luxury 
which  must  be  paid  for  in  gold  and  silver.  A  committee 
of  merchants  was  chosen  from  a  general  meeting  of  all  the 
principal  merchants  of  this  city,  to  consider  and  represent 
the  causes  of  the  unfavorable  state  of  the  exchange;  and 
in  a  memorial  which  was  laid  before  the  Imperial  Council 


1  Cypher. 

2  The  Emperor  explained  to  Napoleon  the  necessity  of  the  tariff:  “  Votre  Majeste 
suppose  que  mon  oukaze  sur  le  tarif  est  dirige  contre  la  France.  Je  dois  combattre 
cette opinion  comme  gratuite  et  peu  juste.  Ce  tarif  a  ete  imperieusement  commande 
par  la  gene  extreme  du  commerce  maritime,  par  l’importation  enorme  par  terre  de 
marchandises  etrangeres  de  prix,  par  les  droits  excessifs  mis  dans  les  etats  de  votre 
Majeste  sur  des  produits  russes,  et  par  la  baisse  effrayante  de  notre  change.  II  a 
deux  buts  en  vue:  le  premier,  c’est,  en  prohibant  avec  la  plus  grande  severite  le 
commerce  anglais,  d’accorder  quelques  facilites  au  commerce  americain,  comme 
le  seul  par  mer  dont  la  Russie  puisse  se  servir  pour  exporter  ses  produits  trop  volu- 
mineux  pour  pouvoir  l’etre  par  terre;  le  second,  de  restreindre  autant  que  faire  se 
peut  l’importation  par  terre  comme  la  plus  desavantageuse  pour  notre  balance  de 
commerce,  introduisant  une  quantite  d’objets  de  luxe  tres  riches  et  pour  lesquels 
nous  deboursions  notre  numeraire,  tandis  que  notre  propre  exportation  se  trouve  si 
extremement  genee.”  Alexander  to  Napoleon ,  March  25,  1811.  Tatistcheff, 
Alexandre  Ier  et  Napoleon ,  548. 

By  the  treaty  of  Tilsit  the  commerce  between  France  and  Russia  was  placed 
upon  the  basis  of  the  privileges  and  customs  duties  of  the  treaty  of  January  11,  1787, 
which  were  favorable  to  France. 


4 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

while  this  subject  was  under  deliberation,  they  represented 
the  great  importation  from  France  of  articles  of  luxury 
as  one  of  the  principal  of  those  causes.  They  proposed, 
therefore,  a  general  prohibition  of  importation  of  silks, 
velvets,  laces,  modes,  costly  wines,  which  contributed  in 
their  opinions  so  largely  to  drain  this  country  of  the  precious 
metals,  and  consequently  to  aggravate  the  load  of  their 
depreciated  paper. 

The  council  adopted  most  of  these  opinions,  and  by  their 
new  tariffs,  of  which  I  shall  send  you  a  translation,  all  these 
articles  are  laid  under  a  tacit  prohibition;  that  is,  they  are  not 
included  in  the  list  of  articles  the  importation  of  which  is 
permitted.  The  French  dealers  in  this  trade  residing,  or 
now  transiently  being  at  St.  Petersburg,  immediately  took 
the  alarm,  and  became  so  clamorous  for  the  interposition 
of  their  Ambassador,  that  by  his  direction  a  meeting  of  all 
the  French  merchants  was  called  at  the  house  of  the  French 
consul,  and  a  memorial  of  their  grievances  under  the  new 
tariff  was  drawn  up,  and  has  been  forwarded  by  the  Ambassa¬ 
dor  to  Paris  for  the  consideration  of  his  government.  It  is 
generally  supposed  here  that  the  French  government  will  be 
much  dissatisfied  with  these  new  regulations,  though  if 
power  was  accustomed  to  listen  to  reason,  it  must  be  obvious 
how  ruinous  to  Russia  a  trade  upon  which  she  has  to  pay  an 
enormous  balance  must  be;  while  in  the  most  imperious  tone 
she  is  required  to  sacrifice  that  portion  of  her  commerce  upon 
which  the  balance  was  always  in  her  favor.  The  adoption  of  the 
new  system  was  preceded  by  highly  animated  debates  in  the 
Imperial  Council ,  at  which  the  Emperor  presided  in  person . 
It  was  opposed  altogether  by  the  Chancellor ,  Count  Romanzoff, 
on  the  ground  of  its  tendency  to  embroil  the  country  with  France , 
and  when  he  found  the  opinion  of  the  Council  unanimous  in 
opposition  to  this ,  he  asked  and  obtained  permission  to  enter 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


5 


1811} 

on  the  journals  of  the  council  his  protest  against  the  decision . 
At  a  subsequent  meeting ,  however ,  when  the  Emperor  expressed 
his  determination  conformably  to  the  sentiments  of  the  majority , 
the  Count  is  said  to  have  withdrawn  his  protest  and  declared 
his  acquiescence  in  the  resolution  upon  which  the  ukase  was 
founded,1  That  it  will  give  rise  to  discussions  with  France 
appears  highly  probable ,  and  as  an  opinion  of  anticipation 
may  be  hazarded  upon  the  foundation  of  inferences  drawn  from 
the  state  of  affairs ,  the  experience  of  late  events ,  and  the  probable 
influence  of  French  measures  upon  an  irresolute  government , 
I  expect  these  discussions  will  lead  to  several  modifications  of  the 
order  itself  .2 

The  new  tariff  is  generally  considered  by  the  merchants 
as  remarkably  favorable  to  the  commerce  of  the  Americans, 
and  there  is  an  article  in  it  expressly  providing  in  a  very 
satisfactory  manner  for  the  care  of  these  cargoes,  the  ad¬ 
mission  of  which  has  been  hitherto  suspended,  and  which 
may  eventually  be  admitted.  Hitherto  the  delay  has  been 
a  benefit  to  the  owners  rather  than  a  disadvantage.  The 
American  vessels  are  only  twenty-three  or  twenty-four  out 
of  more  than  eighty  which  arrived  with  them,  and  the  papers 
of  which  were  taken  from  the  Commission  for  Neutral  Navi¬ 
gation  for  the  special  examination  of  the  Imperial  Council. 
Of  the  whole  number  there  are  nineteen  or  twenty  which 
have  been  found  of  suspicious  character,  and  which  have  been 
ordered  for  trial,  but  among  them  I  understand  that  none  of 

the  Americans  are  included. 

♦ 

None  of  the  Americans,  however,  have  yet  been  admitted 
to  dispose  of  their  cargoes.  Most  of  their  masters  and  super¬ 
cargoes  who  are  here,  becoming  uneasy  under  the  delay, 

1  Navarro  appears  to  have  been  the  source  of  this  information  on  the  Imperial 
Council.  See  Adams,  Memoirs ,  December  21,  1810. 

2  Cypher. 


6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

had  a  meeting  last  week,  and  addressed  a  memorial  to  me, 
requesting  a  further  interposition  on  my  part  with  this 
government  in  their  behalf.1  I  had  already  since  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  year  had  one  conference  with  Count 
Romanzoff  on  the  subject,  and  on  the  23d  instant  I  saw  him 
again.2  He  said  that  the  decision  was  at  present  before  the 
Emperor  himself,  requiring  only  his  signature,  and  was  de¬ 
layed  only  so  far  as  proceeded  from  his  personal  good  pleas¬ 
ure.  He  added  that  although  it  would  not  be  so  easy  for  him 
to  urge  his  master,  as  he  could  his  brother  ministers,  he 
would,  however,  do  what  he  could  to  hasten  the  result.  I 
am,  etc. 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  38.  [Robert  Smith] 

St.  Petersburg,  5  February,  1811. 

Sir: 

The  day  but  one  after  the  date  of  my  last  letter,  one  of  the 
merchants  3  to  whom  some  of  the  vessels  were  consigned, 
the  papers  of  which  have  now  been  nearly  three  months 
detained  for  examination,  was  informed  by  Baron  Campen- 
hausen,  the  Treasurer  General  of  the  Empire,  that  the  de¬ 
cision  was  now  complete  for  the  admission  of  the  list,  in¬ 
cluding  all  the  Americans  excepting  four;  that  the  papers  had 
been  returned  to  him,  and  that  he  should  transmit  them  the 
next  day  to  the  Commission  for  Neutral  Navigation,  with 
orders  to  proceed  according  to  their  first  decision,  which 
had  been  taken  before  the  papers  had  been  taken  out  of 

1  Printed  in  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Proceedings ,  XL VIII. 

2  Adams,  Memoirs ,  January  3,  23, 1811. 

*  Streglitz. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


7 


1811] 

their  hands  by  the  Emperor’s  command,  to  be  examined  by  a 
committee  of  the  Imperial  Council.  The  next  day  passed 
and  the  papers  were  not  transmitted  to  the  Commission. 
The  day  afterwards,  being  the  thirty-first  of  January,  I 
saw  Baron  Campenhausen  myself,  and  asked  of  him  the 
state  of  the  business.  He  said  it  was  entirely  finished.  I 
asked  him  whether  his  Majesty  the  Emperor  had  signed  the 
report  of  the  committee  of  the  Council,  which  he  had  told 
me  was  the  only  thing  that  remained  to  be  done.  Without 
directly  answering  this  question,  he  said  that  all  the  papers 
had  been  sent  back  to  him  together,  and  that  he  should 
immediately  transmit  them  to  the  Commission  for  Neutral 
Navigation  with  orders  to  proceed  and  execute  their  first 
decision,  which  was  (added  the  Baron)  that  the  papers  were 
found  in  regular  order,  so  that  this  business  was  entirely 
finished.  The  first  and  second  days  of  this  month  however 
passed  away  and  none  of  the  papers  were  to  be  obtained  from 
the  Commission  of  Neutral  Navigation.  If  the  cargoes 
should  finally  be  admitted  to  be  sold,  the  greatest  part  of 
them  must  be  brought  from  Reval  and  Port  Baltic  by  land 
to  this  city,  a  distance  of  150  miles  or  more,  for  a  market, 
and  the  return  cargoes  must  in  like  manner  be  sent  from  this 
place  by  land.  As  the  winter  even  in  this  climate,  where  it  is 
all  but  immortal,  is  yet  wasting  away,  and  as  these  papers 
have  now  been  detained  nearly  three  months,  the  patience 
of  the  masters,  supercargoes,  and  persons  interested  for  the 
owners,  is  quite  exhausted,  and  their  hopes  have  been  de¬ 
ferred  until  their  hearts  are  sick.  I  received  yesterday  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Meyer,1  one  of  their  principal  consignees  in¬ 
treating  me  again  to  write  to  Baron  Campenhausen  in  their 
behalf;  which  I  accordingly  did,  and  am  now  in  expectation 
of  his  answer. 

1 J.  C.  Meyer,  of  the  firm  of  Meyer  and  Briixner,  St.  Petersburg. 


8 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

From  my  former  letters  in  relation  to  this  affair,  you  will 
learn  from  what  quarter  all  these  difficulties  have  arisen.  I 
cannot  state  positively  to  you  that  a  formal  insinuation  was  made 
by  France  to  this  government  that  she  expected  none  of  the 
vessels  belonging  to  the  great  convoy  from  Gothenburg  would  be 
admitted  into  the  ports  of  Russia.1 

I  send  you  an  extract  from  the  Moniteur  to  which  I  alluded 
in  my  letter  of  5/17  December,  and  where  you  will  find  the 
question  was  already  decided  at  Paris  in  November.  I 
have  another  motive  now  for  sending  you  the  translation  of 
this  article  at  full  length,  which  is,  because  Baron  Campen- 
hausen  has  repeatedly  referred  to  it  in  our  discussions  con¬ 
cerning  these  vessels;  and  has  intimated  to  me  that  he 
thought  some  notice  of  it  should  be  taken  by  the  American 
government.  Some  of  the  persons  attached  to  the  French 
embassy  here  have  freely  reported  that  these  vessels  were 
all  English  or  sent  here  on  English  account,  and  the  consul, 
as  I  am  informed,  has  had  as  little  hesitation  as  the  Moniteur 
in  announcing  that  they  would  not  be  admitted. 

The  Baron  spoke  to  me  of  the  article  in  the  Moniteur 
(of  1 2th  November)  as  of  a  letter  from  Elsineur.  I  told  him 
that  I  presumed  he  was  aware  that  this  article,  though  bear¬ 
ing  the  date  of  Elsineur,  was  fabricated  at  Paris,  for  the  pur¬ 
pose  of  being  put  into  the  Moniteur .  There  was  internal 
evidence  enough  of  that  in  the  article  itself,  which  he  ad¬ 
mitted.  I  then  asked  him  whether  he  thought  the  pages 
of  the  Moniteur ,  or  of  any  other  gazette  on  the  continent  of 
Europe,  would  be  as  free  for  such  an  answer  as  that  article 
deserved  as  they  were  for  the  article  itself? 

/  believe  the  Baron  thought  I  was  going  to  ask  leave  to  publish 
an  answer  in  the  St.  Petersburg  gazette ,  for  he  immediately 
perceived  that  a  proper  notice  of  the  article  could  not  easily 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


9 


1811] 

find  access  to  the  same  vehicles.1  But  what  could  be  the  mo¬ 
tives  of  France  for  denouncing  as  false  and  forged  all  the 
clearances  and  certificates  of  the  vessels  at  Gothenburg,  pur¬ 
porting  to  be  American?  I  told  him  that  it  was  not  for  me 
to  account  for  the  motives  of  France.  They  were  indee^d 
obvious  enough  to  my  mind,  and  I  believed  would  not 
easily  escape  the  sagacity  of  his.  France  did  not  choose  that 
any  nation  on  the  continent  of  Europe  should  enjoy  the 
benefit  of  a  commerce  of  which  she  was  herself  deprived. 
Where  she  could  exercise  authority,  she  did  not  trouble 
herself  to  assign  reasons,  and  thus  Denmark  and  Prussia 
had  excluded  American  vessels  from  their  ports,  without 
pretence  of  a  cause.  But  as  this  process  would  not  answer 
for  Russia,  some  charge  against  American  vessels  must  be 
adduced  to  obtain  their  exclusion,  and  as  there  might  have 
been  some  instances  in  which  British  vessels  had  been  de¬ 
tected  with  forged  papers  in  the  guise  of  American  docu¬ 
ments,  the  shortest  expedient  was  to  declare  the  real  Ameri¬ 
can  papers  forgeries  too.  As  to  scruples  of  veracity  or  of 
delicacy ,  hozv  were  they  to  he  expected  from  a  Government  which 
had  not  hesitated  to  declare  the  acts  of  its  own  accredited  agents 
forgeries.1  For  I  could  assure  him  that  there  were  many 
American  vessels  provided  with  genuine  certificates  of 
origin  from  the  French  consuls  in  America,  long  after  the 
French  government  had  declared  all  such  papers  to  be  for¬ 
geries.  He  said  it  was  in  fact  very  extraordinary;  but  that 
such  a  declaration  had  formally  been  made  by  the  Duke 
de  Cadore  to  this  government.  “That  every  paper  produced 
as  a  certificate  of  origin,  from  a  French  consul  in  America, 
was  a  forgery,  the  French  consuls  giving  no  such  papers.” 
I  told  him  it  was  only  an  error  of  chronology.  The  Duke 
no  doubt  had  issued  orders  to  the  French  consuls  to  give  no 

1  Cypher. 


10 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

more  certificates,  and  had  concluded  those  orders  were 
obeyed  before  they  were  received.  It  was  to  be  sure  treating 
their  own  consuls  with  not  much  ceremony ,  for  hereafter  every 
man  who  should  receive  a  document  from  them  must  be  prepared 
to  find  it  declared  to  be  a  forgery  by  their  own  government ,  if  a 
purpose  could  be  answered  by  it.  But  the  natural  effect  must 
be  to  weaken  the  credit  of  all  declarations  from  the  government 
itself  which  could  so  lightly  falsify  the  acts  of  its  own  officers . 

The  day  before  yesterday  the  French  Ambassador  sent 
to  enquire  whether  I  should  be  at  home  in  the  morning  and 
could  see  him.  I  informed  him  that  I  should  be  happy  to 
receive  him,  and  he  accordingly  called  upon  me.  I  found  as 
I  had  expected  that  his  object  was  to  converse  with  me  on  the 
subject  of  these  vessels  and  cargoes,  which  he  appeared  to 
consider  as  sequestered.  He  intimated  an  opinion  that  a 
great  proportion  of  the  commerce  in  American  vessels  ar¬ 
rived  here  was  upon  English  account,  upon  which  I  en¬ 
deavored  as  much  as  possible  to  undeceive  him.  He  thought 
that  such  quantities  of  colonial  articles,  particularly  of  sugar, 
could  not  possibly  come  from  any  place  not  in  possession  of 
the  British,  and  especially  that  they  could  not  have  origi¬ 
nated  in  the  United  States.  I  told  him  that  the  West  India 
Islands  and  many  parts  of  South  America  were  open  to  us, 
and  were  competent  to  supply  far  greater  quantities  of  these 
articles  than  had  been  imported  here,  and  that  of  such  articles 
imported  in  American  vessels,  the  general  conclusion  would 
be  much  more  correct  that  they  could  not  be,  than  that  they 
must  be  the  produce  of  British  possessions.  He  asked  me 
how  it  had  happened  then  that  those  American  vessels  had 
met  with  such  difficulties  in  obtaining  admission?  I  told 
him  that  perhaps  he  could  tell,  as  the  credit  of  it  was  prin¬ 
cipally  attributed  to  him.  He  smiled  and  said  he  supposed 
I  meant  the  credit  of  having  required  a  rigorous  examination. 


1 8 1 1]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  n 

He  expressed  much  concern  at  the  distressed  state  of  com¬ 
merce  generally;  and  a  strong  wish  that  England  might 
finally  come  to  some  terms  which  would  make  its  relief 
possible.  He  also  appeared  anxious  to  know  what  the  state 
of  our  affairs  with  England  would  be  in  case  the  Orders  in 
Council  should  not  have  been  revoked  on  the  second  of  this 
month.1 

I  enclose  herewith  two  translations  of  the  new  ordinance 
concerning  the  Russian  commerce  for  the  present  year.  One 
of  which,  in  manuscript,  I  had  made  by  the  gentleman  in 
my  family,  before  the  printed  one,  made  by  the  merchants 
for  their  correspondents,  was  finished.  The  extract  specifies 
some  of  the  articles  which  are  prohibited  in  a  mass.  It  is  a 
subject  of  no  small  curiosity  here,  how  the  ordinance  will  be 
received  at  Paris.  I  am  with  the  utmost  respect,  etc. 

Of  this  extract  from  the  Moniteur  of  20th  November  I  have  only 
one  word  more  to  say.  If  you  have  received  my  letter  (No.  31) 
you  may  perhaps  perceive  the  kernel  of  all  this  exaggeration 
in  the  article  dated  Elsineur.  The  want  of  a  genuine  American 
consul  at  Gothenburg  may  prove  a  heavy  misfortune  to  our  com¬ 
merce.  It  is  so  ungracious  a  task  to  make  reports  about  persons 
acting  as  public  officers  tending  to  show  their  unfitness  for  their 
places  that  nothing  but  a  sense  of  duty  to  the  public  paramount 
to  considerations  of  mere  delicacy  could  have  induced  me  to 
write  that  letter .2 

1  This  interview  is  more  fully  reported  in  Adams,  Memoirs ,  February  3,  1811. 

2  Cypher. 


12 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  39.  [Robert  Smith] 

St.  Petersburg,  12  February,  1811. 

Sir: 

Mr.  Hazard,1  a  young  American  gentleman,  left  this  city 
last  week  for  Copenhagen.  I  entrusted  to  him  two  packets 
of  dispatches  for  you,  to  be  forwarded  from  that  place  or 
from  Gothenburg  by  the  earliest  safe  opportunities  of  con¬ 
veyance  that  may  occur.  One  of  the  packets  enclosed 
two  letters  for  Count  Pahlen,  which  the  Chancellor,  Count 
Romanzoff,  sent  me  with  a  request  that  I  would  transmit 
them. 

I  mentioned  in  my  last  letter  that  I  had  written  a  note  to 
Baron  Campenhausen,  urging  the  restoration  of  the  papers 
of  the  American  vessels,  which  had  been  for  three  months 
in  a  state  of  suspense,  and  that  I  was  in  expectation  of  his 
answer.  My  note  to  him  was  written  on  the  4th  instant, 
my  letter  to  you  on  the  5th,  and  Mr.  Hazard  left  this  city 
the  6th.  Before  he  went  away  I  was  informed  that  the  Com¬ 
mission  for  Neutral  Navigation  had  received  the  papers  of 
some  of  the  vessels,  with  the  order  for  their  admission;  but 
every  step  in  the  transaction  of  this  business  had  been  at¬ 
tended  with  circumstances  which  left  on  my  mind  such  un¬ 
certainty  with  regard  to  its  final  result,  that  I  did  not  think 
it  safe  either  to  add  this  information  in  the  dispatches  which 
were  already  made  up  for  Mr.  Hazard,  or  to  detain  him  any 
longer  to  receive  the  Baron’s  answer. 

The  papers  of  seventeen  vessels  were  actually  returned, 
with  orders  for  the  admission  of  the  entire  cargoes  of  nine 

1  Samuel  Hazard. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


i3 


1811] 

of  them,  and  the  principal  part  of  those  of  the  other  eight 
— that  is,  of  all  that  were  provided  with  the  certificates  of 
origin  from  the  Russian  consuls,  required  by  the  law  of  this 
country.  But  I  did  not  receive  Baron  Campenhausen’s 
answer  to  my  note  until  the  9th. 

There  are  still  five  vessels,  whose  cargoes  have  not  yet 
been  admitted,  being  in  the  same  predicament  with  those 
parts  of  the  eight  which  are  partially  admitted,  that  are  yet 
in  suspense — that  is,  they  have  no  certificates  from  the 
Russian  consuls.  From  what  has  repeatedly  been  said  to 
me  by  Baron  Campenhausen  in  our  conversations  respect¬ 
ing  these  vessels,  and  from  a  renewed  assurance  which  I 
received  from  him  yesterday,  I  should  have  reason  to  expect 
that  these  cases  will  be  settled  in  a  very  few  days,  and  as 
favorably  as  the  rest;  but  as  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  the 
struggle  of  influence  against  their  admission  is  not  yet  finally 
subdued  I  cannot  yet  in  full  security  promise  you  that  they  will 
be  admitted .  The  law  of  the  country  as  you  know  is  precise , 
that  goods  coming  from  ports  where  there  are  Russian  consuls 
must  be  furnished  with  their  certificates  or  be  excluded  the 
Russian  ports .  They  can  therefore  be  admitted  only  by  special 
favor ,  and  although  at  my  solicitation  that  favor  had  before  the 
arrival  of  these  vessels  been  granted  in  several  instances ,  as 
Baron  Campenhausen  informed  me ,  by  the  express  command  of 
the  Emperor ,  it  was  not  considered  as  establishing  a  general 
precedent ,  which  might  be  appealed  to  in  similar  and  subsequent 
cases . 

The  coolness  or  misunderstanding  between  the  cabinets  of 
St.  Petersburg  and  of  Paris  which  has  been  mentioned  in  several 
of  my  letters  has  become  a  subject  of  very  general  notoriety . 
In  the  accounts  which  go  from  this  country  to  England ,  and 
which  there  find  their  way  into  the  English  newspapers ,  it  is 
always  much  exaggerated;  while  in  the  French  gazettes ,  it  is,  with 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


H 


[1811 


as  little  knowledge  of  the  facts  or  as  little  regard  to  the  truth , 
utterly  denied.1  In  the  Journal  de  V Empire  of  19  January, 
there  is  a  note  copied  from  the  Moniteur  of  the  preceding 
day,  upon  an  article  in  the  Morning  Chronicle;  which  note 
declares  that  the  relations  between  France  and  the  con¬ 
tinental  Powers  were  never  more  intimate  than  at  present. 
It  does  not  however  precisely  say  that  the  harmony  be¬ 
tween  France  and  Russia  is  as  great  as  it  has  been  hereto¬ 
fore.  In  truth  the  military  movements  and  organization  in 
the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  on  one  part,  and  the  reenforcements 
of  all  kinds  which  are  constantly  sending  from  this  city  to  that 
frontier  on  the  other,  have  excited  so  much  of  the  public 
attention  here  that  the  rumor  of  war  with  France  as  on  the 
point  of  breaking  out  has  become  universal.  About  two 
months  since  a  General  Hitroff,2  an  aid  de  camp  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander ,  was  taken  by  an  order  from  the  Minister  of  Police 
at  the  moment  when  he  was  going  to  a  ball  at  the  French  Am¬ 
bassador's ,  with  whom  he  and  his  family  were  particularly 
intimate ,  and  was  transported  either  to  Siberia  or  to  some 
other  place  of  banishment  or  of  imprisonment;  a  circumstance , 
which  in  the  unexampled  mildness  of  the  present  reign  could  not 
fail  to  excite  an  extraordinary  degree  of  attention.  Of  the  offense 
which  produced  an  act  of  such  unusual  rigor  no  other  public 
notice  has  been  taken ,  but  the  report  which  has  been  circulated 
in  connection  is,  that  the  General  had  furnished  to  the  Ambas¬ 
sador  himself  statements  of  the  military  forces  of  the  Empire , 
too  detailed  and  too  confidential  to  be  consistent  with  his  duty. 
Various  other  occurrences  of  minor  importance  have  indicated 
symptoms  of  political  alienation  between  the  French  and  Russian 
governments.  Similar  apprehensions  have  certainly  existed 
at  Paris,  and  have  manifested  themselves  in  the  commercial 
relations  of  individuals.  The  bankers  of  Paris  for  some  months 

1  Cypher.  2  Adams,  Memoirs ,  February  3,  8,  1811. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1811] 


15 


have  refused  to  accept  hills  from  St.  Petersburg ,  drawn  upon 
open  credits ,  and  the  Russian  Ambassador  there ,  Prince  Ku¬ 
rakin  himself ,  has  been  obliged  to  request  that  remittances  may 
be  made  to  him  in  specie.  I  have  indicated  in  my  former  letters 
the  causes  of  these  menacing  appearances ,  which  have  consisted 
of  a  continual  series  of  encroachments  on  the  part  of  France , 
which  Russia  has  overlooked  as  long  as  was  possible ,  and  on 
the  part  of  Russia  hitherto  of  nothing  but  the  refusal  to  adopt 
the  tariff  and  incendiary  decrees  of  France ,  and  the  obstinate 
adherence  to  the  fair  and  profitable  relations  of  commerce  with 
the  United  States.1  I  do  not  add  the  late  ordinance  for 
regulating  the  Russian  commerce  during  the  present  year, 
because  it  is  not  yet  ascertained  in  what  light  that  will  be 
considered  by  the  French  government.  But  the  annexation 
of  the  Hanseatic  cities  to  the  French  Empire  has  been 
specified  by  a  boundary  line  which  besides  cutting  off  a  large 
portion  of  the  kingdom  of  Westphalia,  strips  entirely  of  his 
dominions  and  of  his  possessions  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg,2 
father  of  the  Prince  who  is  married  to  the  Emperor  Alex¬ 
ander’s  sister,  the  Grand  Duchess  Catherine.  As  to  the 
integrity  of  the  kingdom  of  Westphalia,  it  is  probably  not  an 
object  of  much  concern  to  Russia,  but  the  Duke  of  Olden¬ 
burg  was  in  a  manner  under  the  special  protection  of  the 
Emperor  Alexander,  and  his  spoliation  has  contributed  to 
aggravate  the  discontent  which  this  measure  has  occasioned 
here. 

Notwithstanding  all  these  appearances,  so  universal  is 
the  desire  of  all  the  Emperor  Alexander’s  counsellors,  and 
so  sincere  and  anxious  is  his  own  wish  to  preserve  peace  with 
France,  that  unless  it  be  the  deliberate  and  irrevocable  de¬ 
termination  of  France  to  come  to  a  rupture  with  Russia 
the  peace  between  them  will  yet  be  preserved.  I  wish  it  may 

2  Peter  Frederick,  now  bishop  of  Liibeck. 


1  Cypher. 


i6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[18 1 1 

be  preserved  without  the  ultimate  compliance  of  Russia  in  those 
measures  which  have  been  required  of  her ,  to  exclude  the  Ameri¬ 
can  commerce  from  her  ports:  but  all  the  transactions  respecting 
the  Havana  sugars ,  imported  in  American  vessels  last  summer , 
at  Archangel ,  and  all  those  relating  to  these  vessels  from  Gothen¬ 
burg  have  shown ,  together  with  a  strong  and  sincere  desire  on 
the  part  of  Russia  to  support  and  encourage  this  trade ,  some 
hesitation  and  indecision  in  the  will  to  maintain  its  own  system 
of  policy.  The  new  ordinance  respecting  commerce  itself  has 
already  to  a  certain  extent  complied  with  the  demands  of  France , 
though  in  connection  with  that  compliance  it  has  combined 
regulations  restrictive  to  the  trade  of  France ,  and  if  England 
should  persist  in  maintaining  her  orders  of  council ,  and  France 
should  renew  with  the  emphasis  which  may  be  expected  the 
demands  which  have  hitherto  been  so  far  withstood ,  our  commerce 
with  this  country  will  be  suspended. 

If  on  the  other  hand ,  according  to  the  expectation  now  gener¬ 
ally  entertained  here  and  prevailing  throughout  Germany ,  a 
war  between  France  and  Russia  should  very  speedily  ensue , 
it  may  be  of  some  importance  to  consider  what  its  effects  upon 
our  commercial  relations  may  probably  be.1  But  I  do  not 
consider  this  event  either  as  so  near  or  so  probable  as  to 
require  for  the  present  the  remarks  which,  if  the  occasion 
should  offer,  I  may  submit  to  you  on  the  subject  hereafter. 
I  am  very  respectfully,  etc. 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1811] 


i  7 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  40.  [Robert  Smith] 

St.  Petersburg,  19  February,  1811. 

Sir: 

•  •••••• 

I  need  not  trouble  you  with  many  comments  upon  this 
conversation,1  which  I  have  detailed  as  accurately  as  my 
recollection  would  permit,  as  it  passed.  I  shall  only  remark 
that  the  Ambassador  had  the  appearance  of  a  full  personal 
conviction  that  the  certificates  which  he  had  been  ordered  to 
declare  forgeries  were  really  genuine;  but  that  he  seemed  to 
think,  what  however  he  did  not  maintain,  that  his  govern¬ 
ment  considered  it  a  fair  expedient  for  the  purpose  of  ob¬ 
taining  the  confiscation  of  American  vessels  and  cargoes, 
to  brand  with  the  mark  of  forgery,  documents  really  fur¬ 
nished  by  the  consuls  of  France  in  the  United  States;  that  by 
receiving  without  any  denial  the  intimation  that  all  the  im¬ 
pediments,  which  our  commerce  here  encounters,  are  as- 
cribable  solely  to  the  interference  of  the  French  government, 
and  its  influence  operating  against  us,  he  tacitly  admitted 
what,  if  the  fact  had  been  otherwise,  he  would  certainly 
most  strenuously  have  denied;  that  by  the  expression  that 
our  commerce  had  found  powerful  protection ,  he  still  more 
clearly  disclosed  the  weight  of  opposition  against  which 
protection  was  necessary;  and  that  by  the  reply  which  he 
made  to  my  observation,  that  I  considered  the  encourage¬ 
ment  of  the  American  commerce  in  Russia  as  perfectly  rec¬ 
oncilable  with  the  alliance  between  Russia  and  France,  he 

1  With  the  French  Ambassador.  It  is  given  in  the  Memoirs ,  February  15,  1811, 
in  much  the  same  words  as  were  used  in  this  dispatch. 


i8 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

evidently  indicated  that  he  was  instructed  to  represent 
them  here  as  things  not  compatible  with  each  other. 

It  will  be  obvious  to  you  that  in  contending  for  the  authenticity 
of  documents  which  have  thus  officially  been  declared  false  by 
the  government  itself  whose  agents  issued  them ,  I  have  been 
laboring  under  a  disadvantage  which  it  has  been  impossible 
altogether  to  overcome ,  the  certificates  themselves  and  my  con - 
fidence  in  those  who  produced  them  being  the  only  evidence  and 
argument  that  I  have  to  oppose  to  this  formal  and  public 
declaration.  The  opinion  expressed  by  Campenhausen ,  that 
some  public  notice  should  be  taken  by  the  government  of  the 
United  States  of  these  French  official  calumnies  will  doubtless 
be  duly  weighed  by  the  President.  At  least  it  may  be  important 
for  the  protection  both  of  the  property  and  reputation  of  many 
of  our  citizens ,  to  demonstrate  that  they  are  unjustly  charged 
with  having  produced  forged  papers ,  purporting  to  be  certifi¬ 
cates  of  origin  from  French  consuls ,  and  that  the  papers  which 
they  have  produced  as  such  were  genuine.1  I  am  very  respect¬ 
fully,  etc. 

FROM  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
[Robert  Smith] 

Department  of  State,  February  26,  1811. 

Sir: 

On  the  1 5th  October  last  I  had  the  honor  of  stating  to  you  that 
it  had  been  intimated  to  the  President  by  a  person  particularly 
attentive  to  your  interest,2  that  your  return  from  the  mission  to 
St.  Petersburg  had  become  necessary  to  avoid  the  ruinous  ex¬ 
penses  to  which  it  subjected  you,  and  I  was  then  directed  to  signify 
to  you,  that  however  acceptable  your  continuance  there  would  be, 

1  Cypher.  *  His  mother,  Abigail  Adams. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


19 


1811] 

the  President  could  not,  under  such  circumstances,  refuse  his  ac¬ 
quiescence  in  your  wish,  nor  would  he  allow  your  return  to  impair 
the  sentiments  which  had  led  to  your  nomination. 

I  have  now  the  satisfaction  to  inform  you  that  the  President 
has  thought  proper  to  avail  the  public  of  your  services  at  home, 
and  has  accordingly  appointed  you  by  and  with  the  advice  and  con¬ 
sent  of  the  Senate  to  the  seat  on  the  bench  of  the  Supreme  Court 
of  the  United  States  vacated  by  the  death  of  Judge  Cushing.1 

This  appointment  will  make  it  proper  that  you  should  return 
to  the  United  States,  as  soon  as  the  public  interest  and  your  own 
convenience  will  permit.  You  are  accordingly  herewith  furnished 
with  a  letter  of  leave,  to  the  Emperor;  and  in  presenting  it  you 
will  be  sensible  of  the  propriety  of  giving  not  only  such  explana¬ 
tions  and  assurances  as  may  be  calculated  to  prevent  the  circum¬ 
stance  of  your  return  from  being  misconstrued,  but  such  as  may  be 
best  suited  to  convince  the  Emperor  of  the  continued  friendship 
of  the  United  States. 

You  will  moreover  assure  the  Russian  government  that  no 
time  will  be  unnecessarily  lost  in  sending  out  your  successor.  .  .  . 
With  great  respect  and  consideration  I  have  the  honor  to  remain, 
etc. 

R.  Smith. 

1  Justice  Cushing  died  September  13,  1810.  See  Mass.  Hist.  Soc.  Proceedings, 
XLIV.  527. 

The  appointment  was  first  offered  to  Levi  Lincoln,  who  declined  it.  The  most 
active  applicant  was  Gideon  Granger.  “  Granger  has  stirred  up  recommendations 
throughout  the  eastern  states.  .  .  .  The  soundest  republicans  of  New  England  are 
working  hard  against  him,  as  infected  with  Yazooism  and  intrigue.  They  wish  for 
J.  Q.  Adams,  as  honest,  able,  independent,  and  untainted  with  such  objections.” 
Madison  to  Jefferson,  December  7,  1810.  Writings  of  Madison  (Hunt),  VIII.  in n. 
Madison,  in  March,  1811,  looked  upon  Adams’  return  with  such  confidence,  that  he 
proposed  to  appoint  Robert  Smith,  then  Secretary  of  State,  to  the  “ vacancy”  at 
St.  Petersburg,  lb.,  144. 


20 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


TO  JOSEPH  PITCAIRN 

St.  Petersburg,  19  March,  18 n. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  have  duly  received  your  favors  of  22  December  and  of 
2nd  of  this  month,  and  give  you  thanks  for  the  trouble  you 
have  taken  to  make  inquiries  concerning  the  tobacco  which 
had  been  shipped  by  Mr.  Hellen,  and  for  the  information 
which  you  have  obtained  and  communicated  to  me  relating 
to  them. 

The  object  of  the  Russian  manifest  for  regulating  the  com¬ 
merce  of  the  Empire  was,  as  is  naturally  to  be  supposed, 
to  promote  the  interests  of  the  Empire  itself.  Its  intention 
as  I  am  assured  was  to  favor  neutral  commerce,  that  is, 
under  the  circumstances  of  the  present  time,  the  commerce 
of  the  United  States.  Whether  the  modifications  which 
you  suggest  or  any  others  will  be  obtainable  may  depend 
upon  circumstances.  If  the  occasion  should  present  itself, 
I  shall  avail  myself  of  your  hints  and  observations.  I  do  not 
consider  the  commercial  system  of  this  country  as  yet  ir¬ 
revocably  fixed,  and  it  must  always  in  some  degree  sympa¬ 
thize  with  the  state  of  general  politics. 

Neither  the  merchants,  nor  any  other  persons  of  my  ac¬ 
quaintance  here,  are  at  all  convinced  of  the  advantages  to 
Russia  of  a  water  communication  inland  between  Liibeck 
and  Antwerp;  but  neither  do  I  know  that  they  deem  it  any 
great  disadvantage.  There  was  a  time  when  European 
statesmen  used  to  reason  about  a  balance  of  power,  some¬ 
what  as  metaphysicians  reason  about  free  will  and  fore¬ 
knowledge.  There  was  a  time,  also,  when  in  the  principles 
of  political  architecture  a  tradesman’s  shop,  or  a  peasant 
hut,  could  exist  close  by  the  side  of  a  royal  or  an  imperial 


i8ii] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


21 


palace.  But  those  times  have  changed.  The  cottage  must 
be  incorporated  with  the  palace,  and  whether  it  is  barely 
brought  within  the  circuit  of  the  walls  of  the  other,  or  is 
made  part  of  the  corps  de  logis  itself,  is  not  very  material, 
either  to  the  comfort  or  safety  of  the  neighboring  palaces. 
The  ministers  of  the  late  king  of  Holland  might  have  known, 
without  sending  M.  Labouchere1  to  London,  that  their 
political  independence  in  that  condition  was  not  a  weight 
to  put  in  the  scale  against  the  British  orders  of  council. 
The  Hanseatic  League  was  a  remnant  of  feudality  still 
more  singular  than  Holland.  With  what  longing  and  ardent 
eyes  it  had  been  viewed  by  Denmark  and  Prussia  in  the 
days  of  their  vigor,  I  need  not  tell  you.  The  name  of  in¬ 
dependence  applied  to  it  for  many  years  past  was  scarcely  a 
serious  term,  and  it  may  possibly  be  considered,  that  as 
members  of  the  great  family  they  will  be  treated  with  more 
tenderness  themselves,  and  therefore  be  more  safe  and  useful 
neighbors,  than  while  in  the  solitude  of  a  nominal  independ¬ 
ence  they  were  destitute  of  a  protector.  The  change  of 
government  in  the  Hanseatic  cities  has  not,  that  I  have 
heard,  excited  much  displeasure  here.  Other  causes  may  be 
operating  of  a  more  powerful  nature,  but  as  yet  nothing 
of  a  decisive  nature  has  occurred. 

I  would  willingly  hope  that  the  mission  to  Copenhagen 
will  be  attended  with  favorable  consequences.  But  I  know 
not  anything  more  is  to  be  expected,  than  there  would  be, 
if  a  senatus  consult  had  found  Holstein  and  Helwick  and 
Jutland,  and  even  the  Island  of  Zeeland,  as  convenient  for 
internal  navigation  as  Hamburg,  Lubeck  and  Bremen. 

There  is  no  foundation  whatever  for  the  report  that  your 
friend  2  proposes  a  journey  to  Paris.  There  is  not  a  city  in 

1  Pierre-Cesar  Labouchere,  a  member  of  the  banking  house  of  Hope,  at  Amster¬ 
dam.  *  Adams  himself. 


22 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

the  world  which  he  has  less  inclination  or  less  prospect  of 
visiting.  He  thinks  in  this  respect  as  you  do,  and  when  he 
leaves  the  place  of  his  present  residence  it  will  undoubtedly 
be  to  return  home.  It  is  possible  that  this  may  happen  dur¬ 
ing  the  present  year,  though  it  may  be  postponed  until 
the  next.  In  the  meantime  he  hopes  to  hear  from  you  as 
heretofore,  and  when  he  goes  will  give  you  seasonable 
notice. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  19  March,  1811. 

•  •••••• 

Our  society  here,  as  you  will  naturally  suppose,  is  princi¬ 
pally  composed  of  the  Corps  Diplomatique,  which  of  all  the 
movable  sand  banks  in  the  world  of  mutability  is  perhaps  the 
most  given  to  change.  When  we  arrived  here  in  October, 
1809,  it  consisted  of  a  French  ambassador,  ministers  of  the 
second  order  from  the  kings  of  Denmark,  Prussia,  Sardinia, 
Saxony,  Bavaria,  Wiirttemburg,  Holland,  Spain,  Naples, 
and  Westphalia.  There  were  from  Sweden  the  two  ne¬ 
gotiators  who  had  just  concluded  the  peace  of  Frederic- 
shamn,  one  of  whom  had  been  for  many  years  the  Swedish 
ambassador  at  this  Court,  and  then  had,  as  he  still  has,  the 
powers  without  the  formal  character  of  ambassador.  There 
was  also  a  charge  d’affaires  from  Portugal,  or  from  the 
Prince  Regent  of  Brazil,  and  an  agent  from  the  Hanseatic 
cities.  Austria  and  England  were  not  represented.  Seven 
of  these  kings,  besides  the  French  Emperor,  were  themselves 
novelties,  created  since  the  commencement  of  the  present 
century,  and  lineally  descended  from  the  revolution,  which 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


23 


18 1 1] 

was  to  found  liberty,  equality  and  fraternity,  and  to  abolish 
monarchy  on  the  face  of  the  globe.  Four  of  them,  Holland, 
Spain,  Naples  and  Westphalia,  were  of  the  collateral  Bona¬ 
parte  dynasty,  which  had  been  set  up  before  he  had  under¬ 
taken  to  have  children  of  his  own  to  provide  for. 

We  had  been  here  about  three  months  when  the  Duke 
de  Mondragone,  the  minister  from  the  king  of  Naples,  was 
recalled,  and  took  leave.  Observe  that  by  the  king  of 
Naples  I  mean  the  person  once  named  Joachim  Murat,  whose 
title  to  that  throne  sprouted  from  his  marriage  with  a  sister 
of  the  Emperor  Napoleon.  For  there  is  yet  here  another 
Neapolitan  nobleman,  the  Duke  de  Serra  Capriola,  an  ex¬ 
ambassador  of  the  ancient  king  of  the  two  Sicilies,  Ferdinand, 
but  who  is  not  recognized  in  that  capacity  now.  The  Duke 
de  Mondragone  was  the  head  of  one  of  the  proudest  and  most 
illustrious  noble  familes  of  the  kingdom  of  the  two  Sicilies, 
and  the  envoy  extraordinary  and  minister  plenipotentiary 
of  Joachim  Murat. 

About  the  same  time  Count  Einsiedel,  the  minister  from 
the  king  of  Saxony,  was  recalled  from  the  mission  here, 
and  sent  in  the  same  capacity  to  Paris.  He  was  a  man  of 
infinite  humor  and  pleasantry,  but  he  protracted  for  five 
months  at  least  our  residence  at  a  very  uncomfortable  public 
inn.  He  received  his  recall  in  December,  and  was  to  go  in 
January.  I  engaged  to  take  the  house  which  he  was  to  quit, 
which  we  accordingly  now  occupy.  But  from  January  to 
June  he  was  always  going  the  next  week,  and  we  were  waiting 
at  the  inn. 

The  Bavarian  minister,  the  Chevalier  de  Bray,  a  French¬ 
man  by  birth,  was  the  only  public  minister  who  had  his  wife 
and  family  with  him.  They  were  very  amiable,  and  paid 
us  all  possible  attention.  But  after  passing  the  last  winter 
here,  they  went  into  the  country.  He  obtained  a  leave  of 


24 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ii 


absence  to  travel  for  one  year,  and  they  are  now  at  Rome 
or  Naples. 

The  Chevalier  Six  d’Otecbeck,  the  minister  from  the  king 
of  Holland,  was  an  old  acquaintance  of  mine.  I  had  seen 
him  in  the  year  1795,  as  the  Citizen  Six  in  the  first  year  of 
the  Batavian  liberty,  go  to  Paris  from  the  Batavian  re¬ 
public  to  attempt  a  negotiation  for  peace  with  the  Committee 
of  Public  Safety  of  the  French  republic,  one  and  indivisible. 
He  was  now  metamorphosed  into  the  Chevalier  Six  d’Oter- 
beck,  bedizened  with  the  ribbons  of  three  orders  of  knight¬ 
hood,  and  envoy  extraordinary  and  minister  plenipotentiary 
from  the  king  of  Holland.  The  king  of  Holland  was  the 
person,  who  in  the  year  1801  had  been  introduced  to  me  by 
General  Beurnonville  at  Berlin,  by  the  name  and  style  of 
le  Colonel  Bonaparte .  The  king  of  Holland  to  me,  who  had 
received  part  of  my  education  at  Amsterdam  and  at  Leyden, 
and  who  at  a  later  period  had  myself  been  accredited  to 
their  High  Mightinesses  the  States  General  of  the  United 
Netherlands,  was  as  good  a  sound  to  the  ears  as  the  sight  of 
Citizen  Six,  with  his  ribbons  and  his  stars,  was  to  the  eye. 
But  the  king  of  Holland  is  no  more.  About  the  month  of 
January,  1810,  Monsieur  de  Champagny,  otherwise  the  Duke 
de  Cadore,  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s  minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs,  made  the  discovery  that  Holland  was  nothing  but  an 
alluvion  of  France,  whereupon  the  king  of  Holland  made  a 
treaty  with  his  august  brother  ceding  about  one-third  of  his 
kingdom  to  France.  And  as,  notwithstanding  this  cession, 
the  British  ministers  refused  to  repeal  the  orders  of  council, 
the  king  of  Holland  abdicated,  his  whole  kingdom  was 
incorporated  with  the  French  empire,  and  my  friend  the 
Chevalier  Six  d’Oterbeck  found  himself  in  the  condition  of 
Othello,  his  occupation  was  gone.  So  he  had  the  honor 
of  dining  with  the  Emperor  Alexander,  which  he  could  not 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


25 


1811] 

have  had  if  he  had  been  simply  a  minister  recalled,  went 
to  Paris  last  August,  was  appointed  Intendant  of  the  Do¬ 
mains,  and  received  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s  permission 
to  wear  the  ribband  of  the  Bavarian  order  of  St.  Hubert,  a 
very  large  blue  ribband.  I  call  him  my  friend  the  Chevalier 
Six  d’Oterbeck,  because  with  all  his  metamorphoses  and  all 
his  ribbands,  he  is  a  good  hearted,  friendly,  as  well  as  a 
sensible,  and  well  informed  man.  While  he  remained  here, 
I  was  upon  a  footing  of  great  intimacy  with  him,  and  I 
met  with  a  very  serious  loss  in  his  departure.  He  had  al¬ 
most  all  the  sound  and  useful  qualities  of  the  ancient  Dutch 
character,  and  he  had  a  very  peculiar  and  sincere  regard 
for  our  country,  where  he  is  the  owner  of  considerable  pos¬ 
sessions. 

One  of  the  Swedish  negotiators  whom  I  mentioned  was 
here  only  a  few  weeks,  and  returned  to  Sweden.  Count 
Stedingk,  the  informal  ambassador,  was  to  have  remained 
only  until  last  June,  and  a  frigate  then  actually  came  to 
take  him  home.  But  just  at  that  time  happened  the  sudden 
death  of  the  late  Crown  Prince,  and  Count  Stedingk  was 
requested  to  stay  here  some  time  longer.  He  is  yet  here,  and 
a  most  amiable  and  respectable  man.  He  served  with  the 
French  army  in  America  during  our  war,  and  was  wounded 
at  the  affair  of  Savannah. 

About  a  month  after  us  arrived  here  Count  St.  Julien,  as 
an  informal  envoy  from  the  Emperor  of  Austria.  The  Em¬ 
peror  of  Austria  in  that  character  is  as  much  of  a  novelty 
as  all  the  rest.  The  reason  for  all  these  informal  missions 
is  to  escape  from  questions  of  etiquette,  and  the  necessity 
of  disputing  for  precedence  with  the  French  ambassador, 
who  would  take  and  maintain  it  upon  all  occasions,  before 
all  other  ambassadors.  Before  the  dissolution  of  the  Ger¬ 
man  empire,  French  ambassadors  yielded  precedence  to 


26 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


those  of  the  Emperor  of  Germany.  Now  they  insist  upon  it 
themselves.  To  avoid  unprofitable  contest  Austria  sent 
Count  St.  Julien,  first  without  diplomatic  rank,  and  now 
with  the  character  of  envoy  extraordinary,  that  he  may 
without  any  evaporation  of  dignity  walk  after  the  French 
ambassador.  But  then  he  is  treated  as  a  sort  of  semi¬ 
ambassador,  something  more  than  a  mere  envoy,  and  has 
been  all  winter  preparing  to  live  in  style. 

The  agent  from  the  Hanseatic  cities  vanished  from  the 
diplomatic  circle  about  two  months  ago,  upon  the  incorpora¬ 
tion  of  his  sovereigns  with  the  French  empire.  I  have  not 
seen  him  since.  He  was  a  very  respectable  man,  and  from 
his  long  residence  in  this  country  an  agreeable  acquaintance. 
His  name  is  Wiggers. 

The  charge  d’affaires  from  Portugal,  the  Chevalier  Navarro 
d’Andrade,  I  had  known  as  the  Secretary  of  the  Portugal 
legation  at  Berlin.  He  is  also  my  very  worthy  and  valuable 
friend,  but  he  is  recalled.  A  minister  is  appointed  to  come 
in  his  stead,  and  he  expects  to  depart  in  May  or  June. 

Lastly  the  French  ambassador,  Coulaincourt,  Duke  de 
Vicenza,  Grand  Ecuyer  of  France,  one  of  the  most  accom¬ 
plished  as  well  as  one  of  the  greatest  noblemen  of  the  Na¬ 
poleon  creation,  has  received  his  recall,  and  only  waits  for 
the  arrival  of  his  successor,  a  Count  and  General  Lauriston.1 
We  shall  regret  the  ambassador,  whose  civilities  to  us  have 
been  frequent  and  uninterrupted,  and  but  for  a  reserve 
which  we  have  thought  necessary  in  accepting  them,  would 
have  been  much  more  frequent  still.  He  lives  in  a  style 
of  magnificence  scarcely  surpassed  by  the  Emperor  himself, 
and  has  an  easy  unassuming  simplicity  of  manners,  which 
is  not  very  common  among  the  modern  grandees,  and  which 
does  not  always  distinguish  even  the  antediluvian  great. 

1  Jacques-Alexandre-Bernard  Law,  Marquis  de  Lauriston  (1768-1828). 


i8ii] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


27 


And  here  ends  my  first  canto  of  mutability.  I  will  make 
you  acquainted  with  many  of  the  persons  whom  we  have 
most  frequently  associated  with  here,  and  show  you  how 
they  pass  like  Chinese  shadows  before  us.  But  whatever 
changes  I  may  witness  or  experience,  be  assured  that  my 
duty  and  affection  to  you  will  remain  immutable.  All  well. 

TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 
St.  Petersburg,  10/22  March,  1811. 

I  dined  yesterday  at  the  French  ambassador’s,  at  a  diplo¬ 
matic  dinner  of  about  sixty  persons,  in  the  highest  and  most 
formal  style.  I  give  you  a  description  of  this  entertain¬ 
ment,  which  may  amuse  you  as  a  specimen  of  the  usages  at 
the  time  and  place,  and  give  you  an  idea  of  what  is  under¬ 
stood  to  be  the  suitable  style  of  an  ambassador.  The  in¬ 
vitation  was  by  printed  card,  sent  five  or  six  days  before  the 
dinner,  which  by  the  custom  is  the  signal  of  a  formal  enter¬ 
tainment.  All  invitations  to  dinner  without  ceremony  are 
sent  by  verbal  message,  or  given  personally.  The  printed 
cards,  although  on  the  face  of  them  they  ask  for  an  answer, 
never  are  answered,  unless  to  decline  the  invitation.  The 
only  answer  expected  is  personal  attendance.  When  the 
invitation  is  without  ceremony ,  the  guests  are  expected  to  go 
not  in  full  dress,  but  in  frock  coats,  and  if  you  choose  in 
boots  and  with  a  round  hat.  But  when  the  invitation  is  by 
card ,  they  must  go  in  full  court  dress,  that  is  to  say  in  uni¬ 
form,  for  there  is  no  court  dress  here  but  an  uniform.  In 
the  summer  season,  however,  the  Chancellor  of  the  Empire, 
Count  Romanzoff,  sometimes  invites  by  cards,  specifying 
that  the  company  are  to  come  in  frock  coats. 


28 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

The  hour  of  dining  varies  at  different  houses  from  four  to 
five  o’clock.  The  Chancellor’s  cards  are  always  for  four 
o’clock,  the  ambassador’s  for  half-past  four.  These  are  the 
only  two  houses  where  entertainments  of  this  kind  are  given, 
or  at  least  where  I  have  witnessed  them. 

At  half-past  four  therefore  I  went  to  the  ambassador’s 
hotel,  at  the  outer  door  of  which  stood  the  porter,  or  Swiss, 
in  full  dressed  livery,  deeply  bordered  with  gold  lace,  a  three- 
cornered  hat,  also  gold  laced,  a  broad  girdle  of  cloth  passing 
over  from  the  right  shoulder  to  the  left  side,  bordered  with 
gold  lace  and  worked  with  gold  embroidery,  and  a  large  thick 
staff  about  five  feet  long,  and  headed  with  silver.  He  opened 
the  folding  doors  and  I  stepped  from  the  carriage  into  the 
house.  As  my  style  here  is  altogether  republican,  I  went 
only  in  a  chariot  and  four,  attended  by  two  footmen  in  livery, 
and  driven  by  a  coachman  on  the  carriage  box,  and  a  postil¬ 
lion,  between  boy  and  man,  on  the  right  side  horse  of  the 
leading  pair.  My  own  footmen  followed  me  about  half  the 
way  up  the  stairs,  when  I  threw  off  and  gave  them  my 
shoop ,  a  large  outside  fur  garment,  fit  only  for  wearing  in  a 
carriage.  The  weather  not  being  cold  I  had  not  taken  with 
me  the  loose  boots  lined  with  fur  or  flannel,  which  are  also 
worn  in  winter  when  riding  in  carriages,  and  are  thrown  off 
on  entering  the  house.  These  are  indispensable  in  the  sever¬ 
ity  of  the  season,  and  are  slipped  on  and  off  over  shoes  and 
silk  stockings  with  as  much  ease  as  the  shoop  is  from  the 
shoulders. 

On  the  steps  of  the  staircase  at  the  Ambassador’s  hotel 
stood  a  line  of  twenty  footmen,  reaching  from  the  bottom  to 
the  top  of  the  stairs,  all  in  the  same  livery  as  the  Swiss,  ex¬ 
cepting  the  girdle,  staff  and  hat,  and  in  silk  stockings  in¬ 
stead  of  boots.  They  stand  there  from  the  time  when  the 
company  begins  to  come,  until  all  the  guests  are  arrived. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


29 


1811] 

They  stand  like  so  many  statues,  and  are  there  merely  for 
the  magnificence  of  the  show.  At  the  top  of  the  staircase, 
at  the  folding  doors  of  the  first  antichamber,  stood  two 
chasseurs  with  pea  green  liveries,  as  deeply  laced  with  silver 
as  those  of  the  footmen  with  gold,  and  with  each  a  hanger 
suspended  at  the  thigh  by  a  leathern  baldric  passing  over 
the  shoulder.  These  like  the  Swiss  were  in  boots.  In  the 
second  antichamber  was  a  line  of  eight  upper  servants,  above 
the  rank  of  footmen  and  chasseurs,  in  uniform  dresses  em¬ 
broidered  in  gold,  but  of  the  same  colors  with  the  liveries. 
They  were  all  in  silk  stockings,  and  stood  like  the  footmen, 
merely  to  be  seen  by  the  company.  In  the  third  antichamber 
the  guests  were  received  and  greeted  by  the  Ambassador’s 
secretaries  and  by  the  French  consul.  The  Ambassador  him¬ 
self  stood  in  the  saloon,  near  the  door  of  entrance,  both  folds 
of  which  were  wide  open,  and  there  received  and  returned  the 
salutations  of  each  guest  as  he  arrived,  after  which  the  guest 
passed  on  into  the  circle  standing  without  any  regular  order 
about  the  hall.  In  the  course  of  half  an  hour  the  whole 
company  was  assembled,  and  all  continued  standing  until 
the  Ambassador’s  steward  in  a  full  dress,  not  of  livery,  but 
of  cloths  richly  embroidered  in  the  ancient  style  of  court 
dresses,  came  and  announced  to  him  that  the  shaal  was 
ready.  The  shaal  is  a  dram  of  cordials  served  with  a  relish 
of  cold  tongue,  or  ham,  caviar,  cheese,  anchovies  and  other 
stimulants  to  appetite,  which  it  is  customary  to  take  im¬ 
mediately  before  sitting  down  to  dinner.  It  was  served  on  a 
small  table  in  the  second  antichamber,  and  each  guest  who 
chose  to  take  it  helped  himself  at  the  table,  without  sitting 
down.  This  ceremony  being  performed,  which  did  not  oc¬ 
cupy  more  than  five  minutes  of  time,  the  Ambassador  bowing 
round  to  the  company  invited  the  Chancellor  to  pass  into 
the  dining  hall,  and  accompanied  him  to  his  place  at  his 


30 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ii 

own  right  hand  at  the  middle  of  the  table.  The  remainder 
of  the  company  followed  without  any  particular  order  of 
precedence,  each  person  taking  his  place  according  to  his 
own  idea  of  propriety,  or  to  the  courtesy  of  others.  All  the 
ministers  and  general  officers,  however,  national  and  foreign, 
waited  yesterday,  and  gave  the  step  of  precedence,  imme¬ 
diately  after  the  Chancellor  and  the  Ambassador,  to  the 
Austrian  envoy  extraordinary  and  minister  plenipotentiary, 
Count  St.  Julien,  who  for  certain  reasons  is  treated  with 
very  peculiar  distinction  at  this  time.  The  rest  of  the  com¬ 
pany  took  their  places  as  I  have  mentioned  at  discretion. 

The  dinner  was  over  in  about  an  hour,  and  seldom  lasts 
longer  on  these  occasions  of  parade.  There  is  no  distinction 
of  different  services,  and  no  time  lost  in  getting  on  and  re¬ 
moving  dishes,  or  in  carving.  The  table  is  elegantly  dec¬ 
orated  with  a  plateau,  and  a  variety  of  images  in  porcelain 
and  ornamented  plates  filled  with  confectionery  and  fruits, 
which  form  part  of  the  dessert,  but  no  dish  is  ever  set  upon 
the  table.  Those  that  require  carving  are  all  carved  by  the 
principal  servants  in  attendance.  The  dinner  begins  with 
soup,  a  plate  of  which  is  carried  by  the  footman  and  offered  to 
every  guest  at  the  table.  The  soup  plates  are  of  elegant 
porcelain.  Then  follows  a  succession  of  seven  or  eight 
dishes  of  flesh  and  fish  variously  cooked,  with  and  without 
vegetables,  and  some  of  them  with  pastry  according  to  the 
fashion  of  French  cookery.  If  the  dishes  in  which  they  are 
served  are  large,  the  footmen  bring  small  portions  of  it 
round,  and  present  them  to  every  guest  as  with  the  soup. 
If  the  dishes  are  small,  they  are  presented  in  succession  to 
the  guest,  each  of  whom  helps  himself  from  the  dish  as  he 
pleases.  Bottles  of  French  table  wines,  red  and  white  al¬ 
ternately,  and  decanters  of  water  are  placed  on  the  table 
between  every  two  persons  seated  at  it,  with  a  tumbler  and 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


3i 


1811] 

a  wine  glass  to  each  person.  But  a  variety  of  fine  wines  are 
served  round  by  the  butler  and  some  of  the  footmen,  between 
every  dish  or  two  that  is  presented.  One  glass  of  each  sort 
of  wine  is  offered  to  each  guest.  They  usually  begin  with 
madeira,  to  which  succeed  various  French  wines,  red  and 
white  alternately,  until  champagne  is  presented  with  the 
last  dish  of  flesh.  Then  come  jellies,  preserves,  fruits, 
sweetmeats,  and  last  of  all  ice  creams,  with  a  small  glass  of 
sweet  wine.  There  are  no  healths  drunk  and  no  toasts, 
and  every  guest  has  as  little  to  do  with  the  drinking  as  with 
the  eating  of  another.  Among  the  liquors  served  round  are 
equally  English  porter  and  ale,  and  frozen  punch  in  cham¬ 
pagne  glasses.  On  rising  from  the  table  the  footmen  be¬ 
hind  the  chairs  offer  tumblers  of  green  glass  filled  with 
water  to  every  guest  to  wash  his  mouth  and  fingers.  The 
company  return  through  the  antichamber  into  the  saloon, 
where  they  continue  standing  as  before  dinner.  The  servants 
hand  round  coffee,  and  afterwards  cordials  in  glasses  not 
much  larger  than  thimbles,  after  which  each  guest  drops  off 
one  by  one  without  taking  leave,  or  being  noticed  by  any 
person  as  he  retires.  At  the  head  of  the  staircase  he  finds 
the  chasseurs  and  footmen,  who  the  moment  he  appears 
call  for  his  servants,  one  of  whom  comes  to  him  and  puts  on 
his  shoop  and  fur  boots,  while  another  goes  and  orders  his 
carriage  up  to  the  door.  There  stands  the  Swiss,  and  at 
the  moment  when  the  carriage  drives  up  opens  the  door,  the 
guest  enters  his  carriage,  and  goes  home  or  wherever  his 
business  or  pleasure  calls  him. 

I  said  there  was  no  distinction  of  services  at  the  table, 

» 

but  after  the  soup  until  the  last  dish  of  flesh  emphatically 
called  roast ,  which  is  always  accompanied  with  a  salad  and 
followed  by  the  glass  of  champagne,  the  plates  in  which  every¬ 
thing  is  presented  and  the  dishes  are  of  silver  plate,  after 


32 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

which  the  plates  are  of  the  most  magnificent  china,  usually 
of  Sevres,  painted  with  portraits,  views,  landscapes  or  history 
pieces,  no  two  plates  of  which  are  alike.  At  this  period  of  the 
repast  the  silver  plates  are  taken  away  from  before  every 
guest,  and  in  their  stead  is  substituted  a  plate  of  this  superb 
porcelain,  with  a  napkin  of  more  beautiful  damask  than  the 
first  served,  which  is  however  not  taken  away,  two  dessert 
knives,  a  fork,  a  spoon  and  a  paddle ,  all  of  silver  gilt,  except 
the  blade  of  one  of  the  knives  which  is  of  steel.  The  knife 
with  the  silver  blade  is  to  pare  or  to  cut  fruit,  that  with  a 
steel  blade  to  cut  preserves  or  confectionery,  or  anything 
requiring  a  keener  edge  than  silver.  The  paddle  (I  call  it 
so  from  its  form,  I  know  not  its  proper  name,)  is  to  take  up 
the  liquid  jellies,  or  preserves,  or  ice  creams,  which  spread 
themselves  over  the  surface  of  your  plate  and  might  escape 
the  scoop  and  thickness  of  a  spoon.  The  second  napkin  is 
merely  to  wipe  your  lips  and  fingers  when  you  wash  them  in 
rising  from  table,  that  which  you  have  used  at  dinner  being 
supposed  less  suitable  for  that  purpose. 

The  attention  of  the  servants  to  the  guests  at  table  is  so 
vigilant  that  you  scarcely  ever  have  occasion  to  ask  for  any¬ 
thing.  The  instant  that  you  have  emptied  your  plate,  or 
that  you  lay  down  your  knife,  and  fork,  or  spoon,  your  plate 
is  taken  away  and  a  clean  one  is  given  you  in  its  stead.  If 
you  choose  to  have  your  knife,  fork  and  spoon  changed, 
you  lay  them,  or  either  of  them,  in  the  plate.  If  you  lay 
them  aside  on  the  cloth,  they  are  not  taken  away;  whenever 
they  are,  others  are  immediately  given  you  with  the  plate. 
If  you  have  occasion  for  a  fresh  supply  of  bread,  the  footmen 
perceive  it  at  least  as  soon  as  you  do  yourself,  and  present  you 
a  new  piece,  just  as  you  are  ready  to  call  for  it.  If  you 
take  two  or  three  glasses  of  the  various  kinds  of  wine  that 
are  handed  round,  the  glasses  as  you  empty  them  are  taken 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


33 


18 1 1] 

away  without  any  hint  from  you.  The  name  of  each  kind 
of  wine  is  mentioned  to  you  by  the  servant  who  offers  it. 
If  you  decline  taking  any  dish  or  glass  offered  you,  there  is 
no  occasion  to  speak,  you  only  raise  your  hand,  or  touch 
the  back  of  your  forefinger  on  the  edge  of  the  plate  or  of 
the  waiter  in  which  it  is  presented.  The  servant  understands 
you,  and  offers  the  same  plate  or  waiter  to  the  guest  seated 
next  you.  As  several  plates  are  serving  from  the  same  dish 
at  once  in  various  parts  of  the  table,  the  whole  company 
is  served  in  a  very  few  minutes.  The  conversations  of  each 
guest  are  merely  with  his  next  neighbors  at  table,  and  in  a 
low  voice  that  they  may  all  be  carried  on  at  once.  The 
voice  of  a  servant  is  never  heard,  unless  to  mention  the 
names  of  the  wines  as  they  are  offered.  The  Ambassador 
and  the  Chancellor  sometimes  have  a  band  of  music, 
who  occasionally  strike  up  an  air  or  a  march  at  intervals 
during  the  dinner;  yesterday  however  there  was  none. 

Ex  uno  disce  omnes.  I  give  you  the  description  of  an  in¬ 
dividual  for  an  idea  of  the  genus.  All  these  parade  dinners 
are  alike,  differing  only  in  some  insignificant  details.  For  in¬ 
stance  the  Ambassador,  who  is  one  of  the  politest  men  in  the 
world,  never  pays  any  attention  to  any  part  of  the  dinner 
more  than  any  one  of  the  guests.  The  Chancellor  usually 
himself  pours  out  the  sweet  wine,  the  last  that  is  served, 
two  kinds  of  which  he  has  before  him,  he  calls  out  to  each 
guest  by  name,  asks  him  which  of  the  two  he  will  have,  and 
according  to  his  choice  sends  him  a  glass  by  a  footman.  This 
you  will  observe  is  a  mark  of  special  attention,  but  it  is 
troublesome  both  to  the  Chancellor  and  to  the  guests.  The 
Ambassador’s  fashion  is  more  of  a  piece  with  the  whole 
system.  The  servants  carry  round  the  sweet  wines  like  all 
the  rest.  They  offer  to  each  guest  the  choice  of  two,  but  in 
that  as  in  everything  else  the  master  of  the  house  can  be 


34 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[18x1 

distinguished  from  the  guests  while  at  table  only  by  the 
seat  which  he  occupies.  Everything  moves  like  a  piece  of 
clockwork.  The  dishes,  the  cookery,  the  wines  are  all  of 
the  most  exquisite  inventions  of  luxury,  and  yet  there  is 
less  of  intemperance  in  fifty  such  feasts,  than  in  one  of  our 
dinners  succeeded  by  a  carousal  of  six  hours  long,  swilling 
upon  a  mixture  of  madeira  wine  and  brandy. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  43.  [Robert  Smith] 

St.  Petersburg,  26  March,  1811. 

Sir: 

In  my  letter  to  you  of  12  February  last,  No.  39,  I  men¬ 
tioned  that  of  the  twenty-three  American  vessels  which 
had  arrived  in  Russian  ports  at  the  close  of  last  season,  and 
the  admission  of  which  had  been  suspended  so  far  as  related 
to  the  disposal  of  their  cargoes,  the  papers  of  seventeen  had 
been  returned,  and  that  the  cargoes  and  parts  of  cargoes 
which  were  provided  with  certificates  of  origin  conformably 
to  the  laws  of  this  country  were  ordered  to  be  admitted. 
I  informed  you  of  the  repeated  promises,  which  I  had  re¬ 
ceived  from  Baron  Campenhausen  (who  has  since  that  time 
been  promoted  to  the  office  of  Comptroller  General  of  the 
Empire)  with  regard  to  the  cases  upon  which  the  decision 
was  still  suspended,  and  of  my  reasons  for  not  speaking 
positively  to  you  concerning  them.  I  had  afterwards  at 
various  times  farther  conversations  with  the  Baron,  in  which 
the  same  promises  were  repeated,  and  in  terms  which  left 
me  nothing  to  desire  but  to  see  them  realized.  In  the  mean¬ 
time  nothing  was  done  and  the  impatience  and  uneasiness 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


35 


18 1 1] 

of  the  persons  concerned  in  the  property  were  continually 
increasing.  After  waiting  upwards  of  three  weeks,  I  re¬ 
quested  a  conference  with  the  Chancellor,  Count  Romanzoff, 
and  on  the  eighth  instant 1  delivered  to  him  a  minute  con¬ 
taining  a  statement  of  all  the  suspended  cases  and  urging 
a  speedy  and  favorable  decision  upon  them.  The  Count 
intimated  some  surprise  that  the  decision  had  been  so  long 
delayed,  and  assured  me  that  he  would  send  an  official  note 
to  the  Baron  to  hasten  his  proceedings,  which  I  know  he 
accordingly  did.  Last  Thursday,  the  2 1st  instant,2  I  met 
Baron  Campenhausen  in  company,  and  he  told  me  that  the 
Emperor’s  decision  had  been  given  the  day  before;  that  it 
was  favorable  upon  all  the  cases  with  regard  to  which  I  had 
made  representations;  that  in  all  the  cases  where  the  proper 
certificates  were  wanting,  the  goods  should  be  admitted  on 
the  engagement  of  the  persons  interested  to  produce  the 
certificates  hereafter;  and  that  in  respect  of  all  the  other 
parts  of  cargoes  which  were  deficient  on  various  points  of 
formality,  his  Majesty,  in  consideration  that  they  were  cases 
of  Americans ,  had  ordered  that  they  should  all  be  admitted. 
The  Baron  at  the  same  time  expressed  much  personal  regret 
that  the  matter  had  been  so  long  delayed.  There  is  still  one 
case,  of  a  character  different  from  all  the  rest,  and  which  is 
not  included  in  this  decision.  It  is  of  a  vessel  called  the  Eliza , 
which  arrived  last  summer  from  the  island  of  Teneriffe  at 
Archangel.  She  had  the  misfortune  to  have  come  from  the 
place,  from  which  all  the  English  vessels  with  the  false  papers, 
which  were  condemned,  and  the  cargoes  of  which  were  con¬ 
fiscated  last  summer,  were  pretended  to  have  been  cleared. 
And  as  the  papers  of  a  part  of  her  cargo  were  similar  in  ap¬ 
pearance  to  those  which  in  the  other  cases  had  been  detected 

1  The  conference  is  given  in  the  Memoirs ,  under  this  date. 

2  lb  *  y  where  the  date  has  dropped  from  before  the  first  paragraph  on  II.  246. 


36 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

as  forgeries,  they  were  unfortunately  brought  under  the 
same  suspicion,  and  the  Commission  of  Neutral  Navigation 
at  Archangel  have  sentenced  it  to  be  confiscated.  At  the 
same  time,  however,  the  vessel  and  a  part  of  her  cargo  have 
been  cleared.  The  vessel  and  all  the  cargo  belonged  to  Mr. 
Thorndike  of  Beverly  in  the  state  of  Massachusetts.  As 
the  law  stands  here,  if  a  part  of  a  ship’s  cargo  upon  which 
false  papers  are  produced  is  more  than  half  the  value  of  the 
whole,  it  subjects  the  whole  to  confiscation.  If  less  than 
half,  then  the  confiscation  applies  only  to  the  articles  falsely 
documented.  The  cargo  of  the  Eliza  consisted  of  dye-woods 
and  wine.  The  papers  for  the  wood  were  found  regular; 
those  for  the  wines  incurred  the  sentence  of  condemnation. 
It  became  a  question  whether  the  value  of  the  wines  con¬ 
stituted  more  or  less  than  half  that  of  the  whole  cargo.  The 
Commission  adjudged  it  to  be  less  and  therefore  cleared 
the  wood.  But  from  this  part  of  the  sentence  the  imperial 
procurer  or  public  attorney  appealed  to  the  Council  of  the 
empire,  while  Mr.  Thorndike’s  agent  appealed  from  the  part 
which  sentenced  the  wine  to  condemnation.  In  the  minute 
which  I  delivered  to  Count  Romanzoff  on  the  8th  instant, 
I  included  the  statement  of  the  Eliza's  case  with  the  rest; 
but  as  it  must  come  separately  for  the  consideration  of  the 
Council,  it  was  not  determined  with  them,  and  Baron  Camp- 
enhausen  informed  me,  that  it  would  be  necessarily  delayed 
some  time  longer.  He  led  me  however  to  expect,  that  the 
eventual  decision  of  the  Imperial  Council  would  be  as  favor¬ 
able  in  this  case  as  in  the  others. 

I  mentioned  in  a  former  letter  the  recall  of  the  French 
Ambassador,  who  has  resided  upwards  of  three  years  at 
this  court,  and  the  appointment  of  a  General  Count  Lauris- 
ton,  as  his  successor.  The  misunderstandings  between  the 
cabinets  of  St.  Petersburg  and  Paris  have  become  so  con- 


i8 1 1]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  37 

siderable  and  so  notorious,  that  this  event  contributes  to 
excite  the  uneasiness  of  those  who  were  already  apprehen¬ 
sive  of  a  speedy  rupture  between  France  and  Russia.  The 
Duke  de  Vicence  has  during  the  whole  of  his  embassy  here 
been  treated  by  the  Emperor  Alexander  with  a  degree  of 
favor  and  until  lately  of  confidence,  which  he  never  showed 
to  any  other  ambassador.  He  has  on  his  own  part  constantly 
endeavored  to  conciliate  the  sentiments  of  the  principal 
persons  of  the  Empire  towards  France,  and  although  their 
aversions  were  too  deeply  rooted  to  render  this  a  practicable 
task,  he  succeeded  at  least  in  making  himself  personally  as 
agreeable  as  to  any  individual  of  his  nation  in  the  same  situa¬ 
tion  would  have  been  possible.  In  supporting  to  the  utmost 
of  his  ability  the  influence  of  France  with  this  government 
he  had  contracted  attachments,  which  led  him  to  estimate 
very  highly  the  importance  of  harmony  between  his  country 
and  Russia,  and  to  give  all  its  weight  to  the  Russian  side  of 
the  discussion  between  them.  He  was  sincerely  and  anxiously 
desirous  of  preserving  peace  and  among  the  conjectured 
reasons  of  his  recall  it  has  been  surmised  that  he  has  not 
urged  the  late  demands  and  pretentions  of  France  here  with 
sufficient  energy  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  master.  The 
reason  assigned  in  the  French  official  gazette  for  his  recall 
is  the  state  of  his  health  and  his  own  repeated  solicitations. 
His  health,  without  being  perfectly  good,  is  hardly  infirm 
enough  to  serve  as  more  than  the  pretext  for  a  resignation.1 
It  is  not  probable  that  this  consideration  alone  has  occasioned 
his  sudden  and  unexpected  recall  (such  it  certainly  was  to 
himself)  at  this  period  so  universally  viewed  as  critical  in 
the  relations  between  the  two  countries.  The  personal  re¬ 
spect  and  attention  shown  him  by  the  Emperor  and  the 

1  See  despatches  from  Caulaincourt  to  the  Due  de  Cadore  in  Vandal,  Napoleon  et 
Alexander  /,  II.  553-559* 


38 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[18 1 1 

Chancellor  have  not  suffered  an y  abatement,  and  the  most 
magnificent  present  ever  made  to  an  ambassador  on  his 
departure  from  this  port  is  by  the  Emperor’s  order  preparing 
for  him.  It  is  probable  that  the  first  occasion  upon  which 
the  influence,  which  he  had  so  long  exercised  here,  failed  of 
success  was  that  upon  which  Count  Romanzoff  told  me  that 
the  attachment  of  the  Russian  government  to  the  United 
States  was  more  obstinate  than  I  was  aware  of.  The  next 
was  in  the  permission  to  the  late  king  of  Sweden  to  embark 
from  Riga.  Then  came  the  refusal  to  adopt  the  French 
tariff  of  prohibitory  duties  upon  all  colonial  merchandises: 
and  the  auto-da-fe  of  English  manufactures:  then  the  refusal 
to  confiscate  or  even  to  exclude  the  American  vessels  from 
Gothenburg  under  pretence  that  they  were  English  property 
in  disguise:  and  lastly  the  Russian  tariff  and  manifest  re¬ 
specting  commerce  during  the  present  year,  which  as  was 
anticipated  has  given  great  dissatisfaction  at  Paris.  On  the 
other  hand  his  inability  to  give  satisfaction  to  the  Russian 
government  upon  any  of  the  numerous  and  important 
causes  of  complaint,  which  France  has  given  to  Russia; 
the  detection  of  his  correspondence  with  a  Russian  officer,1 
which  occasioned  the  arrest  and  exile  of  that  officer;  and  the 
direct  violation  of  the  treaty  of  Tilsit  in  the  spoliation  com¬ 
mitted  upon  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg,  with  the  known 
intrigue  of  the  French  charge  d’affaires  at  Constantinople 
to  prevent  the  peace  with  Turkey,  have  all  concurred  to 
shake  his  credit  and  to  make  the  substitution  of  another 
person  in  his  stead  as  desirable  as  it  may  be  expedient  for 
the  present  purposes  of  his  government.  It  remains  to  be 
seen  what  tone  of  negotiation  will  be  assumed  by  his  successor, 
whose  arrival  is  expected  in  a  fortnight  or  three  weeks. 
Count  Chernicheff,  a  confidential  officer  of  the  Emperor 

1  General  Hitroff,  p.  14,  supra. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


39 


1811] 

Alexander,  who  had  been  dispatched  about  three  months 
ago  to  Paris,  arrived  here  last  week  with  a  letter  expressive 
of  the  most  friendly  sentiments  from  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
and  is  this  day  gone  again  with  the  reply.1  The  Emperor 
himself  is  gone  this  day  an  a  visit  to  his  sister  at  Twer.  He 
is  expected  to  return  this  day  week.  General  Kamensky 
is  recalled  from  the  army  in  Turkey,  to  the  command  of 
which  General  Kutuzuff  is  appointed  in  his  stead.  It  is 
understood  that  the  campaign  in  Turkey  is  to  be  merely 
defensive.  A  part  of  the  army  has  been  withdrawn  to  rein¬ 
force  the  Polish  frontier.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  44.  [James  Monroe]2 

St.  Petersburg,  April  3,  1811. 

Sir: 

Mr.  Harris  arrived  here  a  few  days  since,  returning  from 
his  tour  to  Archangel  and  Moscow,  and  since  his  arrival  has 
received  a  letter  from  Mr.  John  Speyer  at  Stockholm,  men¬ 
tioning  that  he  was  accredited  as  commercial  agent  for  the 
United  States  in  Sweden,  and  intended  to  reside  principally 
at  that  capital.  He  requests  Mr.  Harris  to  communicate 
this  information  to  me,  and  to  add  that  American  prop¬ 
erty  would  be  duly  protected  by  the  government  of  that 
kingdom. 

1  Napoleon’s  letter  was  dated  February  28,  1811,  and  the  reply  of  Alexander, 
March  25,  1811.  The  mission  of  Chernicheff,  or  Tchernitcheff,  and  Napoleon’s 
conversations  with  him  are  related  in  Tatistcheff,  Alexandre  1  et  Napoleon ,  III. 

533- 

2  Robert  Smith  was  removed  from  the  Department  of  State  by  the  President  and 
James  Monroe  took  office  April  2.  The  change  was  not  known  to  Adams  until  June. 


4o 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


li8ir 

If  Mr.  Speyer’s  commission  extends  to  all  Sweden,  I 
should  hope  that  he  will  give  a  regular  authority  to  some 
proper  person  to  act  in  the  consular  capacity  at  Gothenburg; 
a  place  during  the  two  last  years  of  more  commercial  im¬ 
portance  than  Stockholm,  and  concerning  which  I  have 
repeatedly  had  the  honor  of  writing  to  you.  Notwithstand¬ 
ing  all  the  reproaches  and  all  the  menaces  on  the  part  of 
France  to  the  Swedish  government,  the  communication 
between  the  port  of  Gothenburg  and  England  by  the  means 
of  the  packets  is  still  regularly  maintained.  For  the  bay  of 
Gothenburg,  the  packets  have  only  substituted  as  a  landing 
place  the  island  of  Anholt,  a  small  spot  in  the  Cattegat, 
belonging  to  Denmark,  and  of  which  the  English  took 
possession  in  the  summer  of  1809.  It  has  no  harbor,  but 
furnishes  the  means  of  communication  with  the  Swedish 
coast,  which  it  has  not  yet  been  found  practicable  to  prevent. 
Through  this  channel  there  are  now  letters  and  newspapers 
in  this  city  down  to  the  5th  of  March,  and  by  publications 
in  the  English  gazettes,  some  accounts  from  the  United 
States  as  late  as  30  January. 

The  intelligence  from  England  occasions  much  uncertainty 
here  with  regard  to  the  state  of  navigation  in  the  Baltic 
during  the  ensuing  season.  It  is  stated  as  the  intention  of 
the  British  government  to  grant  no  licenses  to  ports  within 
the  Baltic,  and  to  send  into  that  sea  a  larger  force  than  they 
had  in  it  the  last  year.  These  circumstances  have  excited 
an  apprehension,  which  is  still  further  excited  by  rumors 
invented  for  purposes  of  mercantile  speculation,  that  the 
design  of  the  British  government  is  to  declare  a  general 
blockade  of  the  Baltic;  a  measure  which  nothing  can  render 
probable,  and  I  had  almost  said,  possible,  excepting  that  it 
would  be  the  most  injudicious  step  they  could  take.  It 
would,  however,  be  altogether  congenial  to  the  determination 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


4i 


1811] 

which  the  newspapers  announce  to  have  been  communicated 
to  Mr.  Pinkney,  of  a  direct  and  categorical  refusal  to  revoke 
the  orders  in  council,  or  the  system  of  paper  blockade,  until 
the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  shall  have  been  really  re¬ 
pealed. 

It  is  suggested  that  the  delays  of  the  British  government  to 
grant  licenses  to  ports  within  the  Baltic  have  arisen  from 
the  seizures  and  confiscation  of  the  merchandize  which 
came  in  licensed  vessels  the  last  year,  and  from  the  sequestra¬ 
tions  of  those  which  came  with  the  last  convoy  in  November 
from  Gothenburg,  scarcely  any  of  which  except  the  Americans 
have  yet  been  admitted,  and  a  considerable  number  of  which 
are  upon  trial.  English  licenses  it  is  conjectured  will  not  be 
granted,  unless  some  pledge,  or  at  least  some  tacit  engage¬ 
ment,  be  given  to  secure  the  property  from  a  similar  fate 
in  future.  Some  of  the  merchants  here  lately  presented  to 
the  Emperor  a  petition  to  grant  licenses  on  his  part  under 
the  protection  of  which  no  enquiry  should  be  made  whence 
the  vessels  came,  or  under  what  colors  she  was  navigated. 
In  support  of  this  petition  the  example  of  France  was 
alleged,  but  its  prayer  was  immediately  rejected  by  the 
Emperor.  This  circumstance  which  very  recently  occurred 
has  contributed  much  to  silence  the  rumors  of  an  immediate 
peace  with  England,  and  war  with  France  which  were 
circulated  with  so  much  confidence  and  such  strength  of 
notorious  facts  to  support  them,  that  it  was  not  without 
some  hesitation  that  I  wrote  you  on  the  12th  of  February, 
that  in  my  opinion  this  event  was  not  to  be  soon  expected. 
The  preparations  for  war  have  nevertheless  been  continued 
on  both  sides  from  that  time  to  the  present  without  inter¬ 
mission,  and  there  are  now  upwards  of  two  hundred  thousand 
Russian  troops  on  the  frontier  line  of  Prussia  and  Poland. 
The  Duke  of  Oldenburg  is  coming  here.  You  will  probably 


42 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

receive  from  Paris  the  most  authentic  accounts  of  what  is 
passing  there  between  the  Russian  embassy  and  the  French 
government.  I  am  assured  that  Prince  Kurakin  was  ordered 
to  present  a  strong  remonstrance  against  the  annexation  of 
that  Prince’s  territories  to  the  French  empire;  that  the  paper 
was  sent  hack  to  him  by  the  Duke  de  Cadore  with  a  declaration 
that  it  could  not  he  received ,  the  measure  having  already  received 
the  sanction  of  a  senatus  consultum;  that  Prince  Kurakin  hy 
taking  hack  the  remonstrance  gave  some  dissatisfaction  to  the 
Emperor  Alexander;  that  a  new  order  has  been  dispatched  to  him 
hy  Count  Chernicheff  to  send  anew  the  remonstrance  or  another , 
couched  in  still  stronger  terms ,  and  if  it  should  again  he  denied 
a  reception  to  send  copies  of  it  officially  to  all  the  other  foreign 
ministers  at  Paris.  I  mention  this  more  as  an  indication  that 
this  is  one  of  the  principal  subjects  of  irritated  discussion  be¬ 
tween  the  two  governments  than  from  my  own  belief  of  the  facts . 
These  I  believe  are  exaggerated.  It  appears  impossible  that 
the  tone  of  negotiation  from  Paris  should  already  be  so  near 
to  hostility ,  while  that  from  St.  Petersburg  continues  to  be  so 
amicable.1  The  Emperor  Alexander  and  Count  Roman- 
zoff  have  expressed  to  various  persons  their  satisfaction  at  the 
appointment  of  Count  Lauriston  as  the  successor  to  the  Duke 
de  Vicence,  and  the  unusual  compliment  has  already  been 
paid  him  of  sending  an  officer  to  meet  him  at  the  frontier 
town  of  Polangen. 

With  regard  to  the  new  Russian  manifest  and  tariff ,  the  opera¬ 
tion  of  which  will  be  so  unfavorable  to  the  commerce  of  France , 
it  is  probable  that  it  will  terminate  in  a  negotiation  for  a  treaty 
of  commerce  between  the  two  countries.  A  proposition  of  that 
nature  has  already  been  made  I  believe  on  the  part  of  France , 
and  has  been  assented  to  by  this  government.  The  project , 
however ,  is  yet  but  in  embryo.  If  it  should  be  pursued ,  I  hope 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


43 


1811] 

to  give  you  an  account  of  its  progress ,  but  it  will  undoubtedly 
be  subordinate  *o  the  course  of  political  events.1 

I  expect  daily  to  hear  of  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Erving  at  Co¬ 
penhagen,  and  wish  that  he  may  meet  there  a  disposition 
more  favorable  to  the  claims  of  our  countrymen,  than  has 
been  recently  manifested  by  the  Danish  government.  A 
petition  to  the  king  for  a  delay  of  the  decision  of  several 
American  cases  involving  a  very  large  amount  of  property 
until  that  gentleman  should  arrive,  has  been  rejected  and 
the  final  sentences  of  condemnation  have  been  issued.  The 
cases  from  Norway  of  the  vessels  captured  there  last  July 
have  no  better  prospects  before  them.  This  state  of  things 
presents  an  aspect  of  renewed  danger  to  the  American  ves¬ 
sels  which  have  been  wintering  in  the  Russian  ports,  and 
concerning  which  I  have  so  often  had  occasion  to  write  to 
you.  Probably  the  navigation  will  be  open  for  their  home¬ 
ward  voyages  in  June.  But  the  possibility  of  their  passage 
through  the  Sound  or  the  Belt  will  depend  upon  the  pleasure 
or  upon  the  instructions  of  the  English  naval  force  in  the 
Baltic.1  .  .  . 

I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  io  April,  1811. 

You  observe  in  your  letter  of  24  September  last,  that  my 
son  George  was  losing  much  of  his  French  conversation  idiom; 
that  is  precisely  one  of  the  things  upon  which  I  had  most  ear¬ 
nestly  set  my  heart  in  his  education.  Walter  Shandy,  Esq., 
was  of  opinion  that  there  was  a  great  and  mysterious  virtue 
in  the  name  given  to  a  child.  He  intended  to  call  his  son 

1  Cypher. 


44 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


Trismegistus,  and  the  name  above  all  other  names  which 
he  abhorred  was  Tristram.  Alas,  by  trusting  at  the  critical 
moment  his  child  to  that  leaky  vessel  Susanna,  that  very 
execrated  name  was  fastened  upon  the  luckless  wight  for 
life,  and,  as  you  remember,  that  was  not  the  first  disaster 
of  that  child  of  afflictions,  whose  misfortunes  began  nine 
months  before  he  was  born. 

Mr.  Shandy’s  disappointments  often  come  into  my  mind 
in  reflecting  upon  my  own.  Before  I  had  any  children  I 
fancied  myself  so  well  qualified  for  conducting  an  education, 
that  I  had  various  thoughts  of  writing  and  publishing  a 
treatise  upon  the  subject.  Mr.  Locke,  who  had  no  children 
of  his  own,  and  Jean  Jacques,  who  sent  his  children  to  the 
foundling  hospital,  had  set  the  example,  and  it  has  been 
followed  by  Miss  Hannah  More  and  Miss  Edgeworth,  and 
Miss  Wolstonecraft,  and  Madame  de  Genlis,  and  I  know 
not  how  many  more  masters  and  misses,  who  never  had  any 
children  of  their  own,  or  at  least  none  that  they  had  brought 
into  the  world  honestly.  If  I  had  gone  childless  through  life, 
there  is  an  even  chance  that  I  should  have  been  one  of  the 
education  mongers.  But  I  very  soon  found  after  George 
was  born,  first,  that  a  child  is  not  itself  a  piece  of  clay  to  be 
moulded  according  to  the  fancy  of  every  potter;  and  secondly, 
that  the  clay,  such  as  it  is,  was  not  committed  exclusively 
to  me,  to  be  fashioned  upon  my  taste  alone.  Yet  I  have  not 
lost  a  particle  of  my  anxiety  for  the  education  of  my  children, 
nor  have  I  neglected  when  with  them  such  attention  to  it 
as  I  have  been  able  to  bestow.  The  French  language  was 
one  of  the  things,  and  indeed  almost  the  only  thing,  for 
teaching  them  which  I  depended  chiefly  upon  myself.  George 
had  a  foundation  of  it  laid,  which  I  hoped  he  would  never 
lose;  but  John’s  delicate  state  of  health,  and  his  absence  from 
us  which  has  been  almost  continual  ever  since  he  was  of  an 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


45 


18 1 1] 

age  capable  of  learning  anything,  have  very  much  to  my 
regret  deprived  him  of  the  same  advantage. 

I  have  adhered  very  generally  to  the  practice,  both  with 
George  and  Charles,  of  speaking  nothing  to  them  but  French 
myself.  Charles  in  consequence  of  this  system  is  now  learn¬ 
ing  to  speak  it  as  well  as  could  be  expected  from  a  child  of  his 
age,  though  from  female  servants  in  the  family,  with  whom 
he  passes  most  of  his  time,  he  learns  much  more  German  upon 
which  I  had  not  calculated,  though  I  am  very  glad  he  is 
acquiring  it.  He  is  slowest  at  the  French,  because  he  learns 
it  only  from  me;  but  he  is  making  progress,  and  will  shame 
his  eldest  brother  when  we  come  home,  if  George  does  not 
take  care  to  keep  enough  of  his  French  to  talk  it  with  him. 

Of  George’s  general  proficiency  you  say  Mr.  Whitney 
speaks  well.  This  gives  me  pleasure  and  I  have  the  fullest 
confidence  both  in  Mr.  Whitney’s  attention  to  his  progress 
and  in  the  accuracy  of  his  report.  But  I  wish  to  learn  what 
you  or  my  father  say  of  his  general  proficiency,  that  is,  in  the 
studies  which  he  is  pursuing  under  Mr.  Whitney’s  direction. 
I  want  him  to  pass  an  examination  at  least  as  often  as  once 
a  month  before  my  father  or  you,  serving  as  a  review  from 
time  to  time  of  his  studies.  Not  an  examination  how  he 
can  construe  such  a  line  in  Virgil  or  parse  such  a  verse  of  the 
Greek  Testament,  as  may  have  been  prepared  for  him  and  he 
for  them  a  day  before  hand,  but  an  examination  of  his  mind, 
and  not  merely  of  his  memory.  The  most  essential  part  of 
education  after  all  is  to  teach  a  child  to  think.  Perhaps,  too, 
it  is  the  most  difficult.  Let  George  write  me  an  account  of 
what  he  is  studying,  but  do  not  let  him  get  anybody  else  to 
write  it  for  him.  It  is  high  time  for  him  to  be  under  the 
necessity  of  writing  his  own  letters. 

I  am  very  glad  that  you  obtained  at  last  the  fifty  copies  of 
my  lectures  for  which  I  had  stipulated,  and  of  which  I  have 


46 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

requested  you  to  make  distribution.  If  it  should  not  be 
completed  before  you  receive  this,  I  recommend  it  again 
particularly  to  your  care.  It  is  a  friendly  attention  which  I 
am  the  more  earnest  to  show  to  the  persons  named  upon 
the  list  I  sent  you,  because  in  my  absence  it  is  the  best  token 
of  remembrance  that  I  can  send  them.  And  it  is  only  while 
the  work  is  a  novelty  that  I  can  suppose  the  present  would 
be  acceptable.  You  mention  that  you  had  been  applied  to 
concerning  a  second  edition.  But  if  there  ever  should  be  a 
real  call  for  that,  I  presume  it  will  not  be  for  some  years,  and 
that  I  shall  have  time  to  return  home  and  to  give  the  whole 
book  such  a  revision,  as  will  remove  some  of  its  imperfections 
and  make  it  more  worthy  of  the  public  eye.  I  cannot,  in¬ 
deed,  reproach  myself  for  any  neglect  in  its  composition. 
It  is  the  measure  of  my  powers,  under  the  circumstances  and 
the  occupations  of  a  different  nature  in  the  midst  of  which  it 
was  written.  But  its  publication  you  know  was  premature, 
and  I  have  been,  and  still  am,  so  distrustful  of  its  success, 
that  I  shall  wait  for  the  indication  which  the  demand  for  a 
new  edition  would  afford,  to  ascertain  whether  I  ought  to 
devote  any  more  of  my  time  and  labor  to  its  improvement. 
It  is  now  my  expectation  to  return  to  the  United  States  the 
next  year,  and  when  I  come  I  hope  to  have  leisure  for  literary 
pursuits.  I  have  as  many  projects  of  this  kind  floating  in  my 
mind  as  Charles  Fox  had  while  (to  speak  like  the  Anthology 
critic)  he  was  running  after  a  barren  and  withering  chaplet 
of  political  renown.1  Literature,  the  education  of  my  children 
and  the  familiar  intercourse  of  my  friends  at  Quincy,  are  the 
pictures  which  my  imagination  draws  in  the  most  glowing 
colors,  and  on  which  it  dwells  with  the  purest  delight  in 
forming  my  prospects  of  futurity.  As  for  the  law,  the  little 
metal  I  ever  had  of  it  has  gathered  such  an  inveterate  rust, 

1  See  Vol.  Ill,  514  n,  supra. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


47 


1811] 

that  it  will  never  take  an  edge  or  a  polish  again.  But  if  the 
servile  drudgery  of  caucuses,  the  savage  buffeting  of  elec¬ 
tions,  the  filth  and  venom  of  newspaper  and  pulpit  calumny, 
and  the  dastardly  desertion  of  such  friends  as  Anthology 
critics  and  Boston  legislators,  are  to  be  my  lot  as  it  has  been 
in  time  past,  I  shall  with  the  blessing  of  God  live  through 
it  again  as  I  have  done  before,  but  I  shall  almost  regret  the 
stagnant  political  atmosphere  and  the  Scythian  winters  of 
St.  Petersburg.  There  is  a  possibility  that  we  may  return 
home  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  summer,  but  this  is  not 
probable,  nor  in  the  present  situation  of  my  family  desirable. 
The  only  time  in  which  it  is  possible  to  embark  from  this 
spot  for  a  voyage  through  the  Baltic,  is  from  the  first  of 
June  to  the  last  of  October,  and  the  navigation  during  the 
last  two  of  these  five  months  is  so  dangerous,  that  nothing 
short  of  the  extremest  urgency  could  induce  me  to  embark 
with  a  wife  and  child  later  than  the  first  days  of  September. 
Whether  we  could  embark  earlier  this  season  is  uncertain, 
and  at  any  rate  we  shall  not  attempt  it,  unless  my  orders 
from  the  United  States  should  make  it  indispensable. 
#•*•••• 

I  had  heard  of  the  decease  of  President  Webber  even  be¬ 
fore  the  date  of  your  letter,  but  that  of  Judge  Cushing  had 
not  been  announced  to  us  until  this  information  from  you. 
They  were  both  good  and  respectable  men,  and  the  judge  had 
been  an  able  man  in  his  profession.  The  place  at  the  Uni¬ 
versity  is  more  than  supplied  by  Dr.  Kirkland,  who  I  hope 
will  not  be  more  of  a  politician  than  his  predecessor.  The 
prophet  who  told  you  the  successor  Judge  Cushing  would 
have  had,  if  I  had  been  at  his  funeral,  was  not  well  inspired. 
Without  pretending  to  any  extraordinary  degree  of  self- 
knowledge,  I  am  conscious  of  too  little  law  even  for  practice 
at  the  bar,  still  less  should  I  feel  myself  qualified  for  the 


48 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

bench  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States.  I  am 
also,  and  always  shall  be,  too  much  of  a  political  partisan 
for  a  judge;  and  although  I  know  as  well  as  any  man  in 
America  how  and  when  to  lay  the  partisan  aside,  I  do  not 
wish  to  be  called  so  often  and  so  completely  to  do  it,  as  my 
own  sense  of  duty  would  call  me,  were  I  seated  upon  the 
bench.  Besides  all  which  there  was  another  man  whom  I 
should  have  considered  as  the  natural  successor  to  Judge 
Cushing,  so  fully  entitled  to  the  place,  and  so  entirely  de¬ 
serving  of  it,  that  I  should  have  considered  my  occupation 
of  it  to  the  exclusion  of  him  as  an  atrocious  usurpation.  I 
know  not  whether  the  government  has  been  sufficiently 
sensible  of  his  merit  to  place  him  in,  but  I  know  that  nothing 
could  have  induced  me  to  take  it,  while  he  would  have  been 
overlooked  in  this  appointment.  You  understand  me  to 
speak  of  Judge  Davis,  one  of  the  men  that  I  have  ever  known 
whom  I  most  love  and  esteem.  .  .  . 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  45.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  13  April,  1811. 

Sir: 

In  some  of  the  English  newspapers  which  have  been  re¬ 
ceived  here  of  as  late  a  date  as  19  March  I  find  the  only 
accounts  from  the  United  States  that  have  reached  us  since 
the  4th  of  January,  when  I  received  your  favor  of  16  October, 
1810,  and  among  them  I  perceive  a  correspondence  between 
you  and  General  Turreau,  respecting  the  certificates  of 
origin  delivered  by  the  French  consuls  in  the  United  States; 
a  subject  which  you  will  see  renewed  in  a  large  proportion 


49 


18 1 1]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 

of  my  dispatches  from  the  16th  of  August  last  to  this 
day.1 

The  official  gazette  of  the  French  government,  the  Moni- 
teur ,  of  the  ioth  of  July  1810,  contained  an  article  of  which 
the  following  is  an  exact  translation: 

American  vessels  present  themselves  at  the  ports  of  the  North 
Sea,  and  of  the  Baltic,  furnished  with  pretended  certificates  of 
origin  from  French  consuls.  We  are  officially  authorized  to  de¬ 
clare  that  these  certificates  are  false  and  that  the  possessors  of 
them  must  be  considered  as  forgers.  These  papers  are  mani¬ 
festly  fabricated  in  England;  for  the  consuls  of  his  Majesty  in 
America  have  long  since  ceased  to  deliver  any  such  certificates. 

When  in  my  letter  to  you  of  16  August,  noticing  this  official 
declaration,  and  its  inaccuracy  in  point  of  fact,  I  added  that 
probably  the  consuls  had  been  ordered  to  deliver  no  such 
certificates  for  the  future,  I  really  did  not  suspect  that  even 
until  that  day  no  such  order  had  ever  been  sent. 

The  letter  from  General  Turreau  to  you  is  not  published 
in  the  English  papers;2  but  from  your  reply,  it  appears  that 
he  had  acknowledged  the  issuing  of  certificates  by  the  con¬ 
suls  until  the  13  th  of  November,  when  they  ceased  to  de¬ 
liver  them  by  an  order  from  the  Duke  de  Cadore,  dated 
31  August,  1810 

Your  letter  alludes  in  general  terms  to  the  inconveniences 
and  odious  suspicions  which  Americans  were  suffering  in 
Denmark  for  want  of  a  candid  and  explicit  declaration  by  the 
French  government  to  that  of  Denmark,  of  the  real  fact.  But 

1  vThe  only  way  that  I  get  any  news  from  America  is  through  the  English  news¬ 
papers.”  Ms.  Diary.  He  noted  an  unusually  short  run  of  fifty-four  days  from 
America. 

2  The  correspondence  was  printed  in  The  (London)  Times ,  February  18,  1811; 
Am.  State  Papers ,  Foreign  Relations,  III.  400. 


So 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[181  i 

you  were  not  then  informed  of  the  like  inconveniences  and 
suspicions  which  other  fair  Americans  were  suffering  in 
the  Russian  ports,  not  from  the  omission  of  the  French 
government  to  give  a  true  declaration,  but  from  the  official 
repetition  of  the  same  false  declaration,  which  had  been 
published  in  the  Moniteur  of  10  July,  in  a  petition  solemnly 
announced  by  the  French  consul  to  the  Russian  govern¬ 
ment  more  than  two  months  after  I  had  remonstrated  to 
the  French  Ambassador  here  against  it.  The  Ambassador 
promised  me  at  the  time,  that  he  would  immediately  com¬ 
municate  to  his  government  my  observations  on  the  subject. 
He  has  since  assured  me  that  he  did  communicate  them. 
The  only  answer  was  an  order  to  the  consul,  Mr.  Lesseps, 
to  renew  the  declaration  which  is  now  demonstrated  to  have 
been  unfounded. 

Of  the  sequestrations  in  France,  under  the  Berlin  and 
Milan  decrees,  of  all  the  American  merchant  vessels  which 
have  arrived  there  since  the  Duke  de  Cadore  declared  on 
the  5th  of  August  last  that  those  decrees  were  revoked,  I 
shall  say  nothing,  because  excepting  the  letters  of  Mr.  Russell 
relative  to  the  seizure  of  the  New  Orleans  Packet  at  Bordeaux 
in  December,  which  likewise  appear  in  the  Englishnewspapers, 
I  have  no  authentic  information  of  anything  which  has 
lately  been  done  in  France  concerning  American  affairs. 
But  there  are  some  circumstances  which  have  not  hitherto 
been  mentioned  in  my  correspondence  with  you,  and  which 
it  is  now  proper  to  notice,  as  they  are  perhaps  equally  char¬ 
acteristic  of  principles  and  practice  with  those  which  mark 
the  above  transactions. 

Some  months  after  my  arrival  here,  it  was  intimated  to 
me,  through  a  third  person,1  from  the  French  Ambassador, 
that  most  of  the  difficulties  which  prevented  an  amicable 
1  Six  d’Oterbeck.  See  Adams,  Memoirs ,  August  17, 1810. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


Si 


18 1 1] 

settlement  of  all  the  differences  between  the  United  States 
and  France,  arose  from  the  American  Minister  in  France, 
who  had  made  himself  personally  disagreeable,  and  it  was 
suggested  to  me  that  it  would  be  advisable  that  I  should 
give  notice  of  this  to  the  government  of  the  United  States. 
I  did  not  feel  inclined  to  become  the  reporter  to  my  own 
government,  of  a  complaint  against  an  official  colleague,  so 
vague  in  substance  and  so  indirect  in  form.  I  paid  no  at¬ 
tention  to  it.  About  two  months  afterwards,  that  is,  on  the 
17th  of  August  last,  the  same  person  who  had  made  the 
first  insinuation  to  me,  renewed  it  with  more  earnestness  and 
precision,  adding  that  the  Ambassador  himself  would  readily 
converse  with  me  on  the  subject,  if  I  wished  it.  There  was 
an  additional  hint  disclosed  at  this  time,  sufficiently  clear  to 
indicate  purposes  of  which  it  might  be  convenient  to  make 
me  the  instrument:  which  was,  that  I  was  myself  the  most 
suitable  person  to  take  the  place  of  the  gentleman  against 
whom  I  was  to  be  the  secret  informer.  I  asked  what  was  the 
particular  cause  of  complaint  which  General  Armstrong  had 
given  to  the  French  government.  The  answer  was  that  they 
did  not  impeach  his  integrity,  but  that  he  was  morose,  cap¬ 
tious  and  petulant.  I  was  now  convinced  more  than  ever 
of  the  impropriety  of  the  part  with  which  I  was  desired  to 
charge  myself,  and  explicitly  declined  it.1 

On  the  22nd  of  the  same  month  of  August,  I  met  the  Am¬ 
bassador  at  court,  and  he  introduced  the  subject  in  a  private 
conversation  with  me  of  his  own  accord.  He  assured  me, 
and  formally  requested  me  to  write  to  the  government  of  the 
United  States,  that  it  was  the  strongest  desire  of  the  Em- 


1  “Charge  the  Due  de  Vicence  to  tell  Mr.  Adams  that  we  have  here  an  American 
minister  who  says  nothing;  that  we  need  an  active  man  whom  one  can  comprehend, 
and  by  whose  means  we  could  come  to  an  understanding  with  the  Americans.” 
Napoleon  to  Champagny,  July  13,  1810.  See  Henry  Adams,  History,  V.  253. 


52 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

peror  of  France  and  of  his  Ministers  to  come  to  terms  of 
perfect  harmony  with  the  United  States.  That  they  con¬ 
sidered  our  interests  as  altogether  the  same;  and  that  if 
any  other  person  than  General  Armstrong  were  at  Paris, 
on  the  part  of  the  United  States,  all  the  differences  between 
the  two  countries  might  be  settled  with  the  utmost  facility, 
and  entirely  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  American  govern¬ 
ment.  I  told  him  that  this  would  certainly  be  pleasing 
intelligence  to  my  government,  which  I  should  not  fail  to 
communicate  to  you;  that  I  regretted  very  much,  as  I  had 
no  doubt  the  President  would  regret,  that  any  displeasure 
should  have  been  conceived  by  the  Emperor  of  France  or  his 
government,  at  anything  in  the  conduct  of  the  American 
Minister  in  France;  but  if  this  was  to  be  mentioned  by  me, 
you  would  doubtless  expect  that  the  cause  of  offence  which 
had  been  given  should  be  specified.  “C’est  <T abord  un  ires 
galant  homme ,”  said  the  Ambassador;  but  he  never  shews 
himself,  and  upon  every  little  occasion,  when  by  a  verbal 
explanation  with  the  Minister  he  might  obtain  anything, 
he  presents  peevish  notes.” 

On  the  13th  of  September  I  had  another  and  much  longer 
conversation  with  the  Ambassador  at  his  own  house,  where  I 
had  requested  to  see  him  for  the  purpose  of  expostulating 
against  the  official  declaration  discrediting  the  certificates  of 
the  French  consuls  in  America.  I  have  mentioned  this 
interview  to  you  in  one  of  my  former  letters.  At  this  time 
we  were  informed  of  the  professed  revocation  of  the  Berlin 
and  Milan  decrees.  And  I  urged  strongly  upon  the  Ambas¬ 
sador  the  inconsistency  between  such  professions  as  those  in 
the  Duke  de  Cadore’s  letter,  which  had  then  just  been  pub¬ 
lished,  and  such  measures  as  that  declaration,  and  the  ex¬ 
clusion  of  American  vessels  from  the  ports  of  Prussia, 
Holstein  and  Mecklenburg,  at  the  instance  of  France.  He 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


53 


18 1 1] 

said  that  his  government  had  not  instructed  him  with  regard 
to  those  measures,  and  had  only  directed  him  to  make  the 
complaint  against  General  Armstrong,  which  he  again  re¬ 
quested  me  to  write  to  the  American  government. 

I  repeated  the  observation  that  in  transmitting  informa¬ 
tion  of  such  a  nature,  it  was  obvious  that  any  other  channel 
would  be  more  delicate  than  through  a  person  standing  in 
such  an  official  relation  to  General  Armstrong  as  I  then  did. 
And  above  all  that  something  specific  should  be  alleged  to 
warrant  a  direct  complaint  of  this  kind.  He  repeated  in 
substance  what  he  had  said  before:  that  Mr.  Armstrong 
scarcely  ever  went  to  see  the  Minister  (the  Duke  de  Cadore) ; 
that  he  never  went  to  court;  and  that  whenever  anything 
was  to  be  done,  he  was  presenting  testy  notes,  which  made 
written  answers  of  the  same  sort  indispensable,  and  which 
widened  matters,  when  by  verbal  explanations  they  might 
be  conciliated.  But,  he  added,  that  he  did  not  consider  the 
complaints  as  of  a  nature  to  injure  the  character  of  General 
Armstrong  at  home,  and  that  perhaps  after  all  the  real  cause 
had  not  been  alleged  to  him,  the  Ambassador. 

I  considered  this  last  observation  as  a  tacit  admission 
that  the  causes  which  had  been  assigned  to  him,  with  in¬ 
structions  so  gravely  to  request  that  I  should  report  to  you 
the  complaint  against  my  colleague,  were  too  frivolous  to 
bear  examination,  or  to  warrant  a  procedure  so  unfriendly 
to  him.  General  Armstrong’s  note  to  the  Duke  de  Cadore 
of  io  March,  1810,  was  now  published  throughout  Europe, 
and  was  admired  wherever  it  had  been  read.  I  had  no  diffi¬ 
culty  in  understanding  the  uneasiness  which  such  notes 
might  have  occasioned  to  the  French  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs;  but  I  felt  myself  more  than  ever  unsuitable  to  be 
the  messenger  of  his  ill  humors.  I  determined  however  at 
a  proper  time  to  inform  you  of  the  whole  transaction,  leav- 


54 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

ing  to  you  the  inferences  which  it  may  be  useful  to  draw  from 
it.  I  have  been  particular  in  noticing  the  dates,  from  the 
curiosity  of  a  comparison  between  this  diplomatic  expedient, 
and  the  manifestations  of  the  French  government,  towards 
the  gentleman  against  whom  it  was  pointed,  precisely  at 
the  same  period.  The  personal  attentions  of  the  Duke  de 
Cadore  at  that  very  time  were  such  as  to  call  forth  the 
General’s  public  acknowledgments,  and  on  his  appearance 
at  court,  the  Emperor  himself  noticed  him  with  such  peculiar 
distinction  that  it  was  marked  by  the  whole  diplomatic 
circle.  It  has  been  mentioned  to  me  by  a  gentleman  now 
here,  and  attached  to  the  Austrian  mission,  but  who  was 
then  at  Paris,  and  present  at  the  court.  He  says  that  the 
Emperor’s  extraordinary  notice  of  General  Armstrong  ex¬ 
cited  the  more  attention,  because  it  was  immediately  after 
the  appearance  of  that  note,  which  had  so  boldly  spoken 
to  his  government  the  language  of  a  truly  independent 
nation.  I  am  wTith  high  respect,  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  4 6.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  22  April,  18 11. 

Sir: 

For  upwards  of  a  month  I  had  not  found  an  opportunity 
of  forwarding  dispatches  for  you  to  any  place  whence  they 
could  be  transmitted,  until  at  the  close  of  the  last  week, 
when  that  of  a  Russian  courier  dispatched  to  Paris  gave 
me  the  means  of  enclosing  a  packet  to  Mr.  Russell.  I  there¬ 
fore  sent  under  cover  to  him  a  packet  for  you,  containing 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


55 


iSii] 

copies  of  my  last  three  letters,  and  a  few  lines  in  cipher  to 
the  President  of  the  United  States. 

I  have  now  the  opportunity  of  writing  by  Mr.  Preuss,  an 
American  citizen  who  brought  me  last  summer  dispatches 
from  your  Department;  and  who  now  proposes  to  return 
to  the  United  States. 

From  the  day  which  terminated  the  last  war  between 
France  and  Austria,  and  still  more  from  that  which  so  soon 
succeeded  it,  of  a  family  alliance  between  the  French  Em¬ 
peror  and  the  imperial  house  of  Austria,  it  has  been  the 
general  expectation  of  all  men  who  speculate  upon  the  future 
destinies  of  mankind,  with  a  general  knowledge  of  the  state 
of  things^  and  with  the  habit  of  calculating  the  operations 
of  the  sanguinary  passions,  to  which  the  occurrences  of  the 
times  have  given  such  unbounded  scope,  that  the  next 
terrible  conflict  upon  the  continent  of  Europe  would  be  be¬ 
tween  France  and  Russia — a  conflict  for  which  France  with 
a  policy  rather  wily  than  profound  had  already  been  preparing 
in  the  consent  that  Russia  should  enlarge  her  boundaries  at 
the  expense  of  Austria  and  Sweden.1  The  course  of  events 
hitherto  has  been  altogether  conformable  to  this  expectation. 
On  concluding  the  peace  with  Austria  the  Emperor  Na¬ 
poleon  wrote  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia  a  letter,  saying  that 
he  had  determined  to  make  once  more  the  experiment  of 
sparing  Austria,  congratulating  the  Emperor  Alexander  upon 
his  acquisition  of  Finland,  and  solemnly  promising  never  to 
raise  an  insurrection  against  him  in  Poland.  This  last 
passage  was  if  not  a  binding  engagement  at  least  an  intel¬ 
ligible  insinuation.  The  negotiation  for  the  Emperor  Na¬ 
poleon’s  marriage  was  not  only  conducted  with  so  much  secrecy 
that  neither  the  Russian  government  nor  either  of  their  ambas¬ 
sadors  at  Paris  had  a  suspicion  of  the  person  contemplated  as 

1  Cypher. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


the  imperial  consort  of  France ,  hut  their  conjectures  were  inten¬ 
tionally  led  to  a  very  different  direction.  Two  years  before  a 
similar  proposition  had  been  made ,  and  the  hand  of  the  Grand 
Duchess  Catharine ,  the  Emperor  Alexander’ s  sister ,  had  been 
solicited  and  denied.  This  Princess  is  since  married  to  Prince 
George  of  Oldenburg ,  the  son  of  that  very  Duke  of  Oldenburg 
whose  territories  are  now  by  a  direct  violation  of  the  treaty  of 
Tilsit  incorporated  with  the  French  Empire;  and  when  the  con¬ 
tract  of  marriage  with  the  Arch  Duchess  Maria  Louisa  was  all 
but  signed ,  the  Russian  Ambassador  was  communicating  to  his 
court  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s  intended  bride  was  a  daugh¬ 
ter  of  the  Duke  of  Modena.1 

At  the  time  when  the  marriage  was  solemnized  the  Aus¬ 
trian  Prime  Minister,  Count  Metternich,  was  sent  upon  an 
extraordinary  mission  to  Paris,  where  he  remained  more  than 
six  months  without  accomplishing  anything  which  could 
require  the  agency  of  a  person  thus  distinguished,  partic¬ 
ularly  while  another  Ambassador  in  form  from  Austria  was 
residing  at  Paris.  The  mission  of  such  a  minister,  at  such  a 
moment,  naturally  excited  the  attention  of  all  Europe,  and 
especially  of  the  Russian  government.  At  first  and  indeed 
during  the  whole  time  that  Count  Metternich  remained 
at  Paris,  it  was  given  out,  and  somewhat  studiously,  both 
from  the  French  and  Austrian  legations  here,  that  the  object 
of  his  mission  was  to  set  on  foot  a  negotiation  for  a  general 
peace,  in  which  Austria  was  to  assume  the  part  of  a  mediator. 

But  it  was  not  long  before  the  Russian  government  had  notice 
that  projects  by  no  means  friendly  to  this  country  were  inter¬ 
woven  with  the  professed  attempt  at  a  pacific  negotiation ,  and 
since  the  Count’s  return  to  Vienna ,  Austria  has  been  content 
to  have  it  circulated  as  a  diplomatic  secret  that  the  proposition 

1  Cypher.  The  reference  is  to  Maria  Beatrice,  only  daughter  of  Hercules  III, 
who  married  Ferdinand  of  Austria,  son  of  Maria  Theresa. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


57 


18 1 1] 

of  an  alliance  offensive  and  defensive  against  Russia  was  made 
to  her  by  France  and  rejected.  It  is  probable  that  France  had 
reckoned  a  little  too  much  upon  the  deep  resentments  of  Austria 
against  Russia  for  the  part  which  she  had  taken  in  the  recent 
war ,  and  in  her  eagerness  to  recover ,  while  enjoying  the  sweet 
of  revenge ,  that  territory  of  four  hundred  thousand  souls  which 
had  rewarded  the  inaction  of  Russia  under  the  guise  of  her 
alliance  with  France  in  the  short  war  of  1809 A 

Count  Metternich  returned  home  in  October,  from  which 
time  until  this  day  the  coolness  between  France  and  Russia 
has  been  increasing  until  it  is  at  the  point  of  appearing  in 
the  form  of  war.  The  provocations  which  have  been  multi¬ 
plied  on  the  part  of  France  almost  every  week  through  the 
winter,  the  resistance  of  Russia  to  the  demands  of  France, 
her  measures  of  commercial  retaliation  and  her  preparations 
for  war,  have  been  mentioned  to  you  in  many  of  my  former 
dispatches,  but  I  have  still  hoped  that  the  war  would  be 
deferred,  if  not  ultimately  averted,  because  I  knew  that 
such  was  the  earnest  wish  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  and 
his  most  confidential  minister,  Count  Romanzoff,  and  be¬ 
cause  the  preparations  on  the  part  of  France,  although 
considerable,  have  not  been  such  as  to  indicate  the  intention 
of  commencing  the  war  immediately. 

Even  now  the  hope  of  preserving  peace  is  not  absolutely 
abandoned ,  but  its  last  beam  is  quivering  on  the  point  of  extinc¬ 
tion.  The  resolution  to  resign  his  office  is  already  taken  by 
Count  Romanzoff ,  and  waits  only  [the]  answer  to  the  instruc¬ 
tions  carried  by  Count  Chernicheff  to  Paris.  The  conjectures 
of  political  speculators  are  busy  in  designating  the  probable 
successor  to  his  power ,  a  point  which  must  undoubtedly  be  deter¬ 
mined  in  the  Emperor' s  mind ,  but  which  is  yet  undivulged. 
The  generals  to  whom  the  principal  commands  will  be  given  in 

1  Cypher. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[r8ii 


the  event  of  a  war  are  also  named ,  doubtless  by  anticipation . 
They  are  Count  Kamensky ,  /ate  commander  in  chief  of  the 
Moldavian  army ,  who  enjoys  at  this  time  the  first  military 
reputation  in  Russia .  He  is  under  forty  years  of  age ,  but  is 
unfortunately  still  at  Bucharest  by  the  consequences  of  a  fever. 
His  predecessor  in  that  command ,  Prince  Bagration ,  deemed 
an  excellent  officer  for  a  subordinate  command ,  yielded.  He  is 
now  here ,  General  Bennigsen,1  who  was  distinguished  in 

the  last  war  with  France ,  to  new  resides  on  his  estates  at  a 
distance  from  the  imperial  residence.  His  reputation  is  also 
high ,  to  ^  experience  of  the  present  and  recent  wars  of  Europe 
has  passed  some  disfavor  on  commanders  in  chief  of  his  age. 
He  is  little  short  of  seventy.  These  are  the  leaders  of  brightest 
fame  which  the  Russian  Empire  has  to  oppose  against  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  in  person ,  and  a  long  train  of  his  lieuten¬ 
ants,  spurred  not  only  by  the  example  of  his  fortune ,  the  long 
and  constant  habit  of  victory  and  the  actual  enjoyment  of  its 
fruits  in  wealth  and  glory ,  but  by  the  dazzling  glances  of  crowns 
and  sceptres  sporting  in  visions  before  them ,  and  glowing  with 
the  color  of  like  visions  already  realized  to  more  than  one  of 
their  fellow  soldiers.  It  would  perhaps  be  possible  for  Russia 
to  bring  into  the  field  armies  as  numerous  and  troops  at  least 
as  trusty  as  those  which  will  follow  the  eagles  of  France;  but  as 
to  the  great  result  of  European  war  in  these  times  it  has  been 
demonstrated  that  the  men  are  nothing ,  the  officers  all.  If  the 
war  should  now  commence ,  I  believe  that  neither  Austria  nor 
Sweden  will  immediately  take  a  part  in  it.  I  am  at  least  sure 
that  no  apprehension  of  that  sort  is  entertained  here ,  although 
insinuations  are  circulated  at  Paris  that  Sweden  will  co¬ 
operate  with  France ,  and  has  disclosed  at  Paris  some  secrets  of 
Russia.  But  this  may  perhaps  only  be  the  counterpart  of  that 
threat  which  France  used  to  extort  from  Sweden  the  declaration 

1  Levin  Augusti-Theophile  Bennigsen  (1745-1826). 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


59 


181 1] 

of  war  against  England.  Sweden  was  then  told  that  if  she 
hesitated  she  should  he  attacked  by  Russia ,  when  Russia  had  not 
the  most  distant  idea  of  attacking  Sweden A 

But  when  the  war  once  begins  undoubtedly  there  will 
be  no  exertion  spared  by  France  to  draw  both  Sweden  and 
Austria  into  it,  on  the  side  of  France.  I  know  not  whether 
the  measures  are  to  be  considered  as  preparatory  to  this 
event,  but  the  king  of  Sweden  has  resigned  all  the  essential 
part  of  his  executive  power  into  the  hands  of  the  Crown 
Prince,  and  Austria  has  scaled  her  national  bank  paper  at 
five  for  one.  .  .  . 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  47.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  29  April,  18 11. 

Sir: 

With  the  last  letter  which  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  you 
was  inclosed  a  translation  of  the  arrangement  agreed  upon 
between  Count  Romanzoff  and  the  charge  d’affaires  of 
Portugal  at  this  court:  but  which  remains  suspended  until 
the  arrival  of  the  minister  plenipotentiary  from  the  Prince 
Regent  of  Portugal,  who  is  shortly  expected. 

The  first  treaty  of  commerce  between  Portugal  and  Russia 
was  concluded  the  9/20  December,  1787,  for  twelve  years,  and 
was  renewed  with  several  modifications  for  twelve  years  more 
the  16/27  December,  1798.  By  the  6th  article  of  this  treaty, 
all  wines  of  the  growth  of  Portugal,  or  of  the  islands  of 
Madeira  or  the  Azores,  imported  into  Russia  in  Portuguese 
or  Russian  vessels,  for  account  of  Portuguese  or  Russian 

1  Cypher. 


6o 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

subjects,  were  to  pay  only  four  rubles  and  fifty  copecks  a 
hogshead  import  duty:  but  if  imported  in  vessels  of  any 
other  nation,  they  were  to  pay  according  to  the  general 
tariff'  of  1790. 

Further,  the  privilege  was  stipulated,  that  six  thousand 
lasts  of  Portuguese  salt  might  annually  be  imported  in 
Portuguese  vessels  into  the  ports  of  Russia  and  pay  only 
half  the  amount  of  the  duties  prescribed  by  the  general 
tariff  upon  the  same  article.  By  the  7th  article  of  the  same 
treaty  Portuguese  or  Russian  merchants  were  to  pay  only 
one-half  the  import  duties  prescribed  by  the  general  tariff 
and  ordinances  of  Portugal  upon  the  articles  of  hemp,  flax, 
or  hempseed,  hemp  or  linseed  oil,  iron  of  all  dimensions, 
anchors,  cannon  balls,  and  bombs,  provided  they  should  be  of 
the  produce  of  Russia  and  imported  directly  into  Portugal  in 
Russian  or  Portuguese  vessels  for  the  account  of  Portuguese 
or  Russian  subjects.  If  imported  in  the  vessels  of  other 
nations,  they  were  to  pay  the  full  amount  of  the  duties, 
according  to  the  tariff. 

By  the  8th  article  a  similar  diminution  of  one-half  the 
import  duties  was  stipulated  upon  the  direct  importation 
of  Russian  sail-cloth,  hemp,  ravensducks  and  drillings  into 
Portugal,  and  of  Portuguese  olive  oil  and  Brazil  indigo, 
tobacco  and  snuff  imported  into  Russia  by  the  vessels  and 
for  the  account  of  the  subjects  of  either  of  the  two  nations. 
By  the  9th  article  it  was  agreed,  that  as  there  were  other 
goods  and  merchandizes  of  the  growth  and  manufactures  of 
the  two  countries,  their  colonies,  dominions  and  conquests, 
which  might  increase  the  navigation  and  commerce  between 
them  and  contribute  to  their  mutual  advantage,  the  min¬ 
isters  of  the  two  parties  were  to  examine  and  confer  upon 
them,  and  that  whatever  might  be  adjusted  and  agreed  upon 
in  this  respect,  should  be  drawn  up  in  the  form  of  new 


i8u]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  6 1 

articles,  which,  approved  and  ratified,  should  become  a 
part  of  the  treaty. 

Since  the  peace  of  Tilsit,  the  removal  of  the  royal  family 
and  court  of  Portugal  to  Brazil,  and  the  invasion  of  Portugal 
by  the  French,  the  political  and  commercial  circumstances 
of  both  the  parties  to  this  treaty  have  rendered  the  modifica¬ 
tions  anticipated  in  this  9th  article  expedient  to  the  present 
interest  and  purposes  of  both.  In  consequence  of  the  con¬ 
nexions,  which  Russia  had  contracted  with  France  she  was 
prevailed  upon  to  forbid  all  direct  commercial  communica¬ 
tion  between  her  own  dominions  and  Portugal,  on  the  ground 
that  it  was  a  country  occupied  by  the  forces  of  Great  Britain, 
a  power  with  whom  she  was  at  war.  But  this  prohibition 
was  not  extended  to  Brazil  or  any  of  the  Portuguese  colonies 
or  possessions  out  of  Europe.  On  the  other  hand,  by  the 
removal  of  the  house  of  Braganza  to  America,  a  new  interest 
had  arisen,  prompting  the  substitution  on  their  part  of  other 
articles  for  the  enjoyment  of  privileges  when  imported  into 
Russia,  instead  of  the  wine,  oil,  and  salt  of  Portugal,  and 
these  were  precisely  those  colonial  articles  which  could  no 
longer  be  sent  by  exclusive  prerogative  to  Portugal,  as  to  a 
mother  country,  and  which  England  in  the  obstinacy  of 
adherence  to  her  colonial  system,  even  now  under  the  treaty 
of  Rio  Janeiro,  refuses  to  admit.  By  the  present  agreement 
therefore,  the  wine,  oil  and  salt  of  Portugal  cease  to  enjoy 
the  diminution  of  duties,  stipulated  by  the  treaty  of  1798, 
instead  of  which  the  same  privilege  is  transferred  to  the 
articles  of  sugar,  coffee,  cocoa,  dye-wood,  rice,  cochineal, 
pepper,  cinnamon  and  medicinal  drugs,  the  produce  of  Brazil 
or  of  other  possessions  of  the  Prince  Regent  of  Portugal. 
The  privileges,  secured  to  the  indigo,  tobacco  and  snuff  of 
Brazil  are  confirmed.  Madeira  wines  and  those  of  the 
Azore  Islands,  instead  of  four  rubles  fifty  copecks  the  hogs- 


62 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


head,  at  which  they  were  taxed  by  the  treaty  of  1798,  are 
to  pay  under  the  new  Russian  tariff  twenty  rubles  the  hogs¬ 
head,  and  in  the  case  of  any  further  modifications  of  this 
tariff,  they  are  still  to  pay  only  one-fourth  of  the  duties 
charged  upon  other  wines,  or  upon  those,  when  imported  by 
other  than  Russian  or  Portuguese  vessels,  and  for  account 
of  Portuguese  or  Russian  subjects.  They  are  taxed  in  the 
new  tariff  at  eighty  rubles  the  hogshead.  The  increase  of 
duty  from  four  and  one-half  to  twenty  rubles  is  rather  nom¬ 
inal  than  real,  for  as  they  are  paid  in  the  depreciated  bank 
paper,  which  passes  current  at  four  for  one,  twenty  rubles  at 
this  time  are  worth  very  little  more  in  gold  or  silver  than 
four  and  a  half  rubles  were  in  1798. 

In  the  present  situation  of  things  it  is  of  no  material  im¬ 
portance  to  the  navigation  and  commerce  either  of  Portugal 
or  Russia,  whether  this  new  convention  should  be  definitely 
concluded  or  not.  But  I  have  been  thus  particular  in  stating 
the  parallel  between  the  old  treaty  and  the  new  agreement, 
and  in  explaining  the  causes  of  the  alteration,  because  the 
principle  of  this  change  in  the  commercial  relations  between 
Portugal  and  Russia  may  hereafter  be  by  no  means  indif¬ 
ferent  to  the  commercial  interests  of  the  United  States.  The 
articles  of  sugar  and  rice  at  least  are  productions  of  the 
United  States  as  well  as  of  Brazil,  and  under  the  present 
Russian  tariff  a  diminution  of  one-half  the  duty  on  sugar 
would  give  an  advantage  in  the  competition,  which  might 
easily  operate  to  exclude  from  the  market,  those  who  would 
remain  subject  to  the  payment  of  the  full  duty.  The 
Methuen  treaty  between  Portugal  and  England  wTas  probably 
the  model  from  which  these  articles  in  the  first  treaty  of 
commerce  between  Russia  and  Portugal  were  imitated. 

It  is  probable  that  if  a  treaty  of  commerce  between  the  United 
States  and  Russia  should  be  contemplated  during  the  adminis - 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


63 


1811] 

tration  of  Count  Romanzojf  that  he  would  agree  to  similar 
stipulations  in  favor  of  our  vessels  and  productions  upon  the 
like  reciprocal  conditions .  I  have  repeatedly  received  intima¬ 
tions  of  a  similar  nature  to  those  which  I  mentioned  in  my  letter 
of  $th  September  last  (No.  23),  but  the  Count  has  never  said 
anything  explicit  to  me  on  this  subject  himself ,  and  now  should 
the  full  power  and  instructions  which  I  then  requested  be  sent 
me ,  it  is  doubtful  whether  I  could  avail  myself  of  them  before  a 
change  of  administration  here  will  take  place. 

The  accounts  from  Paris  received  here  are  to  the  pth  instant. 
No  act  of  direct  hostility  and  no  public  manifestation  of  a 
rupture  between  the  two  countries  had  then  occurred  there  nor 
has  any  yet  taken  place  here.  But  there  and  here  the  war  is 
considered  as  inevitable  and  every  arrangement  for  it  is  making 
as  speedily  as  possible  by  both  governments.  There  are  a 
multitude  of  rumors  in  secret  circulation ,  the  authenticity  of 
which  I  do  not  consider  as  sufficiently  clear  to  mention  them  at 
present  to  you;  but  things  all  concur  in  proving  that  the  catas¬ 
trophe  is  near  at  hand.  It  is  not  improbable  that  on  one  side 
or  the  other  the  blow  will  at  least  accompany  if  not  precede  the 
word. 1 

I  have  the  honour  to  be,  etc. 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  29  April,  1811. 

...  •  •  •  • 

Your  letter  of  24  September  is  yet  the  last  which  I  have 
received,  and  from  my  dear  mother  I  have  none  later  than 
25  July.  As  the  world  of  waters  is  again  open  before  us,  I 
hope  we  shall  now  hear  from  you  very  often  during  the  navi- 

1  Cypher. 


64 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

gating  season.  At  least  I  have  no  doubt  but  we  shall  have 
vessels  from  the  United  States  arriving  in  swarms,  if  the 
English,  the  French,  the  Danes,  and  Swedes  will  let  them 
come.  Indeed  they  might  dispense  with  the  permission  of  all 
these  nations  except  the  first,  but  without  their  leave  none 
will  reach  a  Russian  port.  The  trade,  however,  according 
to  all  appearances  will  be  good  for  nothing,  and  much  more 
probably  a  source  of  loss  than  of  profit.  First,  because 
it  will  be,  as  it  already  is,  overstocked,  and  secondly,  because 
it  will  ere  long  labor  under  the  double  burthen  of  highly  ag¬ 
gravated  duties,  and  of  English  fellow  customers  in  compe¬ 
tition.  They  hitherto  have  been  excluded,  but  as  an  im¬ 
mediate  war  between  France  and  Russia  is  considered  as 
unavoidable,  the  peace  between  Russia  and  Great  Britain 
will  follow  of  course.  I  can  hardly  say  this  to  you  now  with¬ 
out  indiscretion,  because  to  this  day  there  has  been  no  public 
manifestation  of  the  slightest  misunderstanding  between  the 
cabinets  of  the  Tuileries  and  of  St.  Petersburg.  But  you 
know  the  fashion  of  modern  war  is  to  strike  before  they  speak, 
and  it  is  highly  probable  that  you  will  hear  of  actual  hostili¬ 
ties  between  the  Russian  and  French  armies  before  you 
receive  this  letter.  The  condition  of  the  ports  on  the  Baltic 
and  Gulf  of  Finland  will  then  depend  upon  the  fortunes  of 
the  campaign.  On  this  subject  I  do  not  think  it  prudent  to 
say  more  at  present. 

We  are  hourly  in  expectation  of  hearing  the  arrival  of 
Mr.  Livingston,1  as  Minister  to  France,  and  of  Mr.  Erving,2 
in  the  same  capacity  at  Copenhagen.  Neither  of  these 
gentlemen  will  find  his  mission  a  bed  of  roses.  The  one  will 
be  extremely  dependent  as  to  its  result  upon  the  other.  The 
policy  of  France  is  at  this  time  as  hostile  to  the  United  States 

1  Joel  Barlow  was  appointed  minister  to  France. 

2  Erving  arrived  at  L’Orient,  April  17. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


65 


18 1 1] 

as  it  ever  was,  since  our  existence  as  a  nation.  We  hear, 
and  I  most  sincerely  hope  truly,  that  the  non-importation 
act,  which  was  proposed  in  Congress  before  the  discovery  of 
what  the  French  government  intended  by  the  professed  rev¬ 
ocation  of  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan,  did  not  eventu¬ 
ally  pass.  It  was  a  trap  to  catch  us  into  a  war  with  England; 
a  war  which  England  most  richly  deserves,  but  which  would 
on  our  part  be  more  than  ever  impolitic  at  this  time. 

Mr.  Pinkney  has  taken  leave  at  the  English  court,  and  by 
this  time  I  suppose  is  far  advanced  upon  his  passage  home. 
The  British  ministers  however  say,  that  the  negotiations 
are  not  yet  at  an  end,  but  that  they  have  sent  out  new  propo¬ 
sitions  by  Mr.  Foster,  who  goes  as  Minister  Plenipotentiary.1 
I  have  no  hopes  that  these  propositions  will  be  acceptable 
or  admissible,  but  I  hope  Foster  will  behave  himself  better 
than  Jackson,  that  he  will  spare  his  country’s  partisans  in 
Congress  and  the  Massachusetts  legislature  the  degradation 
of  proclaiming  themselves  the  satellites  of  his  insolence, 
and  that  he  will  not  undertake  to  instruct  the  Ancient 
and  Honorable  Artillery  Company  of  Boston,  at  a  public 
dinner  where  he  is  their  guest,  against  whom  they  are  to 
draw  their  swords,  meaning  particularly,  as  he  and  they 
know,  against  their  own  government. 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  1/13  May,  1811. 
There  was  one  of  the  small  English  poets,  I  think  it  was 
Dodsley,  who  on  the  reformation  of  the  calendar  in  England 
published  a  poem  upon  the  tears  of  old  May  day.  As  this 

1  Augustus  John  Foster  (1780-1848). 


66 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

is  the  only  country  in  Europe  where  old  May  day  is  held  in 
honor,  it  would  not  be  expected  that  here,  too,  is  precisely 
the  spot  where  she  sheds  the  most  tears.  If  she  sheds  none 
upon  the  present  visit  which  she  is  making  us,  it  will  be 
because  they  freeze  upon  her  face  into  snow.  At  least  she 
advances  veiled  in  no  shower  of  shadowing  roses.  Winter 
verily  lingers  in  her  lap,  and  I  think  I  shall  excuse  myself 
from  attendance  at  the  celebration  of  her  festival  in  the 
procession  of  carriages  this  afternoon,  remembering  that  in 
reward  for  having  joined  in  this  act  of  devotion  to  her  lady¬ 
ship  last  year,  she  gave  me  one  of  the  severest  colds  that  I 
have  suffered  in  Russia.  The  procession  of  carriages  takes 
place  from  six  to  nine  o’clock  in  the  evening,  just  without 
the  city  gate,  and  to  a  village  called  Catherineshoff  about 
two  miles  distant  from  it.  The  Emperor  and  all  the  Im¬ 
perial  family  usually  appear  in  it,  and  all  the  splendid  equi¬ 
pages  and  liveries  of  the  court  and  city  exhibit  themselves 
in  their  proudest  magnificence. 

Although  the  day  wears  so  unpromising  an  aspect,  the 
season  has  hitherto  been  uncommonly  fine,  and  is  at  least 
three  weeks  farther  advanced  than  it  was  at  the  same  time 
last  year.  There  are  clearly  symptoms  of  vegetation  upon 
the  fields  and  upon  the  trees.  It  so  happens,  however,  that 
I  feel  here  more  interested  in  the  influence  of  spring  upon  the 
waters,  than  in  her  generative  progress  upon  the  land. 
Whether  the  bud  shows  its  lip  or  the  blossom  opens  its 
petals  a  month  sooner  or  late  engages  little  of  my  concern. 
But  when  the  governor  of  the  fortress  upon  the  island  op¬ 
posite  the  imperial  palace  shall  cross  the  river  in  the  first 
boat,  to  receive  from  his  Majesty’s  hand  a  hundred  ducats 
for  a  glass  of  Neva  water;  when  the  benumbed  and  torpid 
members  of  the  river  god  shall  recover  warmth  and  energy 
enough  to  pour  from  his  urn  the  floating  crystals  of  the 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


67 


l8ll] 

Ladoga;  when  Mr.  Sparrow,  the  consular  agent  at  Cron- 
stadt  shall  in  his  official  bulletin  announce  that  “between 
here  (Cronstadt)  and  St.  Petersburg  likewise,  as  far  as  the 
eye  can  see  to  the  westward,  the  water  is  entirely  clear  of 
ice  ”  (which  notice  he  sent  only  three  days  ago);  when 
lastly,  his  register  of  emigrating  ice  shall  be  changed  for  a 
daily  list  of  vessels  arrived  and  sailed,  these  are  all  pro¬ 
gressive  stages  towards  the  summer  solstice,  which,  if  I 
was  a  poet,  I  should  be  more  strongly  tempted  to  sing, 
than  the  returning  verdure  and  harmony  of  the  groves,  or 
the  reviving  genial  raptures  of  the  flocks  and  herds. 

And  yet  when  the  arrivals  come,  how  often  do  we  find  our¬ 
selves  disappointed  in  the  expectation  of  letters  from  our 
friends.  In  my  last  I  told  you  I  thought  it  impossible  but 
that  some  of  you  must  have  written  by  the  Washington , 
Captain  Brown.  He  is  not  yet  here,  but  he  has  sent  me  a 
letter  of  about  five  lines  from  Lieut.  Governor  Gray,  and  I 
conclude  that  if  he  had  any  other  letters  he  would  have  sent 
them  at  the  same  time.  We  must  be  patient  again,  and 
transfer  our  hopes  to  the  next  vessel. 

I  wrote  you  in  the  letter  of  which  a  press  copy  is  inclosed, 
that  a  war  between  Russia  and  France  was  highly  probable, 
and  that  it  was  on  the  point  of  breaking  out.  Since  then, 
however,  various  incidents  have  occurred  which  make  it  still 
more  improbable  that  the  peace  will  be  some  time  longer 
preserved.  The  serious  objects  of  controversy  all  remain 
as  unsettled  as  they  were  then,  but  France  has  yielded  upon 
certain  points  of  form,  and  has  discovered  certain  proce¬ 
dures,  which  threatened  immediate  rupture.  Mons.  de 
Champagny  has  been  very  suddenly  and  unexpectedly 
removed  from  the  office  of  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and 
Mr.  Maret,  Duke  of  Bassano,  appointed  in  his  place.  That 
the  war  will  blaze  out  yet  before  the  end  of  the  summer  is 


68 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

not  improbable,  but  there  is  now  a  likelihood  that  this 
event  will  be  further  postponed. 

Count  Lauriston,  a  native  of  Pondicherri  and  a  lineal 
descendant  from  the  famous  John  Law,  the  prince  of  paper 
financiers,  arrived  here  last  week,  and  has  presented  his 
credentials  as  ambassador  extraordinary  from  France, 
superseding  the  Duke  de  Vicence,  who  has  resided  here 
between  three  and  four  years  in  the  same  capacity,  and  who 
has  rendered  himself  so  generally  agreeable  here  that  his 
successor  will  find  it  difficult  to  replace  him. 

In  the  total  dearth  of  direct  intelligence  from  the  United 
States  I  am  obliged  to  take  such  as  I  find  in  the  Hamburg 
Correspondent ,  which  is  extracted  usually  from  the  Paris 
Moniteur ,  where  it  is  introduced  by  translation  from  the 
English  newspaper.  In  passing  through  all  these  vehicles 
it  often  gets  disfigured,  besides  the  risk  of  falsehood  in  the 
original  importation  from  America.  It  is  about  three  months 
since  we  were  told  through  this  channel  that  Judge  Living¬ 
ston  was  immediately  coming  out  as  minister  to  France,  and 
now  the  appointment  of  Mr.  Barlow  to  that  office  comes 
through  the  same  source.  Neither  of  these  gentlemen  had 
arrived  at  Paris  on  the  4th  of  April,  the  date  of  my  last 
advices  from  Mr.  Russell.  Mr.  Erving  continues  also  to  be 
expected  at  Copenhagen,  where  I  think  his  presence  at  this 
time  would  be  useful.  By  the  same  circuitous  route  I  now 
learn  that  Congress  before  they  rose  did  pass  an  act  supple¬ 
mentary  to  the  non-intercourse,  prohibiting  all  importations 
from  the  British  dominions  subsequent  to  the  second  day  of 
February.  You  will  see  by  my  last  letter  that  I  expect  no 
benefit  from  this  measure,  and  that  I  shall  regret  that  it 
actually  passed.  It  is  not  for  me  to  blame  the  measures  of  the 
legislature  under  which  I  serve,  and  at  this  distance  I  can¬ 
not  be  qualified  to  judge  with  a  full  knowledge  of  their  mo- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


69 


1811] 

tives  upon  that  propriety.  I  wish  the  new  non-importation 
may  be  productive  of  good,  and  that  it  may  be  more 
successful  than  the  preceding  measures  of  a  similar  nature. 
Spain  and  Portugal  will  still  need  the  advantage  of  a  free 
trade  with  us,  which  may  withhold  the  hand  of  England 
from  proceeding  to  extremities.  To  the  policy  of  neutrality 
we  have  more  than  ever  reason  to  adhere.  The  only  object 
for  which  we  could  engage  in  a  war  would  be  commerce,  and 
from  the  moment  war  would  take  place  our  commerce  would 
be  annihilated.  Once  involved  in  the  contest  it  is  impossible 
to  foresee  how  long  it  would  continue,  or  where  it  would 
leave  us.  In  Europe  the  prospect  of  peace  is  more  remote 
than  war.  England  adheres  more  and  more  obstinately  to 
her  orders  in  council,  which  France  counteracts  by  her  de¬ 
crees  and  her  encroachments  upon  the  continent  of  Europe. 
Portugal  has  a  third  time  been  rescued  from  subjugation. 
Spain  is  neither  subdued  nor  liberated.  France  is  preparing 
for  new  wars  and  new  conquests,  which  England  cannot 
prevent.  Commerce  is  everywhere  in  the  deepest  distress, 
and  not  a  symptom  on  either  side  denotes  a  disposition  to 
relax  from  the  oppressive  and  ruinous  measures  under  which 
it  groans.  The  war  is,  therefore,  yet  likely  to  be  long.  So 
say  the  ministers  of  the  French  Emperor,  so  says  Mr. 
Perceval,  in  Parliament,  and  so  proclaims  every  act  of  both 
the  governments.  Should  we  join  in  the  conflict,  we  could 
scarcely  hope  for  a  better  fate  than  to  be  sacrificed  as  one  of 
the  victims  at  its  close. 

I  was  under  apprehensions  at  the  date  of  my  last  letter  of 
being  dispossessed  of  the  dwelling  house  where  we  have  re¬ 
sided  nearly  a  year,  and  of  which  I  have  a  lease  for  another 
year  by  a  sale  of  the  house  itself  to  the  Emperor.  It  is  now 
said,  however,  that  another  house  has  been  found  more 
suitable  to  the  purpose  for  which  this  was  wanted,  and  that 


?o 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


I  shall  have  another  chance  for  the  full  privilege  of  my 
lease.  I  have,  therefore,  abandoned  the  intention  of  taking 
a  house  for  the  summer  in  the  country,  though  a  summer 
country  seat  is  as  fashionable  as  it  is  desirable  everywhere. 

I  received  a  few  days  since  from  my  son  George  a  letter 
dated  24  September  last,  the  same  day  with  the  most  recent 
letter  that  I  have  from  you.  George’s  however  did  not  come 
with  yours.  It  was  sent  under  cover  to  Mr.  Preble  at  Paris, 
and  there  underwent  the  learned  and  profound  examination 
of  the  police  to  ascertain  what  secrets  of  state  it  might  dis¬ 
close.  I  have  already  answered  it,  and  hope  George  will 
prove  as  punctual  a  correspondent  as  his  father.  He  tells 
me,  as  you  do,  that  he  is  afraid  of  losing  his  French,  to  which 
I  could  only  reply,  as  I  did  to  you,  and  as  I  now  repeat,  that 
I  rely  both  upon  you  and  upon  him  that  he  will  not.  His 
letter  is  partly  written  with  his  own  hand,  which  I  was  re¬ 
joiced  to  see,  though  the  progress  of  his  improvement  in 
writing  is  not  so  rapid  as  I  could  wish.  This  at  least  it  is 
obvious  he  is  learning  invita  natura.  So  much  the  more 
necessary  will  it  be  to  conquer  her  obstacles  by  assiduity. 

I  have  written  to  Mr.  Copley  in  London  requesting  him  to 
deliver  the  portrait  of  my  father  to  the  order  of  Mr.  Boylston; 
but  I  suppose  it  will  be  necessary  to  send  him  at  the  same 
time  a  supplementary  order  from  my  father,  directing  Mr. 
Copley  to  comply  with  my  request,  as  he  will  have  from  me 
only  my  assurance  that  the  picture  was  given  to  me.  But  if 
this  non-intercourse  or  non-importation  has  been  renewed, 
I  suppose  it  will  oblige  us  to  wait  again  two  or  three  years 
before  the  order  can  be  executed.  As  it  is  the  only  full 
length  portrait  of  the  original  good  for  anything  that  ever 
was  taken,  I  am  most  anxious  that  it  may  be  safely  trans¬ 
ported  and  deposited  in  the  Hall  where  I  have  consented 
that  it  should  be  placed.  I  never  think  of  this  subject 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


7i 


1811] 

without  feeling  against  Stuart  an  indignation,  which  I  wish 
I  could  change  into  contempt.  If  there  was  another  por¬ 
trait  painter  in  America,  I  could  forgive  him.  I  beg  you  to 
try  to  get  the  portrait  he  has  of  my  mother,  and  to  buy  of 
him  that  of  my  father  for  me.  If  he  will  finish  it,  I  will 
gladly  give  him  his  full  price  for  pictures  of  that  sort  for  it. 
Perhaps  you  may  tempt  him  by  this  offer,  taking  care  to 
withhold  the  payment  until  the  work  is  finished.1 

We  are  all  so  well  that  the  ladies  intend  going  this  after¬ 
noon  to  the  May  day  parade.  Whether  May  or  January, 
I  am  always  with  equal  warmth  of  affection  yours. 

1  “I  will  write  from  this  place  to  Mr.  Copley  in  London  requesting  him  to  deliver 
the  portrait  to  the  order  of  Mr.  Boylston;  so  that  whenever  the  non-intercourse  shall 
again  cease,  he  may  have  it  by  writing  for  it.  But  you  must  also  procure  from 
your  father  an  order  upon  Mr.  Copley  to  deliver  it  to  my  disposal,  which  I  think  he 
did  once  give  me,  but  which  I  had  not  then  the  means  of  transmitting,  and  which 
I  have  not  now  at  hand.  This  reminds  me  of  the  two  portraits,  of  my  father  and 
mother,  which  that,  I  know  not  what  to  call  him,  Stuart  has  so  shamefully  kept, 
and  which  I  wish  you  could  get  once  more  out  of  his  hands,  as  you  once  rescued 
them  Lorn  the  sheriff  at  Philadelphia.  Among  some  of  my  papers  which  I  left  with 
you,  is  the  receipt  for  painting  that  of  my  mother,  but  I  know  not  whether  you  can 
find  it.  If  you  can,  I  recommend  to  you  to  bring  an  action  against  Stuart,  and  make 
the  sheriff  take  it  from  him  again.”  To  Thomas  Boylston  Adams ,  March  29,  1811. 
Ms. 

Copley  painted  this  portrait  in  London,  in  1783.  It  is  I  believe  the  only  full 
length  picture  of  my  father  as  large  as  life  that  ever  has  been  painted,  and  per¬ 
haps  the  only  one  that  will  remain  after  him.  Mr.  Stuart  was  engaged  by  the  leg¬ 
islature  of  Massachusetts  to  paint  one  to  be  placed  in  the  hall  of  the  House  of 
Representatives,  and  in  pursuance  of  this  engagement  he  actually  took  a  likeness 
of  his  face.  But  Mr.  Stuart  thinks  it  the  prerogative  of  genius  to  disdain  the  per¬ 
formance  of  his  engagements,  and  he  did  disdain  the  performance  of  that.  There 
is  in  America  no  other  painter  capable  of  executing  a  work,  which  I  should  wish 
to  see  preserved,  and  considering  my  father’s  age,  it  is  more  than  probable  that 
hereafter  your  portrait  of  him  will  be  an  unique.  You  will  easily  judge  therefore 
how  anxious  I  am  for  its  preservation.”  To  John  Singleton  Copley ,  April  29, 
1811.  Ms. 


72 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  48.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  6  May,  18 11. 

Sir: 

On  the  3rd  instant  I  received  several  packets  under  the 
seal  and  superscription  of  your  Department  containing  a  set 
of  the  National  Intelligencer  from  8  December,  1809,  to  2 
March,  1810,  and  sundry  public  documents  printed  during 
the  second  session  of  the  Eleventh  Congress.  These  are  the 
remainder  of  the  despatches  mentioned  in  my  letters  Nos.  41 
and  42  as  having  been  received  by  Mr.  Forbes  of  Hamburg, 
and  which  he  forwarded  by  private  hands  to  Riga,  whence 
they  now  came.  It  was  fortunate  that  directions  had  been 
given  not  to  put  them  into  any  post  office  in  Europe:  direc¬ 
tions  which  it  is  adviseable  always  to  give  for  packets  ex¬ 
ceeding  the  weight  of  two  or  three  sheets  of  letter  paper,  and 
for  all  letters  which  may  be  desired  to  reach  their  destina¬ 
tion  unopened. 

The  apprehension  of  immediate  hostilities  between  France 
and  Russia,  which  at  the  date  of  my  last  letter  was  at  its 
greatest  height,  has  since  then  considerably  subsided.  Be¬ 
sides  the  expectations  which  the  known  preparations  for 
war  on  both  sides  had  excited,  all  the  private  advices  from 
Germany  and  from  Paris  concurred  in  representing  the  de¬ 
termination  in  that  “  Capital  of  the  World”  as  irrevocable, 
and  the  impatience  for  action  so  great  that  the  month  of 
May  could  not  pass  without  bringing  the  parties  to  issue. 
In  the  approximation  of  these  two  great  powers  toward  that 
conflict  which  every  reflecting  man  knows  that  nothing  less  than 
a  supernatural  interposition  can  prevent ,  the  opinion  of  all  those 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


73 


18 1 1] 

who  are  not  in  the  most  intimate  confidence  of  one  or  the  other 
of  the  two  governments  has  constantly  outstripped  the  reality.1 
I  need  not  recapitulate  the  causes  of  the  present  misunder¬ 
standings  between  them,  because  they  have  been  enumerated 
in  many  of  my  former  letters.  The  immediate  preparations 
for  a  war  began  last  summer  on  the  part  of  France,  by  a  new 
organization  and  great  reinforcement  of  troops  under  the 
superintendence  of  Prince  Joseph  Poniatowsky 2  in  the 
Duchy  of  Warsaw.  Russia  soon  followed  the  example, 
and  after  beginning  by  a  very  considerable  increase  of  for¬ 
tifications  upon  the  river  Dwina,  and  along  the  whole  Polish 
frontier,  has  been  marching  troops  and  sending  artillery 
thither,  until,  from  authority  which  I  cannot  doubt,  I  am 
assured  there  is  between  Riga  and  Kiew  a  force  of  three 
hundred  thousand  men.  All  these  preparations,  however, 
on  the  part  of  Russia  have  been  essentially  defensive;  and 
until  very  lately  I  know  that  it  has  been  the  determination 
of  the  Emperor  Alexander  not  to  strike  the  first  blow.  He 
was  :ndeed  much  exasperated  by  the  decree,  which  in  annex¬ 
ing  the  Hanseatic  cities  to  the  French  empire,  despoiled  the 
Duke  of  Oldenburg  of  all  his  possessions.  The  restoration 
of  this  Prince’s  territories  had  been  expressly  stipulated  by 
France  in  the  12th  article  of  the  treaty  of  Tilsit,  and  in  the 
25th  article  of  the  same  treaty  there  was  a  mutual  guaranty 
of  the  integrity  of  the  possessions  of  the  two  empires,  and  of 
all  the  princes  included  in  the  treaty.  The  annexation  of  the 
Duke’s  dominions  to  France  was  therefore  a  direct  and  undis¬ 
guised  violation  of  the  peace  of  Tilsit ,  and  as  such  has  undoubt¬ 
edly  been  the  subject  of  strong  remonstrances  on  the  part  of 
Russia .  That  these  remonstrances  have  produced  and  will 
produce  no  effect  is  well  known  or  easily  foreseen ,  and  it  is 
confidently  said ,  and  highly  probable ,  that  they  have  been 
1  Cypher.  2  Joseph-Antoine  Poniatowski  (1762-1813). 


74 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

treated  with  little  respect  not  to  say  with  pointed  contempt  at 
Paris.  In  this  state  of  things  there  has  certainly  been  about  the 
person  of  the  Emperor  Alexander  a  certain  influence  urging 
him  to  commence  the  war .  Their  suggestions  to  him  have  been 
that  the  war  is  resolved  in  the  heart  of  Napoleon ,  that  it  cannot 
be  avoided ,  that  he  is  not  so  fully  prepared  as  Russia ,  that 
time  must  be  taken  by  the  forelock;  that  by  beginning  now , 
Russia  might  insure  the  advantage  of  the  first  campaign ,  which 
success  would  secure  to  her  the  cooperation  of  Austria  for  the 
second;  that  the  favorable  moment  must  be  seized  for  making 
sure  of  an  advantageous  peace  with  England;  that  if  time  is 
given  to  France  to  summon  all  her  auxiliaries  of  the  Rhenish 
Confederation ,  strengthened  by  those  of  Denmark  and  Prussia , 
which  cannot  chuse  but  be  arranged  under  the  same  banners , 
Russia  will  find  her  own  territories  assailed  at  unawares  by  an 
overwhelming  power ,  and  a  single  campaign  may  wrest  from  her 
all  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  and  all  the  conquests  of  Peter  and 
his  successors;  that  now  the  plan  of  campaign  to  begin  with  is 
easy ,  and  its  success  almost  certain;  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw 
must  be  first  occupied  and  Dantzig  besieged ,  and  all  the  interval 
of  Prussian  provinces  between  this  line  and  Magdeburg  con¬ 
verted  into  a  desert.  This  would  give  Russia  an  inexpugnable 
barrier ,  which  she  need  not  step  over  herself ,  and  within  which 
she  might  bid  defiance  to  the  enemy .  The  offer  of  money  from 
a  certain  quarter  mentioned  in  my  cyphered  letter  of  the  igth 
April ,  was  made  at  this  crisis ,  and  for  some  days  it  became 
doubtful  whether  the  counsels  which  were  spurring  him  to  im¬ 
mediate  hostility.  [Here  there  appears  to  be  an  omission  in 
the  cyphers.]  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  he  has  resisted 
the  impetuous  impulse  of  his  martial  advisers ,  has  adhered  to 
the  political  system  of  the  Chancellor ,  and  has  explicitly  de¬ 
clared  his  determination  not  to  be  the  aggressor .  I  am  further 
told  ( but  of  this  information  I  speak  with  less  confidence )  that 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


75 


181 1] 

he  has  declined  overtures  of  negotiation  from  England  as  in¬ 
compatible  with  engagements  which  he  means  to  fulfil  with 
inflexible  fidelity.1 

One  of  the  circumstances  which  contributes  to  accredit 
the  rumors  of  immediate  rupture  was  the  delay  of  the  de¬ 
parture  of  the  new  French  Ambassador  appointed  to  super¬ 
sede  the  Duke  de  Vicence.  The  English  gazettes  had  an¬ 
nounced  that  this  new  ambassador  never  would  come,  and  as 
the  time  which  the  French  embassy  here  had  given  out  when 
he  intended  to  leave  Paris  was  several  times  postponed  from 
week  to  week,  it  began  seriously  to  be  believed  that  he  would 
not  come  at  all.  He  did,  however,  begin  his  journey  from 
Paris  on  the  5th  of  April,  and  has  already  been  heard  of  as 
having  passed  through  Frankfort,  Dresden,  Berlin,  and 
Dantzig.  His  arrival  is  expected  here  this  day  or  tomorrow, 
and  it  is  probable  we  shall  very  soon  know  what  turn  the 
negotiations  will  take  under  his  direction.  Since  his  de¬ 
parture  from  Paris  an  event  has  occurred  there,  which  may 
likewise  contribute  to  a  political  change  of  system.  Mr. 
Champagny,  the  Duke  de  Cadore,  is  removed  from  the 
Department  of  Foreign  Affairs,  it  is  said  in  disgrace,  and 
Mr.  Maret,  Duke  de  Bassano,2  hitherto  Minister  Secretary 
of  State  has  been  appointed  in  his  stead.  The  cause  of  Mr. 
Champagny’s  misfortune  I  have  not  learned,  nor  whether 
the  change  will  tend  to  defer  or  to  hasten  the  explosion  with 
Russia.  There  was  in  the  Journal  de  V Empire  of  April  12, 
a  very  extraordinary  and  insulting  article,  alluding  to  the 
recent  mission  of  Count  Chernicheff,  who  had  arrived  two 
days  before  at  Paris.3  I  enclose  you  a  translation  of  it  in  the 

1  Cypher. 

2  Hugues-Bernard  Maret  ( 1 7^3 ~ 1  ^ 3 9) .  See  Henry  Adams,  History ,  V.  401. 

3  The  article  was  entitled  Les  Nouvellistes.  See  Vandal,  N apoleon  et  Alexandre  /, 

III-  135- 


?6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

extracts  from  the  gazettes.  To  understand  its  true  character 
it  must  be  remembered  that  Chernicheff  has  been  a  con¬ 
fidential  officer  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  who  during  the 
war  of  1809  attended  the  person  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
through  the  whole  campaign  as  one  of  his  family,  living 
constantly  at  his  table  and  sleeping  in  his  tent.  Since  the 
peace  he  has  been  repeatedly  the  messenger  of  personal  com¬ 
munications  between  the  two  sovereigns,  and  on  this  last 
mission  his  message  was  undoubtedly  of  deep  import  to  the 
destiny  of  two  empires  and  of  five  or  six  kingdoms.  How  an 
article  affecting  to  shed  so  much  ridicule  upon  the  person 
and  his  errand  could  get  into  an  official  gazette,  in  a  country 
where  the  press  is  under  more  complete  control  than  in 
any  other,  can  be  explained  only  by  persons  who  are  upon 
the  spot.  The  Ambassador  here  says  that  the  censor  who 
permitted  this  article  to  appear  has  been  imprisoned,  and 
that  Count  Chernicheff  has  been  received  and  treated  by  the 
Emperor  Napoleon  with  very  peculiar  distinction.  I  am 
with  great  respect  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  49.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  12  May,  18 11. 

Sir: 

A  courier  from  the  Russian  Ambassador  at  Paris  who 
arrived  here  in  the  course  of  the  last  week  brought  me  a 
letter  from  Mr.  Russell,  enclosing  a  section  from  an  English 
paper,  the  Times  of  18  February.  It  contained  your  corre¬ 
spondence  with  General  Turreau  on  the  subject  of  the  certif¬ 
icates  of  origin,  only  one  letter  of  which  I  had  before  seen, 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


77 


18 1 1] 

and  that  also,  as  I  have  heretofore  mentioned,  in  an  English 
newspaper.  The  true  state  of  this  matter  is  now  sufficiently 
clear,  but  I  regret  that  I  have  not  yet  received  the  documents 
in  such  a  shape  that  I  can  make  an  official  communication 
of  them  to  the  Russian  government.  There  is  indeed  now 
no  American  vessel  in  any  port  of  Russia  liable  to  confisca¬ 
tion  for  having  produced  such  a  paper,  but  I  should  be  glad 
to  give  Baron  Campenhausen  notice  with  all  suitable  official 
solemnity,  that  the  government  of  the  United  States  did, 
as  he  often  intimated  to  me  that  they  should,  notice  pub¬ 
licly  this  argued  falsehood  of  the  French  consular  certifi¬ 
cates. 

If  the  transactions  of  the  Duke  de  Cadore,  in  his  office  of 
exterior  relations  were  all  of  a  stamp  with  his  proceedings 
throughout  this  business  and  with  his  dealings  in  regard  to 
General  Armstrong,  there  may  be  less  reason  than  ever  to  be 
surprised  at  his  uneasiness  on  the  receipt  of  “peevish  notes  ” 
which  he  could  not  misrepresent  to  his  master,  or  at  the 
manner  in  which  he  is  said  to  have  gone  at  last  out  of  the 
ministry.  It  was  a  “  testy  note”  sent  to  him  by  the  Russian 
Ambassador,  protesting  against  the  violation  of  the  treaty 
of  Tilsit,  in  the  invasion  of  the  Duchy  of  Oldenburg,  which 
he  refused  to  receive,  and  sent  back  to  Prince  Kurakin, 
alleging  that  he  could  not  receive  any  representation  against 
a  measure  sanctioned  by  a  senatus  consult.  The  same  note 
was  again  sent  back  to  Paris,  by  Count  Chernicheff,  with 
orders  to  Prince  Kurakin,  not  only  to  insist  upon  its  being 
received,  but  to  complain  of  the  refusal  to  receive  before. 
And  as  there  was  a  probability  that  the  refusal  to  receive  it 
would  be  renewed,  at  the  same  time  when  Chernicheff  was 
last  sent  off  from  St.  Petersburg,  copies  were  dispatched  of 
the  same  protest,  and  reservation  of  the  right  of  the  Em¬ 
peror  Alexander  to  the  Duchy  of  Oldenburg,  to  the  courts  cf 


78 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

Austria  and  of  Sweden,  and  to  most  if  not  all  the  Sovereigns 
of  the  Rhenish  Confederation.  Chernicheff  arrived  at  Paris 
on  the  ioth  of  April.  On  the  12th  appeared  in  the  Journal 
de  U Empire  the  insulting  article  of  which  I  sent  you  with 
my  last  letter  a  translation.  On  the  15th  Chernicheff  was 
noticed  by  having  the  honor  of  attending  the  Emperor 
Napoleon  upon  a  hunting  party,  which  it  is  now  received 
and  considered  as  a  high  mark  of  distinction;  and  on  the  17th 
the  Duke  de  Bassano  took  the  oath  as  Minister  of  Exterior 
Relations,  a  circumstance  which  in  the  official  gazette  is 
announced  without  saying  whether  the  Duke  de  Cadore  had 
resigned  or  was  removed;  and  indeed  without  making  men¬ 
tion  of  his  name.  The  note  which  had  been  refused,  has  now 
been  received;  and  the  French  Ambassador  here  has  made 
excuses  in  person  to  the  Emperor  Alexander,  for  the  article 
in  the  Journal  de  U Empire;  an  article  not  only  offensive 
by  its  indirect  allusion  to  himself,  and  to  the  mission  of 
Count  Chernicheff,  but  by  the  adoption  from  an  obscene 
and  libellous  book,  entitled  Secret  Memoir es  upon  Russia J 
of  a  ridiculous  story  concerning  an  officer,  now  a  lieutenant 
general  in  the  Russian  service,  whom  it  holds  up  to  derision 
by  name. 

How  far  these  circumstances  which  have  all  occurred  so 
nearly  at  the  same  time  have  been  connected  with  or  depend¬ 
ent  upon  one  another,  I  have  at  this  distance  not  sufficient 
information  to  say  with  certainty;  but  taken  all  together, 
and  more  especially  combined  with  the  discomfiture  and 
retreat  of  the  French  army  in  Portugal,  and  the  disasters 
and  dissensions  of  their  generals  in  Spain,  they  have  almost 
entirely  removed  the  apprehensions  of  an  immediate  war 
between  France  and  Russia  which  during  the  last  fortnight 
of  April  was  universally  expected,  and  which  though  not 

1  Lettres  Persanes . 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


79 


18 1 1  ] 


partaking  of  that  full  conviction  myself,  I  knew  and  wrote 
you  to  be  extremely  probable. 

There  are  many  persons ,  however ,  who  think  that  the  r^tpture 
is  only  deferred  for  a  few  weeks  until  France  shall  have  collected 
a  force  sufficient  to  overwhelm  the  three  hundred  thousand ,  which 
it  is  on  all  hands  allowed  that  Russia  has  on  the  Polish  frontier. 
This  opinion  is  entertained  and  circulated  by  that  party  which 
has  been  stimulating  the  Emperor  Alexander  to  seize  the  golden 
opportunity  and  commence  war  before  France  could  be  pre¬ 
pared.  The  irritations  of  the  last  month  gave  this  party  such 
strength  and  confidence  that  it  was  doubtful  whether  the  imperial 
will  itself  would  remain  firm  to  the  principles  which  there  were 
such  plausible  reasons  for  accommodating  to  the  change  of  cir¬ 
cumstances.  The  conduct  of  the  Austrian  legation  at  the  same 
crisis  was  remarkable.  As  the  coolness  between  France  and 
Russia  has  been  increased  the  anxiety  of  Russia  to  renew  her 
ties  of  intimacy  with  Austria  has  naturally  been  increasing 
with  it,  and  Austria  notwithstanding  her  recent  family  connec¬ 
tion  with  France  has  found  so  little  of  the  advantage  she  had 
anticipated  deriving  from  it,  and  is  still  haunted  by  so  many 
cruel  recollections  and  so  many  fearful  prospects ,  that  her  in¬ 
ducements  have  been  of  the  most  powerful  nature  to  meet  the 
returning  friendship  of  Russia  with  a  return,  if  not  of  equal 
assiduity,  at  least  of  reciprocal  kindness .  Such  has  been  her 
policy  in  point  of  form ;  but  she  seems  at  the  same  time  so  much 
gratified  with  the  situation  of  having  her  friendship  so  stu¬ 
diously  courted  that  she  is  in  no  haste  either  to  take  a  side,  or 
reconcile  the  disputants  with  each  other .  Her  only  public 
manifestations  hitherto  have  been  of  a  determination  to  observe 
the  strictest  neutrality;  but  the  conversations  of  her  legation  here 
have  just  hinted  remnants  of  violent  resentment  against  France 
and  a  strong  probability  that  if  the  Russian  arms  should  be 
successful  the  first  campaign,  Austria  might  then  be  ready  to 


8o 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ii 

throw  her  weight  into  the  scale  on  her  side.  This  language  was 
used  at  a  time  when  it  was  well  known  that  it  would  he  urged  to 
the  Emperor  Alexander  as  a  motive  to  begin  and  is  quite  as 
indicative  of  the  real  policy  of  Austria  as  an  official  declaration.1 

The  new  French  Ambassador,  Count  Lauriston,  arrived 
here  on  the  8th  instant,  and  yesterday  had  a  private  audience 
of  the  Emperor  in  which  he  delivered  his  credentials.  His 
predecessor  the  Duke  de  Vicence  immediately  before  deliv¬ 
ered  his  letters  of  recall.  He  returns  immediately  to  France. 
It  will  probably  soon  be  known  what  tone  of  negotiation  will 
be  assumed  by  the  new  ambassador.  As  yet  I  cannot  under¬ 
take  to  assure  you  that  there  will  be  no  war,  before  the  end 
of  the  ensuing  summer;  but  this  much  I  can  say  with  cer¬ 
tainty,  that  France  disavows  the  intention;  and  that  unless 
France  has  the  intention  there  will  be  none. 

I  had  a  very  few  days  since  a  conversation  with  the  Duke  de 
Vicence  in  which  he  told  me  that  he  hoped  the  storm  would  blow 
over ,  that  there  were  no  great  interests  at  issue  between  the  parties , 
and  few  little  ones  which  could  not  be  easily  compromised .2 3 
His  own  personal  wishes  3  are  known  to  be  for  the  continuance 
of  peace. 

I  am  with  much  respect,  etc. 

1  Cypher. 

2  Adams,  Memoirs ,  May  6, 1811. 

3  Cypher. 


l8 1 1] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


81 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 


No.  50. 


[James  Monroe] 


St.  Petersburg,  19  May,  1811. 


Sir: 


The  first  vessel  which  arrived  at  Cronstadt  this  season 
was  an  American,  last  from  Denmark,  where  she  had  win¬ 
tered.  She  got  in  the  nth  instant  at  night,  and  was  followed 
the  next  day  by  one  more  vessel,  under  Prussian  colors. 
Since  then  there  have  been  no  other  arrivals,  and  it  appears 
that  even  after  they  passed,  the  Gulph  has  again  been  too 
full  of  ice  for  a  free  navigation. 

Almost  all  the  American  vessels  which  have  wintered  at 
the  ports  of  Reval,  Baltic  Port,  Riga  and  Liebau,  will  be 
obliged  to  come  for  a  market  both  of  sale  and  of  purchase  at 
St.  Petersburg.  A  few  of  them  have  disposed  of  their  cargoes 
where  they  arrived  and  are  about  sailing  on  their  return. 
There  is  danger  that  they  will  find  it  as  difficult  to  get  out 
of  the  Baltic  as  they  did  to  get  in.  The  British  fleet  has  not 
yet  appeared,  and  the  Danish  privateers  have  free  scope  for 
their  operations.  Several  American  vessels  have  already 
been  taken  into  the  ports  of  Denmark,  and  some  of  them 
again  been  released.  One  coming  from  the  United  States, 
and  which  sailed  from  Boston  the  twentieth  of  February, 
has  reached  Baltic  Port.  But  another,  the  Hercules ,  Captain 
Snow,  belonging  to  New  Bedford,  and  coming  from  Charles¬ 
ton,  South  Carolina,  with  a  cargo  almost  entirely  of  the 
produce  of  the  United  States,  after  having  been  taken  and 
carried  into  a  Danish  port,  and  liberated  by  the  sentence 
of  the  prize  court  there,  has  again  been  taken  by  a  privateer 
fitted  out  under  French  colors  from  Dantzig  and  carried  into 


82 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


that  place,  where  by  advices  from  the  captain  to  Mr.  Harris, 
they  have  begun  to  unload  her  cargo. 

The  French  and  Hamburg  gazettes  last  arrived  here  have 
brought  information  of  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Erving  at  L’Orient 
the  16th  of  last  month.  I  am  in  expectation  of  dispatches 
from  you,  which  I  presume  must  have  been  brought  by  him; 
but  which  Mr.  Russell  will  not  transmit  until  the  opportunity 
of  a  courier  from  the  Russian  Ambassador  shall  occur.  At 
Paris  Erving  will  doubtless  meet  indications  clear  enough 
of  the  success  which  his  mission  may  find  at  Copenhagen, 
and  I  hope  the  prospects  may  be  more  auspicious  than  they 
were  at  the  date  of  the  last  letter  I  have  from  Mr.  Russell. 

It  appears  by  all  the  accounts  which  we  have  from  Eng¬ 
land  the  intention  of  the  British  government  is  to  send  into 
the  Baltic  a  naval  force  still  greater  than  that  which  they 
kept  there  the  last  summer.  It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  what 
motive  they  can  have  for  this  armament  unless  it  be  for  the 
protection  of  their  commerce.  The  numerous  confiscations 
in  Russia  and  in  Prussia,  which  their  merchants  and  insurers 
suffered  the  last  year  have  rendered  the  trade  extremely 
perilous,  if  not  unprofitable,  and  it  is  yet  uncertain  to  what 
extent  their  licenses  have  been  or  will  be  granted  during  the 
present  season.  It  is  indeed  impossible  to  conceive  anything 
more  profligate  than  this  whole  system  of  licenses.  The 
licenses  are  given  to  vessels  under  any  flag  except  the  French 
(an  exception  not  strictly  adhered  to  in  the  practice);  and 
they  are  given  to  protect  covered  British  property,  in  coun¬ 
tries  where  it  cannot  be  introduced  but  by  fraud  and  per¬ 
jury.  Every  such  license  therefore  is  in  substance  a  license 
for  perjury  as  much  as  for  trade.  But  this  is  not  the  dif¬ 
ficulty  among  the  London  merchants.  Some  of  them  im¬ 
agine  they  have  found  out  that  their  trade  is  of  such 
absolute  necessity  to  their  customers,  that  if  they  do  but 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


83 


1811] 

stiffly  refuse  to  carry  it  under  any  other  flag  than  their  own, 
it  will  force  its  way  into  their  ports  in  spite  of  every  possible 
prohibition.  The  prospect  of  a  peace  with  Russia  which 
they  have  been  flattering  themselves  with  the  whole  winter, 
and  lately  with  great  probability,  has  opened  to  them  the 
hopes  of  being  admitted  again  into  the  Russian  ports  under 
their  own  colors,  which,  if  they  could  realize  these  hopes, 
their  Government  would  soon  take  care  to  make  the  only 
flag  that  could  find  access  to  them.  It  was  under  the  appar¬ 
ent  certainty  of  this  peace  with  Russia,  that  some  of  the 
merchants  in  London  petitioned  the  Board  of  Trade  that  no 
more  licenses  might  be  granted,  and  that  no  importations 
should  be  allowed  from  the  Baltic  but  upon  condition  that  an 
equal  amount  of  British  goods  should  be  taken  in  return, 
and  they  are  threatening  the  same  measure  as  a  retaliation 
for  the  non-importation  act  passed  in  Congress. 

If,  as  according  to  present  appearance  there  is  every 
reason  to  expect,  they  should  be  disappointed  in  their 
visions  of  peace  with  Russia  and  of  a  war  between  Russia 
and  France,  I  know  not  how  it  will  affect  their  policy  towards 
the  commerce  and  vessels  of  the  United  States,  but  they 
will  be  compelled  to  adhere  to  their  trade  of  licenses  in  the 
Baltic.  Perhaps  they  might  renounce  for  a  year  or  two  the 
importation  of  all  the  articles  which  they  have  been  accus¬ 
tomed  to  take  from  this  country,  excepting  that  of  hemp; 
but  the  scarcity  of  that  in  England  is  already  so  great,  they 
find  it  so  impossible  to  obtain  an  adequate  supply  of  it  from 
elsewhere,  and  it  is  an  article  of  such  indispensable  necessity 
to  their  navy,  that  they  must  have  it,  whether  by  an  English 
flag,  by  licensed  frauds,  or  by  neutrals.  They  must  receive 
and  not  prescribe  the  conditions.  Their  North  American 
colonies  alone  preserve  them  from  the  same  dependence  with 
regard  to  ship  timber. 


84 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


The  aspect  of  affairs  between  France  and  Russia  remains 
much  as  at  the  date  of  my  last  letter.  The  reception  at  Paris 
of  the  note  which  had  at  first  been  refused  by  the  Duke  de  Cadore 
has  quieted  the  alarm  of  an  immediate  explosion ,  but  all  the 
causes  of  dissension  between  the  parties  remain  unadjusted 
and  unexplained.1  The  late  French  Ambassador  at  this  court 
has  taken  leave,  and  departs  with  the  most  signal  marks  of 
personal  regard  from  the  Emperor  Alexander  which  he  was 
ever  known  to  bestow,  and  his  successor  Count  Lauriston 
has  been  received,  if  not  with  equal  cordiality  at  least  with 
the  same  courtesy.  It  is  however  regarded  as  something  ex - 
traordinary  that  with  respect  to  the  principal  complaint  of 
Russia  he  has  no  instructions.1  It  is  yet  impossible  to  pro¬ 
nounce  whether  the  issue  of  the  discussions  will  be  peace  or 
war.  There  is  hitherto  no  symptom  of  disarming  on  either 
side  in  Poland.  I  am  assured  that  the  Russian  reinforcements 
continue  to  march  towards  that  quarter.1  But  at  all  events  the 
signal  for  war  will  not  now  be  given  here.  If  it  comes  from 
the  south  you  must  receive  information  of  it  sooner  than  it 
would  be  possible  for  me  to  give  it.  I  am  very  respectfully, 
etc. 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  51.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  May  26th,  1811. 

Sir: 

In  the  course  of  the  last  week  I  have  received  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Erving  written  at  Paris,  in  which  he  mentions  that  he 
was  the  bearer  of  several  despatches  from  you  to  me,  which 
would  be  forwarded  by  the  first  courier  to  be  sent  by  the 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


85 


18 1 1] 

Russian  Ambassador,  Prince  Kurakin.  He  was  to  leave 
Paris  in  about  fifteen  days  after  the  date  of  Mr.  Erving’s 
letter  and  is  expected  here  within  a  week  or  ten  days. 

The  arrival  of  this  courier  is  expected  with  some  anxiety, 
as  it  is  foreseen  that  the  character  of  the  dispatches  with 
which  he  will  be  charged  may  put  an  end  to  the  equivocal 
state  of  the  political  relations  between  France  and  Russia, 
which  still  subsists.  The  last  accounts  which  we  have  from 
England  represent  those  between  the  United  States  and  Great 
Britain  as  extremely  critical,  and  the  prospect  of  war  as 
more  imminent  than  it  ever  has  been  before.  The  ministerial 
papers  announce  without  qualification  that  orders  have  been 
issued  to  their  naval  officers  to  take  all  American  vessels, 
bound  to  France,  and  they  intimate  that  the  same  instruc¬ 
tions  have  been  dispatched  by  the  frigate  Actaeon  to  the 
East  Indies,  and  by  other  vessels  sent  by  express  to  Halifax 
and  to  the  West  India  station.  They  have  not  yet  pro¬ 
claimed  the  same  measure  with  reference  to  the  Baltic  navi¬ 
gation,  but  they  only  hint  that  some  very  important  pur¬ 
pose  is  intended  by  the  unexampled  armament  coming  out 
under  the  command  of  Admiral  Saumarez,  who  sailed  from 
England  about  the  20  April  and  is  said  to  have  appeared 
already  before  Gothenburg.  At  the  same  time  it  is  said  that 
Mr.  Foster  has  sailed  to  the  United  States  with  proposals, 
which  Mr.  Perceval  in  the  House  of  Commons  declared  to 
be  of  a  conciliatory  nature  towards  the  United  States. 

At  the  point  of  extremity  towards  which  our  negotiations  with 
Great  Britain  have  been  so  long  verging ,  and  which  appears  to  be 
so  near  at  hand ,  it  cannot  be  a  matter  of  indifference  to  the  Presi¬ 
dent  to  be  accurately  informed  of  the  real  state  of  the  relations  be - 
tween  Russia  and  her  ally  {if  the  term  may  be  used)  on  the 
one  part ,  and  their  common  enemy  on  the  other .  Impressed 
with  the  importance  tp  our  country  that  a  just  and  somewhat 


86 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

circumstantial  view  of  the  present  and  prospective  policy  of 
Russia  may  he  taken  by  the  American  government ,  at  the  mo¬ 
ment  when  the  final  election  must  he  made ,  of  adherence  to  that 
neutrality  so  long  and  so  earnestly  maintained ,  or  of  becoming 
parties  to  a  war  so  formidable  in  its  aspect ,  so  ardently  dep¬ 
recated,  but  from  which  the  spirit  of  the  nation  may  have  no 
honorable  and  practicable  retreat f  I  have  been  and  still  am 
to  the  highest  degree  sensible  of  the  duty  devolving  upon  me 
to  obtain  the  most  correct  and  particular  information  of  the 
real  state  of  things  here,  and  to  communicate  it  to  you  as 
early  and  as  speedily,  as  the  great  distance  and  the  numerous 
difficulties  and  obstructions,  both  natural  and  occasional, 
to  the  intercourse  will  admit.  But  correct  information  is  not 
always  attainable,  and  the  fabrication  of  false  secret  news  is 
as  flourishing  as  that  of  false  papers  is  under  the  license 
system  in  London.  It  is  sometimes  more  difficult  to  detect 
the  political  forgeries  of  the  newsmongers  than  the  com¬ 
mercial  forgeries  of  the  British  traders,  and  in  the  very 
eagerness  of  zeal  to  give  you  all  the  important  changes  in  the 
political  atmosphere  of  this  country,  I  sometimes  unavoid¬ 
ably  transmit  to  you  accounts  of  particular  incidents,  which 
ultimately  prove  to  have  belonged  to  the  spurious  breed. 
This  observation,  I  flatter  myself,  will  apply  only  to  facts 
of  no  extraordinary  moment,  and  even  with  regard  to  them, 
it  is  always  my  intention,  in  writing  to  you,  to  discriminate 
between  those,  upon  which  undoubting  reliance  may  be 
placed,  and  those,  the  authenticity  of  which  is  questionable. 
Of  the  latter  class  is  the  paper  of  which  I  now  enclose  you 
a  translation.  It  is  secretly  circulated  here  as  a  speech  made 
by  the  Emperor  Napoleon  to  his  Council  of  Commerce 
on  the  6  April  last.  The  day  is  a  mistake,  for  on  the  6  April 
there  was  no  Council  of  Commerce  held.  But  there  was  on 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


87 


1811] 

the  25  March  and  on  the  8  April.  And  in  one  of  those  days , 
or  shortly  before ,  the  Emperor  Napoleon  did  make ,  or  at  least  is 
believed  by  the  Russian  government  to  have  made ,  #  speech  in¬ 
dicating  a  determination  of  war  with  Russia ,  unless  Russia 
should  completely  and  actually  carry  into  execution  measures 
against  English  commerce  corresponding  with  his  own . 

In  my  last  letter  I  assured  you  that  at  all  events  the  signal  for 
war  would  not  be  given  here;  but  in  that  as  on  former  occasions 
I  have  suggested  that  there  is  an  active  and  powerful  English 
party  here  seizing  every  occasion  of  access  to  the  Emperor  and 
stimulating  him  to  be  before  hand  with  France.  I  believe  the 
enclosed  paper  was  got  up  by  them,  and  that  its  object  is  to 
prevail  upon  the  Emperor  Alexander  to  commence  or  conclude 
a  negotiation  of  peace  with  England.  I  say,  to  commence  or 
conclude,  because  I  cannot  pronounce  with  certainty  whether 
such  a  negotiation  between  Russia  and  England  is  or  is  not  on 
foot.  In  my  cyphered  letter  of  19  of  April  I  spoke  of  it  as  prob¬ 
able.  It  was  an  inference  which  I  drew  from  certain  facts,  but 
of  which  I  had  no  sure  advice.  I  have  since  written  you  that 
I  was  told  overtures  from  England  had  been  declined  by  the 
Emperor  Alexander;  but  although  I  had  this  from  a  person 
likely  to  know,  and  on  whose  veracity  I  placed  perfect  reliance,  I 
could  [not]  venture  to  give  it  you  as  certain.  Since  then  additional 
circumstances  have  occurred  to  warrant  the  belief  that  a  separate 
negotiation  with  England  is  en  train,  and  that  it  is  carrying 
on  at  London;  but  if  such  be  the  fact,  it  is  neither  through  the 
medium,  nor  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Chancellor,  Count 
Romanzoff,  though  he  is  still  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs . 

There  is  yet  no  change  in  the  outward  manifestation  of  amity 
towards  France  at  this  court.  The  new  French  Ambassador 
continues  to  be  treated  with  distinction  by  the  Emperor,  but  the 
reenforcements  of  troops  are  still  marching  to  the  frontiers  of 
Poland.  Count  Lauriston  is  still  without  instructions  rel - 


88 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8n 

alive  to  the  occupation  of  the  Duchy  of  Oldenburg ,  and  Russia 
was  never  less  disposed  than  at  this  juncture  to  shut  up  her 
ports  against  commerce.1  It  is  rumored  that  the  Emperor 
Alexander  himself  proposes  to  go  and  review  his  forces  at  the 
frontiers,  and  the  probability  is  suggested  of  a  new  interview 
between  him  and  the  Emperor  Napoleon. 

The  peculiarly  menacing  and  hostile  attitude  which  the 
English  government  have  assumed  towards  the  United  States 
is  one  of  the  circumstances  which  mdicate  their  confidence 
of  an  approaching  accommodation  of  their  affairs  with  Russia. 
If  they  expected  that  the  Russian  markets  would  be  rigorously 
shut  against  them,  they  would  not  likely  deprive  themselves  of 
North  America,  especially  when  they  depend  so  essentially 
upon  one  or  the  other  of  those  markets  for  such  articles  as 
bread  and  naval  stores.1 

Since  I  wrote  you  last  week  I  have  learnt  the  capture  of 
three  more  American  vessels  by  a  French  privateer  from 
Dantzig — the  Atlantic,  Jayne,  from  New  York,  the  Catherine, 

Oakington,  from  Boston,  and  the  Julia  Ann,  from  Philadel- 

* 

phia.  Their  papers  are  sent  to  Paris  where  their  fate  must 
be  decided.  [One  line  and  a  half  of  cypher  not  decyphered.\ 
I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


89 


1811] 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  52.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  2  June,  1811. 

Sir: 

The  Russian  consul  general  in  France,  Mr.  Labensky, 
arrived  here  on  Wednesday,  the  29  ultimo,  as  a  courier  from 
the  Ambassador  at  Paris,  and  brought  me  the  dispatches  of 
which  Mr.  Erving  had  been  the  bearer  from  the  United 
States.  The  packets  of  which  I  have  to  acknowledge  on  this 
occasion  the  receipt  from  your  Department  are  the  following. 

j.  Your  letter  of  the  13th  February ,  authorizing  me  to  con¬ 
cert  with  the  Russian  government  a  treaty  of  commerce ,  and 
giving  me  some  general  instructions  relative  to  the  negotiations , 
accompanied  with  a  draft  of  the  heads  of  a  treaty  to  be  considered 
as  a  part  of  these  instructions.1 

2.  Letter  of  26  February,  advising  me  of  the  President’s 
having  been  pleased,  by  and  with  the  advice  and  consent  of 
the  Senate,  to  appoint  me  an  Associate  Justice  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States:  directing  me  in  consequence  of 
this  appointment  to  return  to  the  United  States  as  soon  as 
the  public  interest  and  my  own  convenience  would  admit, 
and  enclosing  a  letter  of  leave  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia: 
a  blank  commission  for  a  charge  d’affaires  or  a  secretary 
of  legation,  to  be  filled  in  case  of  my  return  to  the  United 
States:  and  the  commission  to  myself  as  an  Associate  Justice 
of  the  Supreme  Court. 

3.  Letter  of  6  March,  together  with  copies  of  your  letters 
to  Mr.  Russell  of  the  same  date,  and  to  Mr.  Pinkney  of  the 
day  before,  and  the  National  Intelligencer  of  5  March,  con- 

1  Cypher. 


90 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ii 


taining  the  supplementary  non-intercourse  act,  to  which  all 
these  letters  relate. 

4.  A  cover,  inclosing  an  open  dispatch  addressed  to  Samuel 
Hazard,  Esq.,  Archangel,  and  containing  a  commission  for 
him  as  consul  at  that  post,  with  a  letter  from  you  informing 
him  of  his  appointment. 

5,  6.  Two  packets  containing  printed  documents  of  the 
third  session  of  the  eleventh  Congress;  the  laws  of  the  three 
preceding  sessions  and  a  few  newspapers. 

7,  8,  9.  Three  packets,  containing  a  file  of  the  National 
Intelligencer  from  25  June,  1810,  to  29  January,  1811.  The 
file  of  papers  comes  down  to  14  February. 

I  shall  immediately  request  a  coiiference  with  the  Chancellor , 
Count  Romanzoff ,  and  communicate  to  him  the  authority  which 
I  have  received  respecting  the  negotiation  of  a  treaty.  Possibly 
some  objection  may  arise  with  respect  to  the  nature  of  my 
powers ,  but  aj  that  which  I  possess  may  suffice  for  every  step 
previous  to  the  signature  and  conclusion ,  perhaps  no  other  will 
be  at  an  earlier  period  required.1 

Deeply  sensible  of  the  honor  done  me  by  the  President 
and  Senate  of  the  United  States  in  the  appointment  to  the 
bench  of  the  Supreme  Court,  I  lament,  that  circumstances 
beyond  my  control  have  prescribed  to  me  the  duty  of  de¬ 
clining  it.  As  they  are  for  the  most  part  of  a  private  nature 
I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  explain  them  in  a  letter  to  the 
President  himself,  herewith  enclosed:  and  which  I  have  to 
ask  of  you  the  favor  to  deliver  to  him.  One  of  them,  itself 
decisive  to  dictate  my  determination,  is  the  impracticability 
of  my  return  to  the  United  States  during  the  present  year, 
arising  from  the  peculiar  situation  of  my  family,  the  length  of 
time  necessary  to  accomplish  a  voyage  from  the  extremity 
of  the  Gulph  of  Finland  to  the  continent  of  North  America 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


9i 


1811] 

and  the  short  portion  of  the  year  during  which  such  a  voyage 
can  be  commenced.  This  circumstance  necessarily  detain¬ 
ing  me  here,  will  induce  me  to  withhold  the  letter  of  leave 
to  the  Emperor,  and  to  leave  the  commission  for  a  charge 
d’affaires  or  a  secretary  of  legation  in  blank  until  I  shall 
receive  the  further  orders  of  the  President. 

The  effect  of  the  act,  supplementary  to  that  commonly 
called  the  non-intercourse,  will  I  hope  be  favorable,  in 
regard  to  our  relations  with  France,  as  it  will  probably  in¬ 
crease  the  inveteracy  of  the  present  British  ministry  against 
us.  On  this  occasion  it  may  he  proper  to  inform  you ,  with  the 
request  that  it  may  he  received  as  in  the  closest  secrecy ,  that  I 
have  recently  had  two  accidental  conversations  with  his  Imperial 
Majesty ,  in  which  he  manifested  the  desire  to  he  informed , 
what  was  the  precise  state  of  our  present  relations  with  England. 
In  the  last  of  them ,  which  was  the  day  before  yesterday ,  he  told 
me  that  he  had  received  very  interesting  dispatches  from  Count 
Pahlen  which  had  given  him  much  pleasure.1  I  have  it  from  a 
good  source  that  in  those  dispatches  the  Count  gives  it  as  his 
decided  opinion  that  there  will  ultimately  he  no  war  between  the 
United  States  and  England ,  and  I  know  from  authority  equally 
good  that  the  Russian  government  earnestly  wishes  there  may 
be  no  such  war.  You  will  of  course  understand  that  nothing  of 
this  sort  has  been  said  to  me  by  the  Emperor ,  o<  officially  by  any 
of  his  ministers .2 

Mr.  Hazard  is  not  at  present  in  this  country.  He  spent 
part  of  the  winter  in  this  city  and  in  February  went  to 
Copenhagen.  His  intention  was,  however,  to  return  here 
in  the  Spring,  but  I  have  not  heard  directly  from  him  since 
the  first  week  in  March.  I  have  heard  that  he  went  from 
Copenhagen  to  England.  I  shall  inform  Mr.  Erving  that  the 
commission  is  in  my  hands,  and  desire  him  to  give  Mr. 

1  Adams,  Memoirs ,  May  31,1811.  2  Cypher. 


92 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

Hazard  notice  of  it,  if  he  is  still  at  Copenhagen.  You  will 
have  learnt  directly  from  Mr.  Harris,  that  previous  to  his 
receiving  knowledge  of  this  appointment,  he  had  given  that  of 
Vice  Consul  at  Archangel  to  Mr.  Francis  Dana,  Jr.,  who  had 
been  recognized  in  that  capacity  by  the  Russian  government. 
He  will  discharge  the  duties  of  the  office  until  Mr.  Hazard 
shall  repair  to  the  post,  and  if  that  gentleman  should  not 
return  to  this  country  at  all,  I  would  recommend  that  Mr. 
Dana  may  receive  the  appointment  in  his  place.  From  what 
I  saw  of  Mr.  Hazard,  while  he  was  here,  I  consider  him  as  a 
discreet  and  intelligent  young  man,  well  qualified  for  the 
office,  as  I  believe  Mr.  Dana  to  be  also. 

The  documents,  laws  and  newspapers,  sent  me  by  Mr. 
Erving,  I  have  not  yet  had  time  to  peruse  with  the  attention 
due  to  them.  Should  the  inspection  of  them  suggest  to  me 
any  step  as  proper  to  be  taken  by  me,  or  any  idea,  which  it 
may  be  useful  to  communicate  to  you,  it  will  be  mentioned 
in  my  future  letters. 

I  enclose  to  you  a  translation  of  the  note  which  the  Duke  de 
Cadore  refused  to  receive  from  the  Russian  Ambassador, 
and  which  has  so  frequently  been  mentioned  in  my  late 
despatches.  I  have  heretofore  informed  you,  that  at  the 
same  time,  when  Count  ChernichefY  was  last  sent  to  Paris, 
copies  of  this  note  were  dispatched  to  be  presented  to  all  the 
courts  on  the  European  Continent  in  amity  with  Russia 
even  including  that  of  Westphalia.  The  substance  of  the 
note  was  known,  but  the  note  itself  was  kept  secret  from  the 
French  Ambassador  here,  and  from  all  the  other  foreign 
ministers,  until  it  returned  to  them  from  their  courts.  The 
one  from  which  the  within  translation  was  made  has  come  in¬ 
directly  to  me,  and  you  will  probably  have  received  before  this 
reaches  you  the  same  document  from  elsewhere.1 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


93 


1811] 

The  Imperial  Council  are  engaged  in  secret  deliberations 
upon  a  new  plan  of  ministerial  organization,  or  rather  upon 
what  is  said  to  be  the  restoration  of  a  system  originally 
formed  by  Peter  the  Great.  It  is  said  there  will  be  a  new 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  but  the  Chancellor  will  be  ele¬ 
vated  to  a  general  superintendence  over  all  the  ministerial 
departments.  The  little  that  transpires  of  this  affair  is  yet 
so  confused  and  the  reports  concerning  it  are  so  various,  that 
I  am  unable  to  speak  of  it  with  more  precision.  I  am  very 
respectfully,  etc. 


TO  THE  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES 
{Private.)  [James  Madison] 

St.  Petersburg,  3  June,  1811. 

Sir: 

I  received  on  the  29th  of  last  month,  together  with  some 
other  dispatches  from  the  Secretary  of  State,  one  enclosing 
a  commission  to  me  as  an  associate  justice  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States,1  a  new  letter  of  leave  to  his 
Majesty,  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  a  blank  commission  for  a 
secretary  of  legation,  or  charge  d’affaires,  and  an  instruction 
in  consequence  of  this  new  appointment  to  return  to  the 
United  States,  as  soon  as  the  public  interest  and  my  own 
convenience  will  permit. 

The  new  mark  of  confidence,  which  you  have  been  pleased 
to  show  me  in  the  nomination  to  an  office  so  highly  honor¬ 
able,  and  so  far  as  could  relate  to  my  own  personal  interest 
and  concerns  so  acceptable,  has  made  on  my  mind  an  im- 

1  The  nomination  was  sent  to  the  Senate  February  21,  and  approved  by  the 
Senate  unanimously  on  the  next  day. 


94 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

pression  which  no  time  can  obliterate,  and  which  leaves  me 
the  more  earnestly  to  regret  my  incapacity  to  meet  it  with 
a  return,  the  most  agreeable  to  you,  by  assuming  and  dis¬ 
charging  its  duties  in  a  manner  to  justify  that  confidence, 
and  do  honor  to  your  appointment. 

In  the  letters,  which  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  you  on  the 
7th  of  January  and  8th  of  February  last,  I  intimated  to  you 
that  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  my  family  would  probably 
make  it  impracticable  for  me  to  embark  with  them  for  the 
United  States  during  the  present  year,  and  in  the  former  I 
informed  you  that  under  these  circumstances,  if  you  should 
judge  that  the  termination  of  my  mission  here  had  become 
expedient,  I  should  remain  here  as  a  private  individual  until 
the  next  summer.  This  obstacle  to  my  departure  remains 
as  when  those  letters  were  written,  and  should  my  successor 
at  this  court  arrivd  during  the  present  season,  I  shall  still 
find  myself  under  the  necessity  of  obtaining  the  Emperor’s 
permission  to  reside  here  probably  until  this  time  next 
year,  but  at  least  until  I  can  commence  my  homeward 
voyage,  without  exposing  to  extraordinary  and  unnecessary 
dangers  lives  which  ought  to  be  dearer  to  me  than  my  own. 
There  are  contingencies  which  might  enable  me  at  a  very 
late  period  of  this  season  to  embark,  but  I  have  little  hope 
to  reckon  upon  some  of  them,  and  still  less  inclination  to 
anticipate  the  rest.  My  expectation  is  to  be  detained  here 
the  next  winter,  by  ties  which  the  affections  of  a  husband  and 
a  parent  can  neither  dissolve  nor  sever. 

I  cannot  expect,  nor  however  it  might  suit  my  convenience, 
can  I  permit  myself  to  desire  that  you  should  keep  an  office 
of  such  importance  vacant  a  full  year  longer  to  await  my 
return,  and  this  consideration  is  decisive  to  induce  me  to 
decline  the  appointment.  It  must  also  relieve  me  from  the 
necessity  of  expressing  to  you  other  motives  operating  upon 


18 1 1] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


95 


my  disposition  to  produce  the  same  result,  some  of  which 
are  of  peculiar  delicacy,  and  for  the  avowal  of  which  I  must 
in  a  special  manner  solicit  your  candor  and  indulgence. 

My  education  to  the  law  was  regular,  and  during  several 
short  periods  in  the  course  of  my  life,  I  have  been  in  profes¬ 
sional  practice  at  the  bar.  But  its  studies  were  never 
among  those  most  congenial  to  my  temper,  and  the  great 
proportion  of  my  time  has  been  employed  in  occupations 
so  different  from  those  of  the  judicial  tribunals,  that  I  have 
long  entertained  a  deep  and  serious  distrust  of  my  qualifi¬ 
cations  for  a  seat  on  the  bench.  This  sentiment  was  so 
strong,  that  it  induced  me  soon  after  my  return  from  Europe 
in  1801,  to  decline  the  proposal  of  being  a  candidate  for 
a  vacancy  in  the  Supreme  Court  of  my  native  State,  at  a 
time  when  I  was  in  private  life,  and  when  that  situation 
would  have  been  altogether  suitable  to  my  own  convenience. 
It  has  long  been  known  to  my  most  intimate  friends,  and 
would  have  been  communicated  to  you,  had  the  prospect  of 
such  a  nomination  ever  presented  itself  to  me,  as  sufficiently 
probable  to  warrant  my  interference  to  prevent  it.  In  the 
present  this  reluctance  would  be  much  increased  by  a  con¬ 
viction,  as  clear  to  my  understanding  as  it  is  impressive 
upon  my  feelings,  that  there  is  another  person,  a  friend  whom 
I  most  highly  value  in  every  respect,  better  qualified  than 
myself  for  that  particular  office,  and  whom  my  warm  wishes, 
perhaps  more  than  the  rigor  of  principle,  have  considered  as 
having  pretensions  to  it  at  least  far  superior  to  mine. 

I  speak  of  Mr.  Davis,  the  present  District  Judge  for  Massa¬ 
chusetts,  a  man  of  whom  an  intimate  acquaintance  of  many 
years  entitles  me  to  say,  that  he  is  equally  estimable  by  the 
purity  of  his  heart,  the  firmness  of  his  temper  and  the  solidity 
of  his  judgment;  whose  education  and  professional  practice 
have  been  with  little  if  any  interruption  devoted  to  the  law, 


96 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[iSi  i 

and  who,  by  an  experience  of  ten  years  in  his  present  station, 
has  been  peculiarly  [qualified]  for  the  duties  of  an  office 
exactly  analogous  to  it. 

I  am  aware  of  all  the  considerations  which  may  perhaps 
concur  in  giving  you  other  views  connected  with  this  sub¬ 
ject,  and  which  may  lead  your  ultimate  determination  to 
another  person.  Mr.  Davis’s  political  opinions,  and  more 
especially  those  of  his  social  connections,  may  render  it 
necessary  to  contemplate  the  possible  operation  of  his  ap¬ 
pointment  to  this  place  upon  the  public  sentiment.  The 
extent  and  influence  of  this  reflection  it  would  not  become 
me,  were  it  even  within  my  competence,  to  discuss,  but  you 
will  I  am  persuaded  permit  me  the  recollection  that  Mr. 
Davis,  on  one  signal  and  not  untrying  occasion,  mani¬ 
fested  at  once  the  steadiness  of  his  mind,  his  inflexible  ad¬ 
herence  to  the  law,  his  independence  of  party  prejudices 
and  control,  and  his  determination  to  support  at  the  post 
allotted  to  him  the  administration  of  government  in  all 
constitutional  measures.  I  may,  perhaps,  estimate  too 
highly  the  qualities  of  which  in  that  instance  he  gave  such 
decisive  proof,  and  you  may  not  have  been  made  acquainted 
with  the  power  of  that  influence  to  which  he  then  proved 
himself  inaccessible.  I  need  not  enlarge  upon  it,  and  can 
only  apologize  to  you  for  having  said  so  much,  only  as  it 
will  explain  to  you  the  motives  upon  which  I  should  have 
such  serious  disinclination  to  occupy  a  place,  which  my  heart 
and  my  reason  would  so  perfectly  concur  in  assigning  by 
preference  to  another. 

I  must,  therefore,  intreat  you,  sir,  to  confer  upon  some 
other  person  the  office  as  a  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court,  to 
which  you  have  had  the  goodness  to  appoint  me.  The  im¬ 
possibility  of  my  return  to  the  United  States  in  due  time  to 
assume  its  duties  must  of  itself  forbid  my  acceptance  of  it. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


97 


18 1 1] 

The  other  reasons  which  would  in  any  case  impel  me  to 
decline  it  I  should  have  suppressed,  but  for  the  high  sense  of 
my  personal  obligation  to  you  for  the  nomination,  and  the 
wish  to  be  justified  in  your  opinion  for  renouncing  the  post 
to  which  you  have  judged  me  suitably  qualified.1 

I  shall  therefore  wait  for  your  further  instructions  re¬ 
specting  my  continuance  at  this  court.  It  may  be  proper  for 
me,  however,  to  add  that  the  public  expectation  in  the 
United  States,  and  that  of  the  Emperor  and  his  government 
here,  being  now  fully  prepared  for  my  removal,  and  my  own 
inclinations  and  those  of  my  friends  in  America  being 
equally  strong  to  abridge  as  much  as  possible  the  period  of 
absence  from  my  country,  I  earnestly  solicit  that  the  motive 
of  my  personal  convenience  may  be  set  aside,  whenever  you 
shall  think  my  recall  expedient  on  public  considerations. 
If  the  condition  of  my  family  should  prevent  my  return  home, 
when  the  want  of  my  services  here  has  ceased,  I  had  much 
rather  bear  the  charge  and  inconvenience  to  which  it  might 
subject  me,  than  remain  an  unnecessary  encumbrance  upon 
the  public.  I  shall  at  all  events  remain  here  a  time  sufficient 
to  receive  your  ultimate  determination,  not  only  upon  my 
letters  of  7  January  and  8  February,  but  also  upon  this  one, 
and  I  beg  you  to  be  assured  that  on  my  return  to  the  United 
States,  whenever  you  shall  deem  it  proper,  and  I  shall  find 
it  practicable,  whether  in  public  office  of  any  kind  or  in  re¬ 
tirement,  the  grateful  sense  of  your  kindness  and  the  most 

1  “  Lieut.  Governor  Lincoln  is  appointed  judge  of  the  Supreme  National  Ju¬ 
diciary  in  the  place  of  Judge  Cushing.  The  newspapers  say  he  accepted  only  to 
keep  the  place  warm  for  J.  Q.  Adams,  whenever  he  returns.  Although  I  know 
there  were  many  who  wished  you  might  have  been  here  to  have  filled  it,  and  the 
late  judge  himself  wished  you  to  have  been  his  successor,  I  think  you  have  ex¬ 
pressed  yourself  of  a  different  opinion.”  Abigail  Adams  to  John  Quincy  Adams , 
January  20,  181 1.  Ms. 


9S 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

fervent  wishes  for  the  prosperity  of  your  public  adminis¬ 
tration,  and  the  promotion  of  your  personal  happiness,  will 
be  among  the  sentiments  nearest  to  my  heart.  I  am,  etc. 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  7  June,  1811. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

•  «••••• 

In  the  midst  of  my  dissertation  upon  the  stoic  philosophy 
came  upon  me  the  whole  budget  of  dispatches  and  news¬ 
papers,  brought  by  Mr.  Erving  as  far  as  Paris,  and  by  the 
Russian  consul  in  France  from  that  city.  I  had  been  think¬ 
ing  how  congenial  to  my  own  feelings  and  resolutions  was 
the  following  passage  of  your  letter  of  11  February:  “In 
absolute  private  life,  scorning  all  intrigue,  but  employing 
your  studies  for  the  solid  interest  of  mankind  and  your 
country,  you  may  do  more  real  good  in  my  opinion  than  in 
any  public  station,”  and  had  been  pleasing  myself  that  you 
would  be  gratified  in  finding  that  I  had  already  expressed 
precisely  the  same  sentiments  in  my  letter  to  my  brother 
of  10  April,  when,  to  give  me  another  view  of  the  question, 
comes  a  commission  as  an  Associate  Justice  of  the  Supreme 
Court  of  the  United  States,  and  your  and  my  ever  dear  and 
venerated  mother’s  letters  of  4  March.  When  I  assure  you 
that  in  the  whole  course  of  my  life  I  scarcely  ever  did  a 
responsible  act,  of  which  I  was  proud  or  ashamed,  without 
feeling  my  soul  soothed  or  galled  with  the  reflection  how  it 
would  affect  the  sensibility  of  my  parents,  I  leave  it  to  your 
own  imagination  to  judge  how  all  my  philosophy,  all  my  love 
of  retirement,  all  my  opinions  of  my  superior  usefulness  in 
private  life,  have  been  staggered  by  this  commission  and  these 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


99 


1811] 

letters.  The  commission,  inasmuch  as  it  offered  me  an  honor¬ 
able  station,  and  a  pittance  (a  miserable  one  indeed)  for  the 
maintenance  of  my  family  during  the  remainder  of  my  days, 
was  all  that  my  ambition  could  wish,  or  that  my  estimate  of 
the  value  of  money  could  expect.  As  it  presented  me  the 
occasion  of  returning  creditably  to  my  country,  to  my  friends, 
and  above  all  to  my  parents  and  children,  it  brought  me  the 
most  welcome  of  messages.  But  you  have  long  known  my 
own  sense  of  my  own  unfitness  for  a  seat  in  judicial  tribunals. 
You  did  not,  perhaps,  know,  but  I  had  written  to  my  brother, 
at  a  time  when  I  had  not  a  suspicion  of  this  appointment, 
what  particular  objections  I  had  against  this  office,  arising 
from  a  wish  long  since  settled  in  my  mind  that  it  might  be 
occupied  by  another  person.  I  will  not  say  that  there  was 
little  attraction  to  me  in  a  place,  which  had  already  been 
declined  by  one  man,  and  to  which  another  had  been  nomi¬ 
nated  before  me.  I  never  did,  and  never  will,  suffer  consider¬ 
ations  of  this  nature  to  influence  my  determinations.  But 
to  take  the  seat,  which  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart  I  believe 
due  to  my  friend,  and  for  which  I  am  equally  convinced  that 
my  friend  is  better  fitted  than  myself,  if  my  reluctance  to 
this  must  be  considered  as  fastidious  delicacy,  be  it  so. 
It  is  not  one  of  the  sentiments  for  which  it  will  be  necessary 
for  me  to  apologize  to  you. 

Yet  I  am  deeply  sensible  to  the  personal  kindness,  as  well 
as  to  the  honor,  shown  me  by  the  President  in  the  nomina¬ 
tion,  and  to  the  more  surprising,  though  not  more  unex¬ 
pected,  unanimity  of  the  Senate  in  approving  it.  To  the 
popularity  with  which  you  assure  me  the  appointment  has 
been  received,  and  to  the  wish  manifested  by  several  of  my 
friends,  and  most  especially  by  yourself  and  my  mother,  that 
I  should  avail  myself  of  this  appointment  to  return  home, 
concurring  with  my  own  ardent  inclinations  to  be  once 


IOO 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

more  restored  to  the  bosom  of  my  country,  to  the  pleasure 
and  instruction  of  your  society,  to  the  means  of  superintend¬ 
ing  the  education  of  my  darling  boys,  and  with  the  impulses, 
physical  and  moral,  which  urge  me  to  more  southern  climes, 
and  a  more  frugal  establishment  than  can  import  with  a 
residence  in  this  country,  they  would  have  produced  an  ex¬ 
treme  perplexity  of  mind  and  a  conflict  of  emotions,  under 
which  either  decision  would  have  been  followed  by  an  un¬ 
easiness  and  dissatisfaction  with  myself,  not  very  suitable 
for  a  stoic  philosopher.  From  this  dilemma  the  blessing  of 
Providence  (for  so  I  fervently  pray  that  I  may  ultimately 
have  cause  to  consider  it,)  had,  by  a  simple  and  very  natural 
circumstance  in  the  condition  of  my  family,  graciously 
pleased  to  relieve  me.  ...  In  this  state  of  things  I  cannot 
embark  for  a  voyage  to  America.  To  say  that  no  office  in  the 
Union  could  tempt  me  to  expose  the  lives  of  a  wife  and  infant 
to  the  dangers  inseparable  from  such  a  passage  at  this  time, 
would  but  weakly  express  my  resolution  upon  this  occasion. 
I  am  not  aware  of  any  duty,  which  can  counterbalance  that 
which  commands  me  to  await  the  result  of  this  dispensation 
of  Heaven  here.  In  January  last  I  had  received  permission 
to  return  home,  and  had  some  expectation  of  being  super¬ 
seded  here.  I  then  informed  the  President  that  under  these 
circumstances,  if  my  mission  here  should  be  terminated,  I 
should  remain  here  as  a  private  individual  until  the  next  sum¬ 
mer.  Such  was,  and  such  still  remains,  my  determination. 
It  rests  upon  a  foundation  not  lightly  laid,  and  which  not 
even  this  new  and  extraordinary  incident  has  been  able  to 
shake. 

The  idea  did  for  a  moment  suggest  itself  to  my  considera¬ 
tion  of  stating  the  facts  anew  to  the  President,  and  leaving  it 
at  his  discretion  to  fill  the  place  by  a  new  appointment,  or  to 
leave  it  vacant  until  the  next  summer,  when  I  have  every 


i8ii]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  ioi 

reason  to  hope  I  shall  find  it  practicable  to  go  home.  But 
my  spirit  could  not  brook  the  thought  of  asking,  or  even 
permitting,  that  an  office  thus  .important  should  be  kept 
vacant,  merely  to  suit  my  private  convenience,  and  besides 
the  dictates  of  my  own  principles,  I  had  before  me  your 
example  when  appointed  Chief  Justice  of  Massachusetts. 
I  remembered  that  you  had  declined  the  acceptance  of  that 
office,  to  prevent  it  from  remaining  too  long  unfilled  by  the 
necessity  of  your  attendance  upon  other  duties.  As  a  direc¬ 
tion  for  my  conduct  upon  every  occurrence  involving  public 
principle,  I  know  of  no  human  law  more  unerring  than  your 
example. 

I  have,  therefore,  explicitly  declined  the  acceptance  of 
this  appointment,  and  in  a  letter  to  the  President  of  the 
United  States  have  alleged,  with  as  much  delicacy  as  the 
subject  would  admit,  the  motives  of  my  determination.  It 
has  been  painful  to  me  to  be  brought  to  this  test  of  my 
principles,  and  I  regret  exceedingly  that  a  fourth  nomination 
should  have  become  necessary  for  an  office  to  which,  if  my 
sincerest  wishes  could  have  availed,  there  would  have  been 
only  one.  With  regard  to  my  own  conduct,  as  I  had  not  a 
moment  of  hesitation  upon  its  propriety,  I  am  not  appre¬ 
hensive  that  I  shall  ever  look  back  with  dissatisfaction  upon 
the  course  I  have  taken.  But  I  would  gladly  be  justified 
for  it  in  the  opinion  of  the  President,  to  whom  I  am  indebted 
for  the  nomination,  and  above  all  in  yours  and  in  that  of 
my  dear  mother.  There  is  neither  office,  dignity,  honor  nor 
emolument,  in  the  gift  of  man,  single  or  collective,  upon  this 
spot  of  earth,  which  could  for  a  moment  counterbalance  the 
anguish  that  I  should  feel  in  giving  by  any  voluntary  act  of 
mine  a  serious  pang  to  you.  I  feel,  however,  a  cheerful 
confidence  that  after  fully  weighing  the  difficulties  of  my 
situation,  you  will  approve  the  grounds  upon  which  I  have 


102 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


rested.  I  am  sorry,  very  sorry,  to  disappoint  the  expecta¬ 
tions  of  my  country,  by  withholding  myself  from  that  judg¬ 
ment  seat  where  their  partiality  would  have  placed  me, 
but  how  much  happier  for  me  and  for  them  is  it,  than  it 
would  be  to  disappoint  their  expectations  upon  the  seat 
itself.  .  .  . 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  53.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  9  June,  1811. 

Sir: 

I  had  last  Tuesday  the  4th  instant  an  interview  with  the 
Chancellor  Count  Romanzoff,  in  which  I  mentioned  to  him 
that  from  ideas  which  since  long  residence  here  I  had  formed  of 
the  importance  and  mutual  benefit  of  the  commercial  relations 
between  the  United  States  and  Russia f  from  the  signal  manner 
in  which  Russia  had  distinguished  herself  above  all  the 
other  belligerent  powers  of  Europe  in  her  treatment  of  the 
fair  commerce  and  neutral  rights  of  America,  and  from  a 
wish  to  increase  and  render  still  more  advantageous  the  commerce 
between  the  two  countries ,  the  idea  and  desire  had  occurred  to  me 
of  cementing  still  further  their  amity  by  a  treaty  of  commerce. 
I  had  suggested  to  the  government  of  the  United  States  and  was 
now  authorized  to  propose  the  negotiation  of  such  a  treaty ,  if  it 
should  be  [agreeable]  to  the  government  of  His  Imperial  Majesty . 
I  had  thought  it  most  proper  to  make  to  him ,  the  Count ,  at  first 
this  verbal  communication  instead  of  sending  him  an  official 
note  upon  the  subject.  I  requested  him  to  consider  it  as  con - 
jidentialy  so  that  it  should  at  least  be  made  known  only  where  he 

1  Cypher.  See  also  Adams,  Memoirs ,  June  4,  18 1 1. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


103 


1811] 

thought  it  advisable ,  as  I  had  communicated  the  knowledge  of  it 
to  no  person  whomsoever.  The  Count  answered  me  by  asserting 
his  great  and  long  settled  attachment  to  the  United  States ,  the 
desire  which  he  had  so  many  years  entertained  of  favoring  the 
American  commerce .  It  was  not  only  a  thing  to  which  he  was 
attached  as  sentiment  but  it  had  been  with  him  long  a  maxim  of 
policy.  It  was  the  interest  of  Russia  to  encourage  and  strengthen 
and  multiply  the  commercial  powers  which  might  be  rivals  of 
England  to  form  a  balance  to  her  overbearing  power .  Russia 
herself  had  not  the  advantages  for  it,  she  could  not  be  a  great 
naval  or  maritime  power,  Nature  had  in  a  great  measure  denied 
her  the  means,  she  ought  then  to  support  and  favor  those  who 
had  them.  The  propriety  of  extending  this  spirit  to  the  United 
States  had  become  more  obvious  and  strong  by  the  decay  and  dis¬ 
appearance  of  the  old  commercial  states.  Holland  for  instance, 
how  great  a  commercial  power  she  had  been  even  within  our 
memory.  She  was  now  swallowed  up.  These  sentiments  he 
had  often  expressed  with  a  strong  sense  of  conviction  to  the 
Emperor,  who  had  always  received  them  well  and  appeared 
impressed  with  the  justice  of  them.  He  referred  me  to  Mr. 
Harris  for  the  proof  that  such  had  always  been  his  system,  or 
indeed  to  any  other  person  acquainted  with  the  opinions  that 
he  had  constantly  avowed.  I  observed  that  I  was  fully  sensible 
of  it  myself,  had  often  had  the  most  satisfactory  evidence  of  it, 
and  that  my  government  were  by  no  means  ignorant  of  it. 
He  said  that  he  would  place  before  the  Emperor  the  two  proposi¬ 
tions  which  he  presumed  would  meet  with  no  difficulty  whatso¬ 
ever,  unless  indeed  there  should  be  one  which  he  did  foresee. 
It  was,  that  in  the  violent  and  convulsed  state  of  commerce  and 
of  the  world  at  this  time  he  hardly  conceived  it  possible  to  agree 
upon  anything  that,  if  he  might  be  allowed  the  expression,  had 
common  sense  in  it.  At  any  rate,  however,  this  need  not  prevent 
him  and  me  from  debating  the  subjects  which  might  be  inter - 


104 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[18 1 1 

e sting  to  the  commerce  of  our  countries ,  and  coming  to  an  agree¬ 
ment  if  we  could.  He  would  make  his  report  of  this  conversa¬ 
tion  to  the  Emperor  in  a  few  days  and  would  send  and  ask  me 
to  call  upon  him  again.1 

I  have  informed  you  in  several  of  my  preceding  letters, 
that  the  convention  which  had  been  arranged  between 
Count  Romanzoff  and  the  Portuguese  charge  d’affaires  had 
not  been  definitely  signed,  but  remained  to  be  settled  on  the 
arrival  of  the  new  minister  from  the  Prince  Regent  of 
Portugal,  who  is  still  expected.  The  changes  which  since 
the  opening  of  the  Spring  have  occurred  in  Portugal ,  as  well 
as  in  the  prospects,  if  not  in  the  existing  relations,  between 
France  and  Russia,  have  no  doubt  very  materially  affected 
the  views  of  both  parties  with  respect  to  modifications  in 
their  treaty  of  commerce.  The  total  evacuation  of  Portu¬ 
gal  by  the  French  armies, and  the  prospect  of  their  evacuating 
Spain  at  least  as  far  north  as  the  Ebro,  have  raised  the  prob¬ 
ability  that  the  house  of  Braganza  may  be  restored  to  their 
European  dominions,  and  that  the  ancient  regulations  of 
trade  in  their  treaty  with  Russia  may  again  become  more  con¬ 
formable  to  their  system  of  policy  than  the  new  ones  lately 
proposed  to  be  substituted  for  them.  The  commercial  ar¬ 
rangements  between  the  United  States  and  Russia  cannot  be 
so  much  affected  by  the  change  of  complexion  in  the  political 
state  of  Portugal ,  but  they  must  be  very  materially  influenced  by 
great  changes  in  the  policy  of  Russia ,  whether  in  relation  to 
France  or  to  Britain ,  and  not  a  little  by  the  changes  in  character 
in  the  relative  situation  of  the  United  States  and  of  Britain  to 
each  other.  The  idea  suggested  by  the  Chancellor ,  that  there 
would  in  these  times  be  a  difficulty  in  agreeing  upon  anything 
rational  which  could  form  the  materials  of  a  commercial  treaty , 
is  itself  very  natural ,  and  may  perhaps  have  contributed  to  delay 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


105 


1811] 

the  transmission  to  me  of  the  full  power  which  I  had  requested . 
From  this  circumstance  and  from  the  observations  of  the  Count 
I  am  led  to  the  belief  that  his  views  and  those  of  the  President 
with  regard  to  the  subject  of  concluding  a  treaty  for  the  present 
are  identically  the  same:  that  it  may  be  well  to  compare  ideas 
and  mutually  communicate  projects  for  consideration ,  but  to 
wait  for  more  settled  times  and  a  clearer  political  sky  to  sign 
and  ratify . 

I  have  not  heard  anything  more  from  the  Count  since  this 
conference.  Two  days  after  it 1  the  Emperor  met  with  an  un¬ 
fortunate  accident,  which  has  confined  him  to  his  chamber 
until  this  day,  and  will  probably  confine  him  for  some  days 
longer.  His  horse  fell  under  him,  and  in  the  fall  he  had  one 
of  his  fingers  dislocated  and  received  severe  contusions  on  the 
face  and  on  one  knee.  His  attendance  at  the  Council  of  the 
Empire  will  probably  be  suspended  for  some  days  by  this 
event,  during  which  the  plan  for  a  new  ministerial  organiza¬ 
tion  mentioned  in  my  last  letter  will  also  remain  in  suspense. 
I  have  heard  something  more  of  this  plan,  but  not  enough  to 
give  you  precise  information  of  its  purport.  One  of  its  effects 
may  be,  as  I  have  before  suggested,  to  raise  Count  Romanzoff 
in  rank  and  dignity,  but  to  remove  him  from  the  Depart¬ 
ment  of  Foreign  Affairs.  This  last  event  has  been  long  pre¬ 
paring,  and  for  some  time  has  perhaps  been  as  much  desired 
by  himself  as  by  his  adversaries  and  rivals.  The  points  of 
dissension  between  Russia  and  France  remain  unadjusted. 
The  speech  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  to  his  Council  of  Com¬ 
merce  and  Manufactures  on  the  24th  of  March  undoubtedly 
did  threaten  a  war  with  Russia  unless  she  should  adopt  his 
measures  against  English  trade.  There  are  in  manuscript 
and  even  in  print  various  different  accounts  of  this  speech, 
one  of  which  I  sent  you  with  a  former  number.  As  the  speech 

1  Cypher. 


io6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

was  not  written  it  was  reported  memoriter  by  different 
hearers,  and  by  secret  circulation  in  manuscript  has  doubtless 
gathered  many  various  readings  and  commentaries;  but  of  the 
substantial  foundation  there  is  no  question.  A  much  milder 
tone,  however,  has  since  been  assumed,  and  I  learn  that  the 
last  dispatches  from  Prince  Kurakin  report  many  fair  words 
and  fair  promises.  The  prospect  of  a  war  this  summer 
loses  daily  of  its  probability,  but  there  is  ample  time  for  it 
yet  to  come  within  the  six  months  from  the  24th  of  March. 
In  the  event  of  a  war  Count  Romanzoff  would  certainly  not  retain 
the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs ,  and  as  there  is  no  expecta¬ 
tion  that  this  catastrophe  will  eventually  or  even  long  he  deferred , 
the  Count  is  perhaps  as  willing  to  ascend  from  that  Department 
to  something  high  as  his  enemies  would  be  to  humiliate  him  from 
it  downward.1 

I  learn  that  the  Experiment ,  Captain  Vibberts,  arrived 
yesterday  at  Cronstadt  with  dispatches  for  me  from  your 
Department,  which  I  am  in  hourly  expectation  of  receiving. 
In  the  meantime  I  remain,  very  respectfully,  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 


No.  54.  [James  Monroe] 


Sir: 


St.  Petersburg,  15  June,  1811. 


•  •  •  •  •  •  • 

In  my  conference  with  Count  Romanzoff  on  the  4th  inst. 
since  which  I  have  not  again  heard  from  him,  I  informed 
him  that  I  had  received  a  new  letter  of  leave  for  his  Imperial 
Majesty,  and  the  President  and  Senate  of  the  United  States 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


107 


18 1 1] 

had  been  pleased  to  honor  me  by  an  appointment  to  a  dis¬ 
tinguished  office  in  my  own  country;  but  that  as  circum¬ 
stances  of  a  private  nature  made  it  impossible  for  me  to  re¬ 
turn  to  the  United  States  at  present,  and  would  probably 
continue  to  prevent  me  from  embarking  the  present  year; 
and  as  the  office  was  of  a  nature  which  required  that  it 
should  be  filled  as  soon  as  possible,  I  had  found  myself 
under  the  necessity  of  declining  it,  and  with  respect  to  the 
mission  here  should  wait  for  further  orders  of  the  President. 
I  further  observed  that  I  was  instructed  to  state  the  motives 
to  my  recall  to  be  such  as  did  not  in  the  slightest  degree  im¬ 
pair  the  friendly  sentiments  of  the  President  towards  this 
government,  and  to  add  that  in  case  of  my  return  to  the 
United  States,  it  was  his  intention  to  appoint  without  any 
unnecessary  delay  a  person  to  succeed  me  here. 

With  regard  to  my  own  departure  the  Count  answered  me 
with  his  usual  civility;  but  he  appeared  to  receive  with  pe¬ 
culiar  satisfaction  the  assurance  that  in  the  event  of  my 
return  another  minister  would  be  appointed  in  my  stead. 
He  said  that  he  was  sure  it  would  give  the  Emperor  pleasure, 
as  it  was  entirely  conformable  to  the  friendly  sentiments 
which  he  expected  on  the  part  of  the  United  States.  I  have 
more  than  once  had  occasion  to  remark  the  solicitude  of 
Count  Romanzoff,  and  of  the  Emperor  himself  on  this  sub¬ 
ject.  As  it  existed  long  before  the  establishment  of  the  re¬ 
ciprocal  missions  now  established,  it  is  well  known  to  the 
President.  The  point  of  view  in  which  the  United  States 
stand  in  the  political  system  of  Russia,  according  to  the 
principles  of  Count  Romanzoff,  which  in  this  respect  are 
certainly  those  of  the  Emperor,  he  has  very  often  and  ex¬ 
plicitly  avowed  to  me,  and  has  reiterated  in  this  conversa¬ 
tion  as  you  will  perceive  by  my  last  letter.  And  this  alone 
might  account  for  the  disposition  so  steadily  and  earnestly 


io8 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


manifested  for  a  permanent  diplomatic  intercourse  between 
the  two  governments.  When  in  the  month  of  January  last 
I  received  permission  to  return  to  the  United  States,  it  was 
impossible  to  counteract  entirely  the  impression  which  the 
Emperor  seems  to  have  received,  that  the  American  govern¬ 
ment  proposed  to  keep  here  in  future  only  a  charge  d’af¬ 
faires.  It  was  probably  from  that  idea  that  a  commission 
was  sent  to  Count  Pahlen  for  the  court  of  Brazil,  with  an 
optional  power  to  go  there  or  to  remain  in  the  United  States, 
as  he  should  judge  proper,  and  without  positively  terminat¬ 
ing  his  mission  with  you.  I  presume  that  a  Russian  minister 
will  be  kept  in  the  United  States  as  long  as  an  American 
minister  is  kept  here,  and  although  Count  Pahlen’s  answer 
to  the  proposition  made  to  him  of  going  to  Brazil  cannot 
yet  have  been  received,  I  have  already  heard  intimations 
that  he  probably  will  not  go,  and  the  report  has  even  been 
circulated  that  he  has  declined  the  appointment. 

The  Count  enquired  with  some  earnestness  what  was  the 
state  of  our  affairs  with  England.  I  told  him  that  it  would 
depend  altogether  upon  England  herself.  That  my  letters 
from  America  did  not  appear  to  indicate  an  expectation  of 
war  there,  but  that  the  late  accounts  from  England  seemed 
to  manifest  hostile  dispositions.  He  said  he  thought  that  very 
probably  England  would  decide  according  to  the  ministerial 
opinion  of  what  was  most  for  her  own  interest ,  and  that  would 
now ,  more  than  ever ,  be  the  adherence  to  their  system .  Their 
recent  successes  give  great  strength  to  the  ministry  and  repress 
the  opposition  far  more  than  had  been  seen  for  many  years  in 
that  country .  He  must  say  that  for  many  years  England  had 
not  exhibited  such  talents  as  those  by  which  she  was  now  gov¬ 
erned .  The  two  brothers  Wellesley  had  certainly  proved  them¬ 
selves  extraordinary  men ,  not  only  by  the  greatness  of  their 
plan ,  which  they  had  pursued ,  and  their  perseverance  in  carry- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


109 


1811] 

ing  it  through ,  but  as  to  the  success  with  which  it  was  likely  to 
be  attended.  The  catastrophe  {denouement)  in  Spain  and  Por¬ 
tugal  was  apparently  not  distant ,  and  it  promised  a  great  result, 
u,  to  be  sure ,  it  was  only  to  begin  over  again ,  they  would  not 
appear  to  have  done  so  much;  but  if  the  issue  should  be  so  im¬ 
portant  as  now  appeared  probable ,  it  would  certainly  be  much 
to  their  credit.  They  will  also  be  much  elated  by  their  successes , 
and  he  did  not  consider  them  as  men  who  would  be  restrained 
by  principle  from  any  enterprise  that  they  might  judge  to  be  ex¬ 
pedient.  I  told  him  I  did  not  rely  at  all  upon  the  expectation 
that  principle  would  restrain  them  if  Spain  and  Portugal  should 
be  entirely  evacuated  by  the  French.  The  people  there  would , 
as  much  as  ever ,  want  supplies  of  grain  and  provisions ,  and  the 
English  could  hardly  resolve  to  intercept  them,  as  they  could  not 
do  it  without  it  famishing  their  allies  and  their  own  armies. 
The  Count  asked  whether  they  could  not  [obtain  some]  of  the 
same  supplies  from  other  quarters,  [and  procure]  part  of  their 
supplies  from  thence;  but  [/  replied]  it  did  not  suffice,  and  if  they 
lost  the  American  market  there  was  none  that  could  take  its 
place  unless  it  were  that  of  the  Baltic  from  Dantzig  to  Riga,  and 
that  I  believed  had  been  to  a  certain  extent  always  open  to  them.1 
He  said  that  supplies  from  thence  had  been  small  indeed;  at 
least  there  had  scarcely  been  any  exportation  from  thence.  That, 
I  replied,  was  at  least  their  only  resource,  and  if  they  opened  that, 
it  could  only  be  by  coming  to  terms  of  accommodation  with 
Russia;  and  if  they  made  peace  with  Russia,  in  the  name  of 
heaven  what  motive  could  they  have  for  quarrelling  with  America? 
The  Count  smiled,  and  said,  that  it  reminded  him  of  something 
that  had  been  said  by  another  person,  and  which,  therefore,  he 
could  not  give  as  his  own.  It  was,  that  there  were  sea  mad-men 
as  well  as  land  mad-men  {des  enrages  de  mer  comme  de  terre), 

1  “There  is  evidently  a  mistake  in  the  figures  of  this  sentence.”  Note  by  Brent 
of  the  Department  of  State. 


no 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

and  the  English  were  the  sea  mad-men,  The  Count  did  not  tell 
me  who  it  was  that  had  said  this,  nor  who  were  intended  by  the 
land  mad-men;  but  you  will  have  no  difficulty  in  divining  my 
conjecture,  both  of  the  speaker  and  the  object  of  the  speech ,l 

Since  the  day  of  this  conversation  the  arrival  at  Cron- 
stadt  of  many  American  vessels,  some  of  them  directly  from 
the  United  States,  has  ascertained  that  as  yet  the  British 
government  has  issued  no  orders  to  intercept  the  American 
navigation  in  the  Baltic.  They  have  not  even  blockaded  the 
passage  of  the  Sound  or  of  the  port  of  Elsineur.  It  is  said 
some  of  their  commanders  have  refused  to  American  vessels 
the  protection  of  their  convoy,  which,  if  they  would  not 
stop  their  passage,  is  the  greatest  favor  we  could  ask  of  them. 

The  anxiety  for  a  peace  with  Turkey  increases  here,  and 
new  efforts  and  sacrifices  will  be  made  to  obtain  it.  The 
prohibition  upon  the  exportation  of  grain  from  the  ports  of 
the  Black  Sea  to  Constantinople  is  already  removed.  This 
has  been  owing  to  the  strong  representations  of  the  Duke  de 
Richelieu,  the  governor  of  Odessa,  who  is  now  here.  He  is 
very  desirous  that  in  the  treaty  of  peace  between  Russia  and  the 
Porte  a  formal  stipulation  should  be  introduced  for  the  admis¬ 
sion  of  American  vessels  to  navigate  the  Black  Sea .  I  had  the 
honor  of  writing  to  you  on  the  30th  March,  1810;  but  as  it  is  not 
noticed  in  any  of  your  letters  to  me  since  that  time,  I  do  not  feel 
myself  authorized  to  take  any  official  steps  in  the  business .  .  .  . 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


in 


1811] 


TO  GEORGE  WILLIAM  ERVING 


Dear  Sir: 


St.  Petersburg,  6/i8  June,  1811. 


The  retirement  of  Mr.  Smith  from  the  Department  of 
State  appears  to  be  the  natural  issue  of  a  certain  train  of 
incidents,  which  commenced  with  the  present  administra¬ 
tion,  and  to  which  I  think  you  allude  in  accounting  for  the 
unexpected  support  given  to  Mr.  Barlow’s  nomination.  I 
know  not  of  anything  that  I  have  heard  for  many  months 
from  America  which  has  given  me  so  much  pleasure,  as  the 
intimation  that  Mr.  Lloyd,1  and  such  men  as  he,  are  sensible 
of  the  necessity  of  supporting  the  President .  For  if  it  be  so 
(of  which  your  assurance  leaves  me  in  doubt),  and  those 
gentlemen  will  act  up  to  their  convictions,  I  have  no  doubt 
but  our  political  bark  will  yet  weather  the  tempest.  Too 
many  of  our  politicians  of  all  parties  have  very  weak  and 
unsettled  as  well  as  utterly  erroneous  principles  on  this  very 
point,  and  for  my  own  part  I  believe  there  is  greater  danger 
to  be  apprehended  from  the  former  than  from  the  latter. 

The  English  newspapers  suppose  that  the  change  in  the 
office  of  state  will  have  a  tendency  to  the  preservation  of 
peace  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain.  Since 
their  late  successes  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  the  restoration 
of  the  King’s  health,  at  least  to  a  degree  sufficient  to  secure 
the  present  ministry  in  their  seats  and  their  prospects  in  the 
politics  of  the  north ,  they  have,  as  was  naturally  to  be  ex¬ 
pected,  redoubled  their  insolence.  They  are  plunging  into 
the  deepest  desperation  of  paper  money,  and,  like  dropsical 

1  James  Lloyd,  a  United  States  Senator  from  Massachusetts. 


1 12 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

patients  at  the  moment  when  the  disease  is  past  all  cure, 
are  beginning  to  discuss  with  themselves  whether  it  is  or  is 
not  dangerous.  I  have  read  the  debates  in  Parliament  on 
the  Bullion  Reports.  Mr.  Perceval  has  not  yet  ascertained 
whether  the  bank  paper  is  or  is  not  depreciated .  Mr.  Canning 
turns  periods  to  prove  how  easily  Great  Britain  will  here¬ 
after  drain  off  this  flood  of  paper.  But  both  admit  that  the 
war  must  be  continued,  and  that  there  is  no  money  but 
paper  in  quantity  adequate  to  carry  it  on.  Let  these  princi¬ 
ples  operate  to  their  full  extent,  and  we  shall  need  no  war 
to  redeem  our  rights  or  revenge  our  wrongs.  I  cannot  aban¬ 
don  the  hope  that  we  shall  escape  this  war. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  55.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  22  June,  1811. 

Sir: 

The  ship  Horace ,  Captain  Thomas  Leach,  belonging  to 
Mr.  William  Gray  of  Boston,  arrived  at  Cronstadt  last 
Sunday  from  Boston.  She  had  been  boarded  off  Christian- 
sand  by  the  British  armed  vessel  Plover ,  Captain  Campbell, 
who  not  only  broke  open  and  read  letters  directed  to  me 
which  had  been  entrusted  to  Captain  Leach,  but  detained 
him  five  hours  on  board  the  Plover ,  took  from  him  two  of 
his  men,  named  Francis  Flood  and  Samuel  Patterson,  both 
having  protections,  and  the  former  of  whom  Captain  Leach 
has  no  doubt  of  being  a  native  American,  and  put  on  board 
the  Horace  two  of  his  own  sick  men,  named  Myrick  Winslow 
and  John  Gray,  both  British  subjects,  unserviceable  as  sea- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


18 1 1] 


113 


men,  and  fit  only  for  a  hospital  of  invalids.  Captain  Leach 
has  made  his  protest,  conformably  to  the  laws  of  the  United 
States,  but  I  think  proper  to  mention  this  transaction  to 
you,  as  presenting  a  new  feature  in  the  conduct  of  a  Brit¬ 
ish  naval  commander — the  abandonment  of  his  own  sick 
people  to  the  mercy  and  humanity  of  a  stranger,  while  he 
forced  that  stranger  to  take  them.  He  also  knew  that  the 
Horace  was  bound  to  a  country  at  war  with  Great  Britain, 
where  these  invalid  British  seamen  would  be  liable  to  be 
held  as  prisoners,  and  where  Captain  Leach  could  not  pro¬ 
tect  them.  I  shall  inform  Mr.  Smith,  the  charge  d’affaires 
of  the  United  States  at  London,  of  these  circumstances,  and 
whatever  the  principles  of  the  British  Government  may  be 
with  regard  to  the  rest  of  Captain  Campbell’s  procedure,  I 
presume  his  treatment  of  his  own  men  will  be  thought  de¬ 
serving  of  their  attention.1 

The  Horace’s  destination  was  Stettin  or  Dantzig,  but  from 
the  information  which  Captain  Leach  received  in  passing 
the  Sound  of  the  danger  to  which  any  American  vessel 
would  be  exposed  in  approaching  either  of  those,  or  any  other 
Prussian  port,  he  was  in  a  manner  compelled  to  come  im¬ 
mediately  to  this  country;  and  unfortunately  found  upon 
his  arrival  that  the  principal  part  of  his  cargo  consists  of 

1  ctI  omitted  to  inform  you  in  my  last  that  Lord  Castlereagh  on  the  5th  of  March, 
immediately  after  his  coming  into  office,  wrote  me  an  answer  to  a  note  addressed 
by  my  predecessor  Mr.  Smith  to  Lord  Wellesley,  relative  to  the  conduct  of  the 
commanding  officer  of  the  British  ship  Plover  towards  the  American  ship  Horace. 
He  states  as  the  result  of  an  examination  instituted  in  this  matter  by  the  Lords 
Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty,  that  no  letters,  public  or  private,  were  broken 
open,  and  that  no  complaint  was  made  by  the  master  of  the  Horace.  As  to  the 
seamen,  Flood  and  Patterson,  they  were  supposed  at  the  time  to  be  Englishmen, 
but  it  appearing  on  examination  that  they  are  American  citizens,  an  order  has  been 
given  for  their  discharge.  Lord  Castlereagh  adds  that  he  has  no  doubt  that  this 
explanation  of  the  conduct  of  Capt.  Campbell  will  appear  perfectly  satisfactory!” 
Jonathan  Russell  to  John  Quincy  Adams ,  April  7,  1812.  Ms. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


114 


[1811 


articles,  the  importation  of  which  is  prohibited  and  which 
according  to  the  letter  of  the  commercial  ordinance  now  in 
force,  are  to  be  destroyed  at  the  port  where  they  arrive.1 
As  there  could  be  no  possible  intention  of  fraud  or  of  an  at¬ 
tempt  at  a  contraband  trade  in  this  case,  I  have  written  a 
note  to  Count  Romanzoff  stating  the  circumstances,  and 
expressing  my  hope  that  the  permission  of  re-exporting  this 
merchandise  would  be  granted.  There  is  another  vessel, 
the  Superior ,  belonging  to  Messrs.  Pratt  and  Kintzing  of 
Philadelphia,  under  circumstances  nearly  similar,  and  which 
I  have  included  in  the  application.  I  have  also  seen  this 
morning  the  Minister  of  Finance,  Mr.  Gourieff,  who  is  now 
at  the  head  of  the  Commercial  Department  and  have  urged 
to  him  the  equitable  grounds  for  exempting  these  cases  from 
the  literal  rigor  of  the  ordinance.  He  assured  me  that  he 
should  this  day  make  his  report  to  the  Emperor,  upon  whose 
personal  decision  it  must  depend,  and  that  it  would  be  in 
favor  of  a  permission  for  re-exportation. 

In  some  general  conversation  which ,  on  the  occasion  of  this 
interview ,  Mr.  Gourieff  introduced ,  he  enquired  with  some  earn¬ 
estness,  what  was  the  state  of  the  political  relations  between  the 
United  States  and  Great  Britain.  You  will  have  perceived  by 
several  of  my  late  despatches  how  anxious  an  interest  the  Russian 
government  feels  on  this  point ,  and  how  strong  their  desire  is, 
that  the  misunderstanding  between  us  and  England  may  not 
kindle  into  a  war.  It  is  easily  to  be  seen  how  they  think  it 
would  affect  their  interests,  and  why  they  are  so  averse  to  the  re¬ 
sult.  At  the  same  time  I  must  repeat,  that  neither  the  Emperor 
nor  any  of  his  ministers  has  ever  expressed  officially  to  me  ( nor 
any  of  the  ministers  with  whom  I  have  had  official  communica¬ 
tions,  unofficially)  any  sentiment  on  the  subject,  other  than  a 

1  Skins,  which  were  liable  to  confiscation,  and  cotton,  with  which  the  market  was 
glutted. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


18 1 1] 


“5 


desire  to  know  the  state  of  things  as  they  are.  I  told  Mr.  Gourieff 
that  so  long  as  the  present  English  ministry  remained  in  power , 
their  principles  on  the  subjects  of  difference  between  the  two 
nations  left  me  no  hope  or  expectation  that  we  should  ever  be  upon 
terms  of  harmony  with  them ,  but  that  I  hoped  and  believed  it 
would  not  come  to  a  state  of  absolute  war.  He  then  spoke  to  me 
of  the  English  ministry  in  terms  so  similar  to  those  lately  used 
to  me  by  Count  Romanzoff ,  and  which  were  reported  in  my 
last  number ,  that  I  am  strongly  impressed  with  the  belief  that 
the  opinion  itself  came  from  a  higher  source ,  and  had  been  ex¬ 
pressed  to  both  the  ministers  from  a  source ,  where  opinion  was 
authority.  Indeed  this  opinion  is  at  present  by  no  means  singu¬ 
lar.  The  successful  defense  of  Portugal ,  the  prospect  of  the  ex¬ 
pulsion  of  the  French  from  Spain ,  the  fall  of  the  Isle  of  France , 
and  the  attitude  already  assumed  between  Russia  and  France , 
have  gathered  a  lustre  round  the  Wellesley  administration ,  which 
it  requires  duration  to  render  genuine ,  but  which  is  already 
quite  sufficient  to  dazzle.  As  this  power  of  opinion  rises  in  favor 
of  them ,  it  falls  in  regard  to  France ,  and  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
will  ere  long  find  it  necessary  by  some  new  achievement ,  of  con¬ 
quest  or  of  terror ,  to  redeem  that  irresistible  influence ,  which , 
since  his  peace  with  Austria ,  has  been  insensibly  slipping  from 
his  hands.  This  is  the  very  cause  which  leads  me  most  to  appre¬ 
hend  that  he  will  attempt  to  gather  his  new  laurels  in  the  north . 
There  are  many  indications  that  he  will  soon  abandon  the  con¬ 
test  for  Portugal ,  and  perhaps  the  unconquered  part  of  Spain , 
and  give  his  forces  another  direction.1 

I  have  received  a  letter  from  Captain  Snow  of  the  ship 
Hercules ,  taken  and  carried  into  Dantzig  by  a  privateer  under 
French  colors,  and  he  has  sent  me  a  copy  of  his  protest.  He 
complains  that  the  owners  of  the  privateer,  immediately  on 
the  arrival  of  the  Hercules  at  Dantzig  had  her  discharged, 

1  Cypher. 


n6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

turned  her  officers  and  crew  ashore,  allowed  him  to  have 
nothing  to  do  with  ship  or  cargo,  and  after  twenty-five  days 
had  not  sent  his  papers  to  Paris.  Notwithstanding  an  appli¬ 
cation  which  he  made  to  the  French  consul,  they  refused  to 
give  any  support  to  his  crew,  who  at  the  same  time  were  not 
allowed  to  leave  the  place.  Three  other  American  vessels 
with  their  people  and  their  cargoes  are  in  the  same  situation. 
It  is  to  be  hoped  they  will  speedily  obtain  relief  from  the 
orders  of  the  French  government.  They  ought  to  obtain 
immediate  restoration  of  their  vessels  and  cargoes.  But  I 
am  afraid  that  it  is  already  beyond  the  power  of  the  French 
government  itself. 

The  project  mentioned  in  some  of  my  late  letters ,  as  being 
under  discussion  before  the  Imperial  Council ,  is  still  discussed . 
Their  meetings  are  not  public ,  but  their  secrets  are  kept  like 
those  of  all  deliberate  assemblies .  Their  plan  is  comprehensive , 
and  would  introduce  an  entire  new  organization  of  the  govern¬ 
ment.  Some  parts  of  it  have  already  been  decided  upon ,  and 
adopted  but  the  Chancellor  is  averse  to  the  honors  which  would 
exalt  him  out  of  his  Department  of  Foreign  A  fairs.  I  think 
this  part  of  the  plan  will  not  succeed  at  present .  There  is  nothing 
yet  from  France  but  fair  words. 

A  peace  with  Turkey  is  expected.  To  obtain  it ,  the  rumor  is , 
that  Russia  has  proposed  to  leave  the  two  provinces  which  she 
has  already  incorporated  with  the  Empire  to  be  [one-half  line 
pf  cipher  not  deciphered]  independent  of  her  and  of  the  Porte. 
It  is  supposed  that  this  will  be  accepted ,  of  which  I  doubt.  I 
have  the  honor  to  be,  etc. 


18 1 1] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


117 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  25  June,  1811. 


My  Dear  Sir: 

The  fortieth  American  vessel  which  has  arrived  at  Cron- 
stadt  since  the  opening  of  this  year’s  navigation,  was  the 
John  Adams ,  Captain  Thomas  Downing,  from  Savannah. 
She  arrived  last  Saturday  the  22nd  instant,  and  the  first 
which  sailed  for  America  was  the  Laurel ,  Captain  Burnham, 
belonging  to  Mr.  Gray,  by  whom  I  sent  the  letter  to  you  of 
which  the  inclosed  is  a  press  copy.  She  sailed  the  10th 
instant,  and  I  hope  will  arrive  in  season  to  save  your  eyes 
the  trouble  of  tracing  the  characters  of  the  copy.  For  seven 
months  of  the  year  my  great  embarrassment  was  to  devise 
means  of  sending  my  letters  for  America  to  places  from  which 
they  could  be  dispatched,  but  now  the  opportunities  of 
direct  conveyance  are  so  numerous,  that  it  is  impossible  to 
write  by  them  all.  Hitherto  the  American  trade  to  this 
country  has  been  an  advantageous  one  to  those  of  our 
merchants  who  have  adventured  in  it.  But  this  year  they 
have  already  so  completely  glutted  the  market  here,  and  are 
continually  pouring  in  such  profuse  additional  supplies,  that 
most  of  them  will  find  it  altogether  unprofitable,  if  not  rui¬ 
nous  speculation.  Indeed  there  are  numbers  of  those  daily 
arriving  which  were  not  destined  for  this  country,  but  which 
have  been  compelled  to  come  as  to  the  only  place  where  they 
could  obtain  admission.  They  continue  to  be  received  with 
every  encouragement  on  the  part  of  the  government,  and  with 
a  degree  of  favor  enjoyed  by  no  other  nation.  The  general 
principle  of  this  favor  is  to  be  found  in  the  circumstances 
which  at  this  moment  render  the  American  trade  of  very 


1 1 8  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1811 

high  unusual  importance  to  the  interests  of  Russia  herself. 
Particular  instances  result  from  the  personal  dispositions  of 
the  Emperor  Alexander,  to  whose  special  orders  I  have  been 
often  indebted,  when  they  were  not  to  be  obtained  from 
any  of  his  ministers.  On  this  subject,  however,  it  becomes 
me  to  speak  with  reserve,  and  especially  to  request  that 
no  more  extracts  from  my  letters  may  be  published  in  the 
newspapers.  In  those  which  I  wrote  you  and  my  mother 
and  brother  the  last  autumn,  I  felt  myself  called  to  explain 
to  you  the  origin  and  source  of  the  charges  against  me  which 
had  appeared  first  in  the  London  prints,  and  afterwards 
copied  in  the  federal  papers  in  America — that  I  was  meddling 
here  for  the  exclusion  of  American  vessels.  The  impudence 
as  well  as  the  falsehood  of  this  accusation  provoked  me  in 
my  letter  to  my  mother,  to  lay  perhaps  too  much  stress 
upon  the  success  of  my  own  exertions  here  in  favor  of  the 
American  commerce.  When  it  came  back  here  in  the  news¬ 
papers,  although  there  was  nothing  in  it  but  was  strictly 
true,  and  very  little  but  was  known  to  be  so  by  numbers  of 
people  in  this  city,  yet  I  confess  to  you  my  own  letter  had 
to  my  own  judgment  an  air  of  vainglorious  boasting  which 
mortified  me,  and  of  which  I  had  not  been  at  all  conscious 
when  writing  it  in  confidence  to  one  of  the  dearest  of  my 
friends.  I  know  very  well  that  the  motive  for  the  publication 
was  affection  for  me,  and  an  earnest  wish  to  make  my  justi¬ 
fication  as  public  as  had  been  the  assertion;  but  when  once 
justified  to  my  friends,  I  was  willing  to  bear  an  unfounded 
imputation  in  public  rather  than  to  incur  that  of  blazoning 
my  own  shield.  There  were,  however,  other  considerations 
far  more  important  than  any  personal  concerns  of  mine 
which  warn  me  not  to  permit  the  publication  of  my  letters. 
My  idea  may  perhaps  be  best  illustrated  by  the  fact  I  shall 
now  mention.  The  extract  of  my  letter  which  was  first  pub- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


iSi  i] 


119 


lished  in  the  Palladium  has  been  sent  and  particularly  pointed 
out  to  the  government  here  by  Mr.  Daschkoff,  with  some 
observations  of  his  own.  It  has,  therefore,  excited  the  at¬ 
tention  of  the  Emperor  as  well  as  of  his  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs.  I  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  it  has  affected  me 
disadvantageously  in  their  minds,  but  there  may  be  facts 
stated  there,  which  they  as  well  as  I  know  to  be  true,  but 
which  they  are  not  pleased  to  see  publicly  stated  under 
the  authority  of  my  name.  There  are  enemies  and  allies  and 
subjects ,  whose  interests  and  passions  and  politics  are  deeply 
involved  in  the  subjects  touched  upon  in  that  extract.  The 
human  body  is  sometimes  in  such  a  state  of  nervous  irrita¬ 
bility,  that  the  slightest  whisper  is  sufficient  to  throw  it 
into  a  convulsion.  The  body  politic  of  the  civilized  world 
is  now  in  almost  as  diseased  a  state.  If  I  were  to  write 
letters  for  the  express  purpose  of  having  them  published  in 
America,  I  could  not  pen  a  line  of  them  without  calculating 
its  probable  operation  in  France,  in  England,  and  in  Russia, 
as  well  as  upon  the  public  opinion  in  America.  Besides 
the  restraint  under  which  everything  thus  composed  must 
be  produced,  there  are  such  great,  sudden  and  violent 
changes  in  the  complicated  machine  of  European  and  Ameri¬ 
can  politics,  that  I  doubt  whether  it  would  be  possible  to 
make  up  for  publication  anything  which,  in  the  interval 
between  the  time  of  writing  and  that  of  producing  its  effects, 
might  not  entirely  lose  its  beneficial  operation,  and  turn  from 
an  antidote  into  a  bane.  The  favor  extended  to  the  Ameri¬ 
can  commerce  in  Russia  since  my  arrival  here  is,  I  believe, 
now  well  known  in  every  part  of  Europe  and  of  the  United 
States.  Of  the  share  of  credit  which  I  might  claim  in  ob¬ 
taining  it  I  am  not  a  competent  judge,  and  however  I  may 
be  tempted  to  overrate  it,  I  have  at  least  no  pretension  to 
any  other  merit  than  that  of  having  done  my  duty.  The 


120 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ii 


course  of  events,  or  rather  as  I  ought  to  consider  it,  the  smile 
of  Providence,  has  propitiated  my  endeavors,  and  to  Provi¬ 
dence  I  hope  I  am  duly  grateful  for  it.  But  I  am  and  have 
been  fully  aware  that  this  favorable  state  of  things  is  liable 
to  change,  and  that  events  might  occur  from  day  to  day 
as  inauspicious  to  the  success  of  any  exertions  in  my  power 
as  hitherto  they  have  been  promotive  to  it.  Above  all  I 
have  been  convinced,  that  for  what  I  could  attribute  only 
to  the  personal  kindness  and  good  will  of  the  sovereign,  the 
most  useful  gratitude  and  that  which  would  be  most  pleasing 
to  him  would  be,  to  conceal  rather  than  to  ostentatiously 
divulge  his  favor.  And  one  of  the  reasons  which  occasions 
my  regret  that  I  cannot  now  return  home  is,  that  there  are 
changes  here  to  which  I  must  look  forward  as  more  than 
probable,  and  under  which  the  motives  for  favoring  America 
will  be  far  less  urgent  than  they  have  been  hitherto. 

Your  disposition  to  draw  from  everything  that  you  read, 
whether  poetry,  romance  or  history,  speculations  upon  gov¬ 
ernment,  with  your  own  description  of  this  state  of  mind, 
delighted  me  exceedingly;  not  only  as  I  could  see  in  it  the 
likeness  of  the  picture,  but  as  it  struck  me  with  the  accuracy 
of  self  observation  in  the  painter.  I  rejoice  that  meditation 
upon  government,  as  resulting  from  and  combined  with 
the  nature  of  man,  has  been  throughout  your  life  the  most 
strongly  marked  feature  in  your  character,  because  I  am 
convinced  that  your  country  has  already  derived  great 
benefit  from  this  cause  and  its  effects,  and  because  I  am 
equally  confident  that  posterity  will  derive  still  more  ad¬ 
vantage  from  them.  Though  you  will  expect  no  thanks  from 
your  country,  perhaps  none  from  posterity,  for  any  good 
they  may  enjoy  in  consequence  of  your  labors,  it  is  my 
deliberate  opinion  that  this  very  propensity  of  your  mind  is 
the  principal  cause,  if  not  the  exclusive  one,  of  the  balance 


i8ii] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


121 


established  as  the  great  and  fundamental  principle  of  the 
American  Constitution.  Other  men  may  claim  details,  many 
of  them  very  ill  suited  to  the  system.  Some  are  useful, 
some  injurious  and  some  absurd,  but  the  balance  is  yours 
and  yours  alone.  How  long  it  will  last  I  shall  not  undertake 
to  say;  but  there  it  is  in  the  general  Constitution,  and  in 
most  of  the  particular  ones.  Let  the  powers  of  earth  and 
the  other  place  be  conjured  as  they  have  been  against  it, 
they  can  devise  nothing  to  take  the  place  of  this  balance 
without  falling  into  anarchy  or  despotism.  In  your  own 
country  mankind  have,  therefore,  to  a  certain  extent  and  to 
a  very  great  extent,  listened  to  you  and  to  nature.  So  far 
as  they  have  listened  to  you,  their  systems  of  government 
have  hitherto  proved  highly  prosperous.  But  whatever 
our  future  history  is  destined  to  be,  the  principle  of  the  bal¬ 
ance  is  now  so  deeply  rooted  in  our  institutions,  that  it  can 
no  more  be  eradicated  from  them  than  your  agency  in  in¬ 
troducing  it  can  be  contested. 

You  have  in  one  or  two  of  your  letters  reported  to  me  the 
opinion  of  certain  of  your  correspondents  upon  the  review 
of  Ames,  not  without  a  little  friendly  sarcasm  upon  my  dis¬ 
trust  of  the  talents  of  Americans  at  panegyric.  I  do  not 
dislike  praise,  but  I  am  certainly  much  more  covetous  of 
approbation.  Racine,  the  poet,  once  said  that  all  the  praise 
he  had  ever  received  had  not  given  him  so  much  pleasure  as 
any  one  instance  of  censure  however  slight,  however  unjust, 
and  however  contemptible,  had  given  him  pain.  My  feelings 
are  not  tuned  to  such  exquisite  sensibility  as  those  of  Racine, 
but  censure  gives  me  more  pain  than  any  applause  but  yours 
and  my  mother’s  can  give  me  of  enjoyment.  It  is  much 
sweeter  to  my  soul  to  see  my  friends,  my  country,  and  even 
my  enemies,  made  wiser,  better  or  happier  by  any  act  of 
mine,  than  it  would  be  to  hear  the  loudest  concert  of  ap- 


122 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i  8 1 1 

plause  that  the  united  voices  of  the  whole  human  race  could 
produce.  There  is  so  much  of  this  thing  called  praise  which 
springs  from  friendship,  from  prejudice,  from  party  spirit, 
from  flattery,  from  interest,  and  even  from  the  bad  passions, 
that  I  consider  very  little  of  it  as  genuine,  and  set  but  a  low 
value  upon  it.  I  value  your  applause,  because  I  consider  it 
as  evidence  of  a  duty,  one  of  the  greatest  duties  discharged. 
•  •••••• 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  56.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  29  June,  1811. 

Sir: 

On  Monday  last  I  received  a  note  from  Mr.  Gourieff,  the 
Minister  of  the  Finances,  informing  me  that  in  consequence 
of  my  conversation  with  him  (Mr.  Gourieff)  the  preceding 
Saturday,  which  I  mentioned  to  you  in  my  letter  of  that  day, 
his  Majesty  the  Emperor  had  been  pleased  to  order  that 
permission  for  the  re-exportation  by  sea  should  be  granted  for 
the  prohibited  articles  which  had  been  brought  by  the  two 
ships  Horace  and  Superior ,  and  that  this  re-exportation 
might  be  either  in  the  same  vessels,  or  in  any  others  at  the 
option  of  the  parties  interested. 

The  Ellen  Maria ,  Captain  Adams,  had  sailed  in  April, 
1810,  from  Lisbon  for  Riga.  She  was  taken  by  a  Danish 
privateer  and  detained  nearly  twelve  months,  before  her 
final  acquittal  in  the  prize  courts  of  Denmark.  She  then 
completed  her  voyage,  although  an  ordinance  of  May,  1810, 
confirmed  by  the  commercial  regulations  of  the  present  year 
prohibited  the  entry  of  vessels  in  Russia,  from  the  European 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


123 


18 1 1] 

ports  of  Portugal.  But  all  the  vessels  which  had  sailed  from 
Lisbon  before  notice  of  the  prohibition,  and  which  had  ar¬ 
rived  in  the  course  of  the  last  year,  had  been  admitted.  On 
her  arrival  at  Riga,  the  Ellen  Maria  was  denied  admission. 
Captain  Adams  wrote  me  a  letter,  and  I  wrote  a  note  to 
Count  Romanzoff,  claiming  in  favor  of  this  vessel  the  appli¬ 
cation  of  the  principle  upon  which  those  that  arrived  last 
year  had  been  admitted.  Mr.  Gourieff  informed  me  that  he 
had  dispatched  his  orders  to  Riga  to  that  effect. 

In  my  letter  of  26  March,  number  43,  I  mentioned  the 
case  of  the  Eliza ,  a  vessel  which  had  arrived  last  year 
from  the  Island  of  Teneriffe  at  Archangel,  and  a  part  of 
whose  cargo  had  been  condemned  for  a  supposed  irregularity 
of  her  papers.  This  part  of  the  sentence  is  now  reversed  by 
a  decision  of  the  Imperial  Council,  and  the  wines  are  to  be 
restored  on  the  production  of  the  regular  documents. 

Several  vessels  which  on  their  passage  from  the  United 
States  have  been  taken,  or  driven  by  stress  of  weather  into 
English  ports,  where  some  of  them  had  been  detained  the 
whole  winter,  have  also  by  special  permission  been  admitted. 
Upwards  of  forty  American  vessels  with  cargoes  have  ar¬ 
rived  already  at  Cronstadt,  and  a  proportionable  number  at 
Riga  and  at  Archangel.  American  vessels  are,  with  very 
few  exceptions,  the  only  ones  that  arrive  loaded.  In  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  seizures  and  confiscations  of  vessels  which 
come  here,  and  to  Swedish  and  Prussian  ports  last  year, 
with  licenses ,  it  has  been  found  impossible  this  year  to  effect 
insurance  upon  such  adventures  in  London  for  the  present 
season.  A  contract  for  ten  or  twelve  thousand  tons  of  hemp 
for  the  use  of  the  British  navy  has  been  made  here;  but  for 
its  transportation  they  have  been  obliged  to  send  out  a 
number  of  vessels,  under  flags  of  all  colors,  and  with  licenses, 
but  in  ballast.  These  are  among  the  consequences  of  the 


124 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

Orders  in  Council,  and  the  licenses.  Their  effect  here  at 
this  time  is  to  give  the  market  exclusively  to  the  Americans. 
This  is  now  so  notorious,  and  is  felt  so  deeply  by  the  English 
interest,  that  I  would  ask  nothing  more  than  a  continuance  of 
the  present  state  of  things  one  year  longer  to  sicken  the  most 
stubborn  of  the  British  ministers  with  their  Orders  of 
Council  and  their  licenses.  A  peace  between  Russia  and 
England  would  produce  a  total  revolution  in  the  commerce 
of  the  Baltic.  Perhaps  the  British  ministers  rely  upon  this 
event.  They  may  have  relied  upon  it  too  much,  and  pre¬ 
maturely.  At  least  it  is  clear  beyond  all  question  that  un¬ 
less  they  do  make  this  peace  the  operation  of  their  Orders 
of  Council  will  henceforth  in  these  quarters  lie  almost  en¬ 
tirely  against  themselves. 

I  wish  it  were  in  my  power  to  speak  as  favorably  of  the  pro¬ 
ceedings  of  France  towards  our  commerce,  as  of  those  of 
Russia.  Since  the  last  non-importation  act,  passed  at  the 
close  of  the  late  session  of  Congress,  we  are  told  that  the 
sequester  upon  the  vessels  from  the  United  States,  arrived 
in  France  since  the  2nd  of  November  last,  has  been  removed. 
But  the  tariff  remains  unaltered,  and  the  duties  are  equiva¬ 
lent  to  prohibitions. 

In  the  course  of  the  last  week,  Mr.  Harris  has  received  a 
letter  from  Captain  Irion,  master  of  one  of  the  four  American 
vessels  carried  into  Dantzig.  He  informs  him  that  twenty- 
two  American  seamen,  belonging  to  those  four  vessels  have 
been  compelled  to  march  from  Dantzig  to  Antwerp,  where 
they  are  to  be  forced  to  serve  on  board  the  French  fleet. 
I  suppose  that  we  shall  be  told  this  is  a  retaliation  upon 
the  British  for  their  impressment  of  our  men. 

The  discussions  between  this  country  and  France  are  yet 
in  a  state  of  stagnation.  Nothing  is  settled.  It  would  seem 
as  if  nothing  was  doing  for  a  settlement.  It  is  intimated 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


125 


1811] 

here  that  great  hopes  of  a  conciliatory  nature  are  enter¬ 
tained  from  the  reports  which  it  is  supposed  the  Duke  de 
Vicence,  the  late  French  ambassador,  carried  with  him. 
Much  is  expected  from  the  disastrous  state  of  the  French 
cause  in  Spain.  But  whether  the  result  of  that  will  be  to 
preserve  the  peace,  or  to  precipitate  the  war  in  the  north,  is 
not  perfectly  ascertained.  A  report  of  the  Emperor  Na¬ 
poleon’s  speech  to  the  Council  of  Commerce  on  the  24th 
of  March  has  been  published  in  a  Danish  gazette,  printed  at 
Altona.  It  differs  less  in  substance  than  in  the  expressions 
from  that  of  which  I  sent  you  a  translation.  It  has  been 
formally  and  officially  disavowed  by  the  French  ambassador 
to  Count  Romanzoff.  But  this  speech  has  rung  like  thunder 
all  over  Europe.  The  Russian  government  know,  beyond  all 
possible  disavowal,  that  the  substance  of  it  was  made. 
They  expect  the  war  as  it  was  threatened,  and  are  prepared 
to  meet  it.  They  will  not  abandon  their  commerce  and 
particularly  that  of  America.  They  have  the  whole  military 
force  of  the  Empire  on  the  frontiers  and  ready  for  action, 
and  are  now  probably  not  to  be  intimidated. 

The  Imperial  Council  are  still  occupied  with  the  project 
which  has  been  mentioned  in  several  of  my  late  letters.  The 
Chancellor  now  believes  that  the  part  of  it  which  was  to 
remove  him  from  the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs  will  not 
be  accomplished.  But  I  think  this  question  will  depend 
upon  the  solution  of  the  present  controversies  with  France. 
If  they  terminate  in  war,  he  must  go  out.  As  long  as  the 
peace  continues  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  any  other  person 
should  come  in. 

The  Portuguese  minister,  who  has  so  long  been  expected, 
the  Chevalier  Bezarra,1  arrived  here  the  day  before  yester¬ 
day.  He  landed  at  Reval,  from  the  British  frigate  Fisgard , 

1  Bezarra  had  been  Portuguese  Minister  in  Holland  1802-1810. 


126 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

which  was  sent  with  a  flag  of  truce  to  convey  him  and  his 
family.  He  has  this  day  seen  Count  Romanzoff,  but  has 
not  yet  had  his  audience  of  the  Emperor.  I  am  very  re¬ 
spectfully,  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  30  June,  1811. 

I  have  now  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  number 
six,  dated  23  February,  brought  by  the  Henry ,  Captain 
Harris,  a  vessel  of  which  we  had  heard  nearly  a  month  since, 
and  which  has  at  length  arrived  after  a  passage  from  Boston 
of  one  hundred  days.  The  arrivals  from  America  now  crowd 
upon  one  another  in  multitudes,  which  I  am  afraid  will  prove 
not  very  profitable  to  many  of  the  adventurers.  From  Quincy 
we  have  yet  nothing  later  than  4  March,  but  letters  and  news¬ 
papers  have  been  received  by  other  Americans  here  to  the 
beginning  of  May. 

The  Massachusetts  election  appears  to  agitate  the  Ameri¬ 
cans  in  Europe  almost  exclusively  of  all  the  other  elections 
going  on  at  the  same  time  in  many  parts  of  the  Union.  I 
see  paragraphs  in  the  newspapers,  but  hear  not  a  syllable 
from  any  other  quarter.  But  American  federalists  in  this 
city  have  received  letters  from  their  friends  in  London  and 
in  Gothenburg,  in  high  exultation,  announcing  the  election 
of  Mr.  Gore  1  by  a  majority  of  more  than  the  three  thousand 
votes.  But  other  Americans  of  different  politics  contest  the 
validity  of  this  return,  and  affirm  that  Mr.  Gerry  and  Mr. 
Gray  have  been  reelected  though  by  a  reduced  majority 
compared  with  that  of  the  last  year.  Why  this  extreme 
anxiety  and  concern  for  the  Massachusetts  elections?  Is  it 

1  The  federalist  candidates  were  Christopher  Gore  and  William  Phillips. 


18 1 1] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


12  7 


Mr.  Gore  for  whose  election  all  this  enthusiasm  is  harbored? 
I  think  it  by  no  means  difficult  to  account  for.  There  is 
much  foreign  hope  and  fear  involved  in  these  Massachusetts 
elections.  All  the  rest,  even  New  York,  are  despaired  of. 
But  the  Massachusetts  federal  politicians  have  got  to  talk 
so  openly,  and  with  such  seeming  indifference  not  to  say 
readiness  for  a  dissolution  of  the  Union,  they  are  so  valiant 
in  their  threats  of  resistance  to  the  laws,  they  seem  so  reso¬ 
lute  for  a  little  experiment  upon  the  energy  of  the  Union  and 
its  government,  that  in  the  prospects  of  a  war  with  America, 
which  most  of  the  British  statesmen  now  at  the  helm  con¬ 
sider  as  in  the  line  of  wise  policy,  they  and  all  their  partisans 
calculate  boldly  and  without  concealment  or  disguise  upon 
the  cooperation  of  the  Massachusetts  federalists.  The 
Massachusetts  election,  therefore,  is  a  touchstone  of  national 
principle,  and  upon  its  issue  may  depend  the  question  of 
peace  and  war  between  the  United  States  and  England. 
However  hostile  a  British  ministry  may  feel  against  us,  they 
will  never  venture  upon  it,  until  they  can  depend  upon  ac¬ 
tive  cooperation  with  them  within  the  United  States.  It  is 
from  the  New  England  federalists  alone  that  they  can  ex¬ 
pect  it,  and  from  them  they  will  doubtless  receive  it.  From 
the  same  view  of  the  subject,  though  prompted  by  very  op¬ 
posite  feelings,  I  too  take  a  deep  interest  in  the  Massachu¬ 
setts  elections.  I  have  known  now  more  than  seven  years 
the  projects  of  the  Boston  faction  against  the  Union.  They 
have  ever  since  that  time  at  least  been  seeking  a  pretext  and 
an  occasion  for  avowing  the  principle.  The  people,  however, 
have  never  been  ready  to  go  with  them,  and  when  at  the 
embargo  time  they  did  for  a  moment  get  a  majority  with 
them,  they  only  verified  the  old  proverb  about  setting  a 
beggar  on  horseback.  Mr.  Quincy  has  now  been  at  the 
pains  of  furnishing  them  with  a  new  pretext,  which  will 


128 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[18 1 1 


wear  no  better  than  its  predecessors.  Mr.  Quincy  should 
not  have  quoted  me  as  an  authority  for  a  dissolution.  He 
may  be  assured  it  is  a  doctrine  that  never  will  have  my  sanc¬ 
tion.  It  is  my  attachment  to  the  Union  which  makes  me 
specially  anxious  for  the  result  of  the  Massachusetts  elec¬ 
tions.  They  are  a  contest  of  life  and  death  for  the  Union. 
If  that  party  are  not  effectually  put  down  in  Massachusetts, 
as  completely  as  they  already  are  in  New  York,  and  Penn¬ 
sylvania,  and  all  the  southern  and  western  states,  the  Union 
is  gone.  Instead  of  a  nation,  coextensive  with  the  North 
American  continent,  destined  by  God  and  nature  to  be  the 
most  populous  and  most  powerful  people  ever  combined 
under  one  social  compact,  we  shall  have  an  endless  multi¬ 
tude  of  little  insignificant  clans  and  tribes  at  eternal  war 
with  one  another  for  a  rock,  or  a  fish  pond,  the  sport  and 
fable  of  European  masters  and  oppressors.1 


1  “There  are  so  many  seeds  and  elements  of  division,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to 
multiply  them  by  premature  threats  which  will  not  intimidate,  and  which  may 
perhaps  be  soon  reciprocated.  Quincy  is  very  clever,  but  I  cannot  read  a  word 
without  regret  that  glances  at  a  dismemberment  of  the  Union,  though  ever  so  re¬ 
motely  or  obscurely.  The  dangers  to  American  liberty  will  be  increased  beyond 
all  Mr.  Ames’s  imaginations,  and  the  independence  of  both  parts  of  the  division 
would  be  totally  lost  by  a  separation.”  John  Adams  to  John  Quincy  Adams,  Jan¬ 
uary  25,  18 1 1.  Ms.  “The  prophecies  of  Quincy’s  imagination  are  not  altogether 
chimerical,  though  I  hope  the  fulfilment  of  them  is  far,  very  far  remote  in  futurity.” 
lb.  to  lb.,  February  15,  1811.  Ms. 

“June  12.  By  a  return  of  the  first  day’s  votes  of  the  Massachusetts  election  which 
I  find  in  a  New  York  paper,  I  perceive  that  the  Executive  in  Massachusetts  has 
changed  hands  again.  And  the  course  of  these  elections  is  so  regular,  that  from  the 
events  which  must  have  influenced  those  of  the  House  of  Representatives  in  May, 
I  have  no  doubt  that  the  legislative  majority  has  gone  back  to  its  station  of  the 
years  preceding  the  last.  It  is  obvious  that  this  struggle  will  be  continued  as  long 
as  the  war  in  Europe  shall  last.  My  prayer  to  God  is,  that  it  may  eventuate  to  the 
good  of  my  country.”  Ms.  Diary. 


l8n] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


129 


TO  WILLIAM  JONES 

St.  Petersburg,  5  July,  1811. 

Sir: 

I  have  received  the  letter  which  you  did  me  the  honor  of 
writing  me  the  31st  of  January  last,  relating  to  Claude 
Gabriel,  to  whom  I  have  read  and  explained  it  in  the  fullest 
manner,  at  the  same  time  that  I  delivered  to  him  the  letter 
from  his  wife  Prudence,  that  was  inclosed  with  it. 

At  the  time  when  he  entered  the  service  of  the  Emperor, 
the  Minister  of  the  Police,  by  order  of  his  Majesty,  who  did 
not  know  that  the  ship  to  which  he  belonged  was  gone  leav¬ 
ing  him  behind,  sent  to  me  a  message  that  the  man  was  de¬ 
sirous  of  engaging  himself  in  the  Emperor’s  service,  who 
had  consented  to  take  him,  if  he  could  be  disengaged  from 
that  of  the  ship;  that  his  Majesty  would  indemnify  the 
owners  of  the  ship,  if  they  should  sustain  a  loss  in  the  man, 
and  I  could  ascertain  their  demand  on  that  account;  and  that 
he  would  also  defray  all  expenses  which  might  be  occasioned 
for  the  passage  of  Prudence  and  her  children  to  this  country. 
As  the  ship  was  gone  I  undertook  to  give  information  to 
the  owners  of  the  Emperor’s  offer  to  indemnify  them,  and 
knowing  that  Mr.  William  Gray  of  Boston  would  probably 
send  vessels  to  this  country  the  ensuing  spring,  I  wrote 
to  him  requesting  him,  if  he  conveniently  could,  to  provide 
a  passage  for  the  woman  and  children  in  one  of  them.  I 
wrote  also  to  Mr.  Russell  at  Paris,  who  had  been  the  super¬ 
cargo  and  as  I  understood  part  owner  of  the  ship  President 
Adams ,  informing  him  that  if  the  owners  had  any  demand 
for  damages  occasioned  by  the  loss  of  the  man,  the  Emperor 
had  ordered  that  it  should  be  satisfied.  From  Mr.  Russell’s 
answer  I  understood  that  although  the  loss  of  the  man  was 


13° 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[181 1 

considered  as  a  serious  inconvenience,  no  demand  for  in¬ 
demnity  would  be  made. 

From  the  tenor  of  your  letter  I  am  led  to  believe  that  you 
consider  the  man  as  being  detained  against  his  own  will, 
which  is  far  from  being  the  case.  He  is  perfectly  well  satis¬ 
fied  with  his  condition  here,  which  is  a  very  advantageous 
one,  and  exceedingly  disappointed  at  his  wife’s  refusal  to 
come  with  his  children  to  join  him  here.  He  has  obtained 
permission  from  his  Majesty  to  go  himself  to  the  United 
States,  with  a  view  to  return  with  them,  which  he  hopes 
the  health  of  his  wife  and  the  security  which  she  and  his 
family  will  derive  from  being  with  him  will  enable  him  to 
accomplish.  He  informs  me  that  he  is  not  a  citizen  of  the 
United  States,  but  he  considers  himself  as  a  free  man,  and 
best  qualified  to  judge  of  the  manner  in  which  he  is  to  pro¬ 
vide  for  himself  and  his  family.  I  have  in  consequence  of 
your  letter  urged  upon  him  in  the  most  earnest  manner 
the  duty  which  he  owes  to  his  wife  and  children,  of  which 
he  appears  to  be  fully  sensible.  But  he  is  firmly  convinced 
that  for  their  ease  and  comfort  as  well  as  his  own,  the  most 
eligible  condition  within  his  reach  is  that  which  he  now  en¬ 
joys,  and  he  has  neither  inclination  nor  intention  to  renounce 
it. 

He  will  probably  arrive  in  Providence  shortly  after  this 
letter  will  come  to  your  hands.  I  presume  that  in  all  events 
he  will  make  a  suitable  provision  for  his  family,  so  that 
whether  he  returns  hither  or  remains  with  them  in  the 
United  States,  your  solicitude  on  his  account  and  theirs 
will  be  relieved  by  the  knowledge,  that  whatever  course  he 
may  ultimately  determine  upon  will  be  the  result  of  his  own 
choice.  I  am  etc. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1811] 


131 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  57.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  6  July,  1811. 

Sir: 

The  speech  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  to  the  legislative 
assembly  of  France  at  the  opening  of  their  session,  the 
16th  of  last  month,  was  brought  by  an  extraordinary  courier 
from  the  Russian  ambassador  in  France  to  his  government 
and  arrived  here  on  Wednesday  last.  It  had  been  a  subject 
of  great  expectation,  as  it  was  foreseen  that  it  would  indi¬ 
cate  the  prospects,  whether  of  peace  or  war,  between  France 
and  Russia  which  were  known  to  depend  altogether  upon 
the  will  of  the  French  Emperor.  Its  complexion  is  altogether 
pacific  and  has  confirmed,  almost  to  a  certainty,  the  hopes 
of  those,  who  have  for  some  time  past  flattered  themselves 
that  the  war  will  not  break  out  during  the  present  year.  If 
the  true  intention  of  the  speaker  were  to  be  collected  with 
unerring  accuracy  from  the  purport  of  the  speech,  not  a 
doubt  could  remain  upon  the  question.  The  name  of  Russia 
is  not  mentioned  in  the  speech,  but  there  is  frequent  allu¬ 
sion  to  the  state  of  the  relations  between  her  and  France, 
and  always  in  obscure  and  ambiguous  terms.  He  says,  that 
he  has  no  occasion  to  call  for  any  new  taxes  or  impositions 
upon  the  people,  although  he  had  three  months  before  placed 
one  hundred  millions  at  the  disposition  of  his  ministers  of 
war,  because  he  then  thought  it  necessary .  Three  months 
before  was  precisely  the  time,  when  he  made  his  far  famed 
speech  to  the  Council  of  Commerce  and  Manufactures. 
He  says  that  he  wishes  nothing  but  what  is  in  the  treaties 


132 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ii 

that  he  has  concluded :  that  he  will  never  sacrifice  the  blood 
of  his  people  for  interests,  which  are  not  immediately  those  of 
his  empire,  and  that  he  flatters  himself  the  peace  of  the  con¬ 
tinent  will  not  be  disturbed.  There  seems  to  be  in  these  ex¬ 
pressions  a  promise  that  he  will  give  satisfaction  to  Russia 
with  regard  to  the  Duchy  of  Oldenburg  and  to  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  armaments  in  Poland;  but  the  strongest  of  all  the 
pledges  of  peace  is  the  assurance  that  he  will  not  ask  for 
any  additional  taxes. 

By  the  peace  of  the  continent,  however,  he  is  not  to  be 
understood  as  including  the  peace  of  Spain.  There,  he  says, 
it  is  that  the  struggle  against  Carthage  is  to  be  decided.  It 
is  to  be  finished  by  a  thunderbolt  which  will  avenge  Europe 
and  Asia  by  terminating  this  second  Punic  war,  but  which 
will  be  delayed  until  England  is  exhausted,  until  she  shall 
have  felt  the  evils  which  for  twenty  years  she  has  been  so 
cruelly  pouring  upon  the  Continent,  and  until  half  her  fam¬ 
ilies  shall  be  covered  with  the  funeral  veil. 

I  observed  in  one  of  my  last  letters,  that  there  were  many 
indications,  that  he  would  soon  abandon  the  contest  for 
Portugal,  and  perhaps,  the  unconquered  part  of  Spain.  The 
declaration  to  the  contrary  here  appears  to  be  very  explicit. 
But  Europe  has  already  heard  him  at  one  time  threaten  to 
plant  the  imperial  eagles  on  the  walls  of  Lisbon,  where  they 
have  not  yet  been  seen  to  perch,  and  at  another  time  to  drive 
the  frightened  leopard  into  the  sea,  though  the  leopard  still 
ranges  the  Spanish  plains,  undismayed.  In  the  action  so 
glorious  to  the  French  arms  to  which  he  alludes,  French 
blood  flowed  in  streams,  as  copious,  at  least,  as  the  English, 
and  the  fact  is  not  concealed  from  the  world,  however  it 
may  present  itself  to  him,  that  all  the  most  illustrious  of 
his  generals  have  failed  to  accomplish  hitherto  his  plans  of 
conquest  in  the  Peninsula.  The  most  distinguished  of  them 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


133 


18 1 1] 

all,  Massena,  the  spoilt  child  of  victory,1  at  the  moment 
when  the  Emperor  thus  announced  the  future  thunderbolt, 
was  in  Paris,  though  not  present  to  hear  him;  just  returned 
crowned  with  no  laurels  from  a  campaign  in  which  he  had 
in  the  face  of  a  most  attentive  world  been  notoriously 
worsted,  and  to  add  the  last  drop  of  bitterness  to  the  gall 
of  his  mortification,  worsted  by  an  English  general.  Until 
the  issue  of  this  campaign,  the  prospect  of  defending  Spain 
and  Portugal  appeared  so  desperate  to  all  the  best  informed 
politicians  and  military  men  in  Europe,  that  the  British 
ministry  incurred  no  slight  censure  of  extreme  rashness  for 
venturing  to  stake  anything  upon  it.  That  they  have  staked 
and  are  staking  more  upon  it  than  the  prize,  if  they  ever 
obtain  it,  will  ever  be  worth  to  their  cause,  is  my  own  opinion. 
I  do  not  very  clearly  see  what  advantage  the  British  nation 
will  derive  should  they  succeed  in  driving  the  French  out  of 
Spain,  unless  they  can  keep  it  as  a  conquest  of  their  own. 
For  if  France  should  spontaneously  withdraw  all  her  armies 
north  of  the  Pyrenees,  Spain,  by  whomsoever  governed,  must 
in  the  nature  of  things  very  soon  find  herself  in  the  same  de¬ 
pendence  upon  France  which  for  so  many  years  has  involved 
her  in  the  vortex  of  the  French  political  system. 

But  on  the  other  hand,  the  war  in  Spain  has  from  its  first 
commencement  been  extremely  unpopular  in  France.  No 
radiance  of  glory  has  sufficed  to  cover,  and  no  accumulation 
of  power  has  been  adequate  to  suppress  the  character  of  the 
transactions  in  which  it  originated.  The  losses,  the  dis¬ 
asters,  the  disgraces,  which  France  has  so  frequently  suffered 
in  the  course  of  this  war  have  rendered  it  as  odious  as  at  all 
times  it  has  been  thought  useless.  The  generals  and  armies 
sent  into  the  country  where  a  constant  experience  has  proved 
that  neither  plunder  nor  honor  is  to  be  acquired  are  all  dis- 

1  Bonaparte  had  called  him  “enfant  cheri  de  la  victoire.” 


134 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

satisfied  with  the  service,  and  the  Emperor  himself  has  oc¬ 
casionally  manifested  his  weariness  of  it.  The  opinion  is 
fast  gaining  ground,  throughout  Europe,  that  the  conquest 
of  the  Peninsula  is  more  than  he  can  achieve,  and  if  the 
thunderbolt  lingers  much  longer,  it  will  be  set  at  defiance  in 
regions  other  than  Portugal  or  Spain. 

As  the  probability  of  another  winter  of  peace  in  this  quar¬ 
ter  increases,  the  present  administration  recovers  strength. 
It  is  now  generally  believed  that  the  political  system  will 
undergo  no  change  at  present.  Whether  the  British  govern¬ 
ment  have  made  any  advances  for  a  separate  peace  or  not, 
I  cannot  positively  say,  but  if  they  have,  it  has  been  without 
success.  The  seizures  and  confiscations  of  the  last  year  have 
produced  such  an  effect,  that  no  insurance  can  be  made  in 
London  on  goods  brought  into  the  Baltic  by  licensed  vessels, 
and  all  those  sent  here  for  English  accounts  come  this  year 
in  ballast. 

I  have  this  day  received  the  despatches  from  your  Depart¬ 
ment,  brought  by  Captain  Bainbridge,  consisting  only  of 
duplicates — of  the  commission  as  an  Associate  Justice  of 
the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  the  letter  of  leave 
to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  and  the  letter  to  me  from  the 
Secretary  of  State  of  26  February. 

In  my  letter  to  you  of  2  June,  I  had  the  honor  of  informing 
you  that  I  had  found  myself  under  the  necessity  of  declin¬ 
ing  the  appointment  to  a  seat  upon  the  bench.  However 
reluctantly  I  adopted  this  determination,  the  situation  of 
my  family  rendered  it  indispensable.  From  the  indications 
of  public  gazettes  and  of  private  letters,  I  have  learnt  the 
probability  that  a  successor  to  this  mission  has  been  ap¬ 
pointed,  and  may  shortly  be  expected  here.1  In  which  case, 
after  transmitting  to  him  the  affairs  of  public  trust,  I  shall 

1  Robert  Smith,  late  Secretary  of  State. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


135 


1811] 

remain  here  in  my  individual  capacity  until  the  state  of  my 
family  will  admit  of  our  embarking  for  the  United  States, 
that  is,  in  all  probability,  until  next  June.  .  .  . 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  io  July,  1811. 

•  •••••• 

As  long  as  the  waters  flow  we  have  very  frequent  and  often 
very  recent  intelligence  from  our  country.  The  public  news 
we  generally  get  from  the  gazettes.  For  example  I  find  in 
the  Boston  papers  which  I  have  seen  to  8  May,  that  you 
were  one  of  the  commissioners  appointed  to  go  into  the  dis¬ 
trict  of  Maine,  and  that  you  were  at  Wiscasset  the  first  day 
of  that  month.  I  was  happy  to  hear  so  much  as  that  of  you 
and  of  so  late  a  date,  but  I  marvelled  that  you  had  mentioned 
nothing  of  this  appointment  in  any  of  your  letters.  The 
first  accounts  that  we  had  of  the  Massachusetts  elections 
(they  came  from  England),  were  that  Mr.  Gerry  and  Mr. 
Gray  were  superseded  by  the  federal  candidates.  This  I 
find  was  a  miscalculation;  but  the  complexion  of  both 
branches  of  the  legislature  remains  yet  very  uncertain. 
Massachusetts  appears  still  to  depend  upon  foreign  politics. 

The  Port  Folio  critique  upon  my  lectures  has  never  pre¬ 
sented  itself  to  me,  neither  am  I  at  all  anxious  to  see  it.  I 
never  heard  of  its  existence  but  by  your  letter  of  22  January. 
If  it  is  as  dull  as  the  Knickerbocker  History,  I  should  choose 
to  be  excused  from  reading  it.  Whatever  may  be  my  fate 
elsewhere,  I  am  sure  I  shall  never  have  an  impartial  critic 
in  America  while  I  am  myself  alive.  No  one  but  a  friend  or 
foe  will  take  the  trouble  to  review  me,  or  a  mongrel  of  both 
breeds  like  the  Anthologist .  As  to  the  Port  Folio ,  to  which 


136 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

you  and  I  once  rendered  so  many  thankless  services,  I  ex¬ 
pect  as  little  justice  from  it  as  from  all  the  other  federal 
common  sewers  of  literature  and  politics  in  America.  How 
the  Port  Folio  under  all  its  metamorphoses  has  lived  so  long 
is  to  me  unaccountable.  I  think  it  has  now  received  its 
death  wound  from  Walsh,1  whose  Review  will  be  edited 
with  more  talents,  more  industry,  more  consistency  and  in¬ 
comparably  more  address.  I  have  seen  Walsh’s  pamphlet 
on  France  2  and  the  first  number  of  his  Review.  Making 
allowances  for  the  prejudices  and  passions  of  a  violent  par¬ 
tisan,  his  account  of  France  appears  to  be  tolerably  correct; 
but  his  bombastical  enthusiasm  for  England  is  not  only  so 
absurd,  but  so  full  of  representations  ridiculously  false,  that 
it  has  given  me  a  strong  suspicion  of  his  honesty.  It  looks 
too  much  as  if  it  were  calculated  for  the  federal  swallow  (for 
which  no  camel  is  too  big),  with  a  cool  and  deliberate  con¬ 
tempt  of  truth.  He  has  had  the  cunning  to  declare  himself 
a  warm  friend  to  the  American  revolution.  Dennie  and  the 
Anthology  were  more  candid  and  more  in  unison  with  Eng¬ 
lish  passions.  Walsh  will  find  it  hard,  very  hard,  to  get 
along  with  his  ardor  for  the  American  revolution  and  his 
worship  of  John  Bull,  marching  pari  passu .  He  sets  out  with 
the  avowed  intention  of  indoctrinating  the  people  of  America 
to  know  what  is  good  for  themselves.  Ames  tried  that  ex¬ 
periment  for  several  of  the  last  years  of  his  life.  Timothy 
[Pickering]  labors  in  the  same  vineyard,  and  they,  to  recom¬ 
mend  themselves  to  their  auditory,  began  by  telling  them 
that  they  were  all  a  pack  of  knaves,  and  fools,  and  madmen. 
Hopeful  disciples  to  turn  into  wise,  and  sober,  and  virtuous 
patriots!  Walsh  is  more  cunning,  too,  in  this  respect.  He 

1  Robert  Walsh  (1784-1859),  who  began  in  1811  to  publish  a  quarterly  The 
American  Review  of  History  and  Politics. 

1  Letter  on  the  Genius  and  Disposition  of  the  French  Government  (1810). 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


137 


1811] 

does  not  begin  so  much  like  the  Irish  orator  with,  “you 
ragged,  beggarly,  lowly  rascallions,  I  love  you,  you  know 
I  do,’’  but  he  tells  us  the  country  is  hideously  metamor¬ 
phosed  since  the  days  of  Washington,  and  promises  very 
kindly  to  change  it  back  3gain  to  all  its  former  beauty. 
There  is  no  character  which  our  federal  heroes  are  so  fond  of 
assuming  as  that  of  a  reformer.  But  it  is  not  like  their 
charity.  It  never  begins  at  home. 

Mr.  Blodget,1  of  Philadelphia,  arrived  here  last  week  and 
brought  me  a  letter  from  our  friend  S.  Ewing.  Though  it 
was  written  last  August  he  mentions  having  received  the 
copy  of  my  lectures  which  you  had  sent  him;  but  does  not 
tell  me  what  I  first  learnt  from  Mr.  Blodget,  that  he  was 
married.  I  believe  Dennie  now  remains  the  only  bachelor 
of  your  old  circle  of  intimates  at  Philadelphia,  and  he,  I 
understand,  lives  entirely  with  Mr.  Meredith. 

We  have  had  since  our  first  arrival  here  a  continual  succes¬ 
sion  of  Americans,  so  that  we  dwell  among  our  own  people 
almost  as  much  as  if  we  were  at  home.  The  winter  before 
last,  sixteen  American  vessels  wintered  at  Cronstadt,  and 
several  at  Archangel.  Upwards  of  one  hundred  and  fifty 
arrived  at  and  sailed  from  Russian  ports  last  summer.  More 
than  thirty  passed  the  last  winter  in  them,  and  sixty-three 
have  already  arrived  this  summer  at  Cronstadt,  besides 
twenty  or  thirty  at  Archangel  and  Riga.  A  large  proportion 
of  these  vessels  have  supercargoes  or  owners,  and  many  of 
them  bring  letters  of  introduction  to  me.  They  are  for  the 
most  part  transient  acquaintance  who  remain  here  only 
while  their  business  detains  them,  but  they  enliven  our  so¬ 
ciety,  and  by  their  own  correspondences  with  America  keep 
us  informed  of  the  principal  news  in  circulation,  sooner  than 
we  can  obtain  it  from  our  own.  Some  of  them  are  natural- 


1  William  H.  Blodget. 


138 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

ized  Americans,  but  the  greater  number  are  natives  of  the 
northern  and  eastern  states  as  far  as  Virginia,  inclusive.  Of 
the  states  south  or  west  of  that,  I  think  I  have  not  seen  a 
native  since  I  have  been  in  Russia. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  58.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  13  July,  18 n. 

Sir: 

In  my  letter  of  2  June  I  mentioned  having  received,  among 
the  despatches  brought  by  Mr.  Erving,  a  commission  for 
Mr.  Samuel  Hazard  as  Consul  at  Archangel,  and  that  he  was 
not  then  in  this  country.  He  arrived  at  Cronstadt  this  day 
last  week,  having  taken  passage  in  an  American  vessel  from 
Copenhagen.  As  by  the  regulations  of  the  police,  it  was 
necessary  for  him  to  obtain  a  passport  from  the  Department 
of  Foreign  Affairs  before  he  could  come  to  St.  Petersburg, 
he  did  not  arrive  here  until  last  night,  and  he  called  on  me 
this  morning.  I  had  delivered  his  commission  to  one  of 
his  friends,  to  send  to  him  at  Cronstadt,  where  he  received 
it.  The  only  document  which  had  accompanied  it  was  a 
short  letter  from  the  Secretary  of  State  informing  him  of 
the  appointment.  He  had  received  no  other  communication 
from  your  Department.  So  that  he  has  neither  the  circular 
instructions,  nor  the  collection  of  the  laws  relating  to  the 
duties  of  our  consuls,  nor  even  the  knowledge  of  the  private 
marks  by  which  the  genuine  American  registers  of  vessels 
are  to  be  recognized.  I  have  advised  him  to  apply  to  Mr. 
Harris  for  information  of  the  private  marks,  and  for  a  copy 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


139 


1811] 

of  the  circular  instructions,  as  well  as  for  a  loan  of  the  pam¬ 
phlet  containing  the  collection  of  the  consular  laws.  Proba¬ 
bly  these  documents  so  essential  to  enable  him  to  discharge 
the  duties  of  his  office  have  been  despatched  to  him  by  some 
vessel  bound  directly  to  Archangel,  and  that  he  will  receive 
them  on  his  arrival  there. 

Our  accounts  from  England  here  are  to  the  14th  of  last 
month,  and  I  have  seen  a  file  of  the  Courier ,  a  ministerial 
paper,  down  to  the  nth.  From  these  papers  it  is  evident 
that  at  that  time  the  British  government  was  in  the  full  ex¬ 
pectation  of  an  immediate  war  between  France  and  Russia. 

The  Courier  states  that  all  the  Russian  prisoners  in  Eng¬ 
land  had  already  embarked  to  be  sent  home,  and  had  ac¬ 
tually  sailed.  He  asserts  that  a  plan  for  an  alliance  offensive 
and  defensive  between  Russia  and  Great  Britain  had  been 
sent  from  St.  Petersburg  to  the  British  ministry,  who  had 
it  under  consideration,  and  it  insinuates  that  France  will  be 
under  the  necessity  of  employing  so  large  a  portion  of  her 
forces  in  the  north,  that  she  will  not  be  able  to  send  any  re¬ 
enforcements  to  her  armies  in  Spain.  I  have  in  former  letters 
intimated  to  you  the  probability  that  there  was  a  negotia¬ 
tion  en  train,  between  Russia  and  Great  Britain,  in  London. 
If  it  be  true  that  the  plan  of  an  alliance  has  been  sent  from 
this  country,  it  has  not  been  through  any  official  department, 
but  by  one  of  those  irregular  channels  which  as  most  likely 
to  escape  discovery  are  often  preferred  by  governments 
which  are  not  checked  by  any  settled  principle  of  responsi¬ 
bility.  It  is  still  more  probable  that  this  ostentatious  res¬ 
toration  of  a  few  hundred  Russian  sailors,  and  these  boasts 
of  projected  alliance  were  intended  to  produce  the  events 
they  anticipate — to  sharpen  the  jealousies,  to  multiply 
the  suspicions  and  to  inflame  the  resentments  already  ex¬ 
isting  between  France  and  Russia.  At  least  it  might  be 


140 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

supposed  they  would  prevent  the  French  Emperor  from  send¬ 
ing  into  Spain  the  reenforcements  necessary  to  renew  the  con¬ 
test  for  the  dominion  of  the  Peninsula. 

But  while  the  hopes  of  a  northern  coalition  were  so  san¬ 
guine  in  England,  all  prospect  of  it  had  vanished  here.  Or 
rather  to  speak  more  correctly,  no  such  prospect  of  a  coali¬ 
tion  against  France  had  ever  existed.  The  real  prospect  was 
of  a  war  between  France  and  Russia,  in  which  the  whole 
Rhenish  confederation,  together  with  Denmark  and  Prussia, 
would  have  been  allies  of  France;  and  Sweden  and  Austria, 
neutral  in  the  first  instance.  I  have  heretofore  informed  you 
what  the  Austrian  policy  was  on  that  occasion,  and  I  believe 
she  is  now  not  a  little  mortified  and  disappointed  at  the  fail¬ 
ure  of  a  war,  which  she  flattered  herself  would  add  so  much 
to  the  importance  of  her  friendship  in  the  estimation  of 
both  parties.  But  in  the  war  Russia  would  have  stood 
alone. 

I  have  told  you  of  the  great  expectations  which  were  en¬ 
tertained  that  the  Duke  de  Vicence  upon  his  return  to  France 
would  produce  impressions  of  a  conciliatory  nature  upon 
the  mind  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon.  He  arrived  at  Paris 
on  the  5th  of  June,  and  the  speech  of  the  Emperor  to  the 
legislative  body  on  the  16th  evidently  shows  the  pacific  in¬ 
fluence  of  the  assurances  and  sentiments  reported  to  him 
by  that  ambassador  upon  his  return.  It  is  the  opinion  of 
all  the  speculative  politicians,  the  best  informed,  both  here 
and  at  Paris,  that  the  intention  to  expel  Russia  from  Europe 
is  a  long  settled  plan  in  the  French  cabinet;  that  its  execu¬ 
tion  is  to  be  attempted  whenever  the  opportunity  shall  be 
favorable;  and  that  in  the  full  confidence  that  the  subjuga¬ 
tion  of  Spain  and  Portugal  would  have  been  completed  the 
last  winter,  France  was  preparing  by  a  series  of  the  most 
offensive  pretensions  and  provocations,  for  the  commence- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1811] 


141 


ment  of  the  Russian  war,  immediately  after  that  of  the 
Peninsula  should  be  ended.  This  policy  was  in  truth  pur¬ 
sued  so  far,  and  Russia  was  so  deeply  exasperated,  that  there 
was  a  short  period  during  which  it  was  doubtful  whether 
Russia  would  not,  as  in  all  probability  France  had  intended 
she  should,  commit  the  first  act  of  hostility;  and  thus  seem 
to  be  the  aggressor.  It  was  the  personal  prudence  and  firm¬ 
ness  of  the  Emperor  Alexander  alone,  which  averted  this 
catastrophe,  and  it  has,  I  would  fain  hope,  saved  Europe, 
and  will  contribute  to  save  America  from  one  bloody  and 
most  calamitous  war.  The  formidable  attitude  of  defense 
assumed  by  Russia,  together  with  the  failure  of  the  Portu¬ 
guese  campaign  of  Massena,  and  the  precarious  state  of  the 
French  affairs  in  Spain,  have  suspended  for  this  time  the 
prosecution  of  the  project  against  Russia,  and  it  being  now 
ascertained  that  she  will  not  on  her  part  commence  the  at¬ 
tack,  the  peace  of  the  continent  is  here  universally  considered 
as  secured  during  the  present  year. 

The  hopes  of  a  peace  between  Russia  and  the  Turks,  are 
not  so  sanguine  as  they  were  when  I  had  the  honor  of  writ¬ 
ing  you  last.  The  Russian  armies  on  the  line  of  the  Danube 
have  been  so  much  weakened  by  detachments  to  strengthen 
the  Polish  frontier  that  they  are  scarcely  competent  to  de¬ 
fend  what  they  acquired  at  such  heavy  expense  the  last 
summer.  They  are  retiring  to  the  left  banks  of  the  river. 
It  is  said  that  in  proportion  to  the  eagerness  for  peace  mani¬ 
fested  by  Russia,  the  Turks  rise  in  their  pretensions,  until 
instead  of  ceding  provinces  they  have  come  to  the  point  of 
demanding  indemnities  for  themselves.  There  is  no  doubt 
but  that  Russia  would  restore  all  that  she  has  acquired  for  the 
sake  of  peace.1 

Before  the  late  war  between  Sweden  and  Russia,  Count 


1  Cypher. 


142 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

Stedingk  had  been  many  years  the  Swedish  ambassador  at 
this  court,  but  without  the  formal  character.  He  has  now 
taken  leave  of  the  Emperor,  and  returns  home.  He  goes  by 
water,  having  made  a  vow  that  he  never  would  set  his  foot 
again  in  a  province,  to  the  cession  of  which  he  had  been  under 
the  necessity  of  signing  his  name.  But  he  is  obliged  to  go 
under  a  passport  or  safe-conduct  from  the  British  admiral 
in  the  Baltic,  which  he  says  is  as  mortifying  as  it  would 
have  been  to  have  gone  through  Finland.  He  is  a  nobleman 
of  the  most  elevated  sentiments  and  is  universally  respected. 
To  an  American  he  has  peculiar  claims  of  veneration,  hav¬ 
ing  served  and  bled  in  our  cause  during  the  war  of  our  rev¬ 
olution.  He  was  an  officer  in  the  French  army,  and  was 
wounded  at  the  affair  of  Savannah.  I  am  with  great  respect 
etc. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  21  July,  1811. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

American  vessels  are  now  pouring  upon  us  in  floods.  I 
wrote  you  less  than  a  month  since  that  there  had  then  ar¬ 
rived  at  Cronstadt  forty  since  the  opening  of  the  year’s 
navigation,  and  already  the  number  exceeds  ninety,  besides 
as  many  more  at  Archangel  and  the  other  Russian  ports. 
They  have  already  glutted  the  market  until  they  are  forced 
to  disgorge,  but  I  hear  that  they  are  still  coming  by  the 
hundred.  I  am  sorry  for  the  adventurers.  They  will  almost 
universally  make  ruinous  voyages. 

To  us  however  they  furnish  the  advantage  of  bringing 
numbers  of  our  countrymen,  bearers  of  news  and  news¬ 
papers  from  the  United  States,  and  occasionally,  though 
very  rarely,  a  letter  from  some  one  of  our  friends.  Yester- 


l8n] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


H3 


day  morning  for  instance  Captain  Boit,  of  the  Cordelia , 
called  upon  me  and  delivered  me  your  favor  of  23  April, 
dated  from  the  “  Head  Quarters  of  the  Lieutenant  Governor.” 
I  had  already  received  ten  days  ago  your  letter  of  10  April, 
which  was  intended  to  have  been  sent  by  the  same  oppor¬ 
tunity,  but  which  was  brought  by  a  Captain  Peart.  In  both 
these  letters  you  manifest  anew  the  wish  for  our  return,  and 
in  one  of  them  repeat  the  desire  that  I  should  accept  the 
judicial  office  to  which  I  had  been  appointed. 

On  this  subject  my  determination  was  founded  upon  cir¬ 
cumstances,  which  could  not  be  known  to  you  at  the  time 
when  your  letters  were  written.  I  hope  they  will  be  sufficient 
in  your  mind  for  my  justification.  With  regard  to  my  ac¬ 
ceptance  of  the  office,  it  is  now  too  late  for  repentance  nearly 
two  months  since  I  declined  it.  I  have  not  changed  my  feel¬ 
ings  or  my  opinions.  But  in  your  letter  of  10  April  there 
seems  a  suggestion  that  the  state  of  things  in  America  has 
increased  your  idea  of  the  urgency,  that  I  should  accept  the 
proffered  seat  upon  the  bench.  In  a  former  letter  you  had 
intimated  that  refusal  of  the  office  would  be  imputed  to 
unbridled  ambition . 

I  suppose  there  are  who  would  impute  it  to  unbridled  am¬ 
bition,  whether  I  had  or  had  not  consented  to  be  adjudicated. 
Because  there  are  who  have  long  since  settled  it  in  their  own 
minds,  that  I  am  ambitious,  and  that,  as  you  observe 
with  reference  to  another  person,  all  ambition  is  boundless. 
When  the  mind  is  predisposed  to  a  certain  conclusion  in 
matters  of  opinion,  the  facts  most  irreconcilable  with  each 
other  serve  equally  well  for  premises.  For  instance,  if  from 
my  refusal  of  one  of  the  most  distinguished  offices  in  the 
Union  the  inference  must  be  drawn,  that  my  motive  was  un¬ 
bridled  ambition,  what  would  have  been  the  inference  from 
my  acceptance  of  it?  Do  you  think  it  would  have  established 


144 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

me  a  reputation  for  meekness  and  humility?  I  never  was 
afraid  of  the  reproach  of  being  ambitious.  But  I  have  many, 
many  times  felt  an  obligation  of  duty  to  sacrifice  the  senti¬ 
ment  of  ambition  to  my  family  or  my  friends,  and  still  oftener 
have  I  been  irresistibly  impelled  to  sacrifice  it  merely  to  tran¬ 
quillity,  not  to  say  to  the  love  of  ease. 

When  I  came  to  Russia  my  motive  doubtless  in  the  opinion 
of  many  was  ambition.  But  there  were  not  wanting  persons 
who  thought  I  was  sent  here  for  the  express  purpose  of  put¬ 
ting  me  out  of  the  way.  More  than  one  of  my  friends  wrote 
and  spoke  to  me  of  it  as  of  an  exile,  and  it  was  certainly  not  a 
voyage  which  I  considered  calculated  to  promote  ambitious 
views.  I  knew  that  it  was  not  agreeable  to  you,  and  that 
circumstance  alone  was  enough  to  take  away  all  pleasure 
from  it.  I  knew  equally  well  that  it  was  going  straight  away 
from  the  high  road  of  ambition,  and  so  far  as  related  to 
political  prospects  retiring  into  obscurity.  My  real  motive 
was  perfectly  simple.  The  constitutional  organ  of  my  coun¬ 
try  had  assigned  this  to  me  as  my  proper  post.  I  saw  no 
reason  sufficient  to  induce  me  to  refuse  it.  The  same  con¬ 
stitutional  organ  has  now  seen  fit  to  call  me  home,  and  to  put 
me,  as  one  of  my  friends  writes  me,  upon  a  high  shelf.  How 
does  it  appear  to  you?  You  welcome  it  as  the  means  to  pro¬ 
cure  my  return,  and  because  it  would  remove  me  from  the 
tourbillon  of  politics.  But  yet  you  specially  wish  me  to  ac¬ 
cept,  because  parties  are  splitting  up,  because  one  secretary 
is  out  and  another  in;  because  the  Governor  and  Senate  of 
Massachusetts  are  Republican;  because  all  was  uncertainty 
from  Europe,  and  a  special  session  of  Congress  was  expected. 

In  this  state  of  things ,  had  I  accepted  and  returned 
home,  do  you  think  that  a  seat  upon  the  bench  would 
have  removed  me  from  the  tourbillon  of  politics?  Do  you 
think  it  would  have  been  a  shelter  from  the  “wind  of  this 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1811] 


US 


commotion  ?”  I  will  candidly  confess  to  you  that  I  have  no 
such  idea.  If  my  own  passions  would  allow  me  to  stand  aloof 
from  all  politics,  as  much  as  every  judge  ought  to,  the  pas¬ 
sions  of  others  would  involve  me  in  them.  If  my  heart  is 
sufficiently  impartial  towards  all  my  countrymen  to  make  me 
a  proper  umpire  in  their  controversies,  their  hearts  are  not 
impartial  enough  to  me  to  make  them  fit  to  be  judged  by 
me.  Is  this  the  phantom  of  my  imagination?  I  will  not  give 
you  a  dissertation  for  what  you  will  understand  by  a  hint. 
My  aversion  to  a  judicial  office  rests  chiefly  upon  this  settled 
opinion — the  opinion  upon  all  my  experience,  all  my  self 
observation,  all  my  observation  of  others  in  their  relations 
to  me. 

I  have  other  objections  against  holding  a  judicial  office, 
with  which  I  need  not  trouble  the  public,  and  which  I  should 
have  desired  to  keep  exclusively  within  my  own  breast. 
How  shall  I  disclose  them  to  you,  after  acknowledging  my  ap¬ 
prehension  that  you  will  disapprove  the  opinions  in  which 
they  originate?  Pressed  as  I  am  by  your  advice  so  earnestly 
and  so  repeatedly  urged,  I  must  however  disclose  them,  and 
leave  the  estimate  of  their  weight  to  your  indulgence.  Let 
me  say  then,  that  I  am  deeply  dissatisfied  with  what  is  called 
the  administration  of  justice,  both  in  our  state  and  federal 
courts.  That  by  the  principles  of  their  organization  and 
procedures  they  appear  to  me  in  the  majority  of  cases  to 
produce  by  inevitable  necessity  the  sacrifice  of  substantial 
justice  either  to  mere  forms  or  to  general  rules .  I  entertain 
some  very  heretical  opinions  upon  the  merits  of  that  common 
law ,  so  idolized  by  all  the  English  common  lawyers  and  by  all 
the  parrots  who  repeat  their  words  in  America.  These 
opinions  have  not  been  adopted  hastily  or  without  considera¬ 
tion.  They  are  deeply  rooted  in  my  mind,  and  could  not 
easily  be  eradicated.  In  the  report  of  the  Senate  in  the  case 


146 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[18 1 1 

of  John  Smith,  and  in  one  or  two  passages  of  my  lectures,  I 
have  given  a  mere  glimpse  of  some  of  them.  One  of  my  mo¬ 
tives  for  doing  it  was  to  feel  the  public  pulse  with  regard  to 
certain  principles.  The  storm  of  passion  in  the  Senate  and 
the  clamor  throughout  the  nation  excited  by  those  very 
passages  of  the  report,  as  well  as  by  the  enthusiastic  appro¬ 
bation  of  the  same  passages  by  another  party,  both  in  the 
Senate  and  among  the  people,  warned  me  to  be  extremely 
cautious  in  future  how  I  mingled  such  edged  tools  as  those 
in  the  political  controversies  of  the  times.  I  have  not  weight 
and  influence  enough  in  my  country  to  bring  it  over  to  my 
opinions,  and  I  have  too  much  independence  of  spirit  to 
renounce  them  myself.  In  any  other  than  a  judicial  station 
I  have  no  call  to  discuss  them.  There  a  sense  of  my  duty 
would  often  compel  me  to  bring  them  out,  and  if  I  did,  you 
may  be  assured  that  neither  my  life  nor  the  good  people  of 
America  would  be  tranquillized  by  it. 

26  July,  18 1 1 . 

I  have  been  obliged  to  change  my  usual  place  of  abode  in 
St.  Petersburg;  the  house  in  which  I  resided,  and  of  which  I 
had  a  lease  to  the  13th  of  next  June,  having  been  sold  and 
the  lease  of  course  annulled.  I  was  fortunate  to  find  a  com¬ 
fortable  and  beautifully  situated  house  on  an  island  within 
the  bounds  of  the  city,  but  really  a  country  seat  on  the  banks 
of  the  Nevka.1  It  had  been  some  months  empty  for  want  of 
a  tenant,  and  being  suitable  for  habitation  only  during  the 
summer  months,  its  owner  was  glad  to  let  me  have  it  at  a 
moderate  rent.  We  took  it  for  four  months,  of  which  one 
is  nearly  past  and  at  the  end  of  which  we  must  again  seek  for 
winter  lodgings. 

I  received  last  evening  your  favor  of  April  28,  No.  10, 

1  It  belonged  to  Count  Tatischeff,  and  was  situated  on  Apothecaries  Island, 
about  three  miles  from  the  Summer  Garden  Gate. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


i47 


1811] 

brought  me  by  the  Hugh  Johnston ,  Captain  Johnson,1 
which  renews  the  injunction  upon  me  to  accept  the  appoint¬ 
ment  which  I  have  refused.  I  can  add  nothing  to  what  I 
have  already  written  you  upon  this  subject.  If  I  could  recall 
my  answer  to  the  President  declining  the  office,  it  must 
have  been  by  asking  that  he  should  keep  it  vacant  for  me 
another  year,  after  it  has  to  the  great  injury  of  the  public 
been  kept  so  one  twelvemonth.  .  .  .  It  is  still  my  in¬ 

tention  to  pass  the  winter  here.  I  shall  have  the  inclination 
and,  with  the  blessing  of  Heaven,  hope  there  will  be  no  in¬ 
superable  impediment  to  my  return  next  summer;  but  not  to 
be  a  judge,  not  to  usurp  the  place  which  ought  to  be  held  by 
Judge  Davis. 

We  have  very  lately  received  the  account  of  the  action 
between  the  frigate  President  and  the  Little  Belt.2  The 
English  ministerial  papers  assert  that  the  first  shot  was 
fired  from  our  frigate.  I  hope  this  is  not  true.  But  affairs 
appear  to  be  rapidly  coming  to  the  last  extremities  between 
the  United  States  and  England.  A  war  appears  to  be  in¬ 
evitable  and  I  lament  it,  with  the  deepest  affliction  of  heart 
and  the  most  painful  anticipation  of  consequences.  It  is  at 
home  that  an  English  war  will  bring  on  our  heaviest  trial, 
as  I  presume  one  of  its  early  effects  will  be  a  struggle  for  the 
division  of  the  states,  which  has  been  so  long  in  contempla¬ 
tion  and  preparation  by  New  England  federalists.  Our  com¬ 
merce  too  will  suffer  most  severely  by  the  war,  though  it  will 
continue  to  be  carried  on  to  a  considerable  extent  by  contra¬ 
band  or  by  licenses. 

It  is  upon  the  fate  of  the  war  in  Spain  that  the  fate  of  the 
world  is  suspended.  So  says  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  and 
so  speak  the  actions  of  the  British  government.  We  are  now 

1  William  Johnson. 

2  May  16.  See  Henry  Adams,  History ,  V.  2 6. 


148 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

in  expectation  of  the  news  of  a  battle.  But  why  should  I 
say  this  to  you,  when  if  such  a  battle  has  been  fought,  you 
will  hear  of  its  issue  nearly  as  soon  as  we  shall.  I  could  tell 
you  indeed  of  a  battle  in  Turkey,  between  General  Kutuzoff 
and  the  Grand  Vizier.  Last  Sunday  I  attended  the  Te  Deum 
to  celebrate  the  victory  of  the  Russians.  But  the  Russians 
have  something  now  upon  their  hands  more  serious  than  a 
Turkish  war.  Digito  compressu  labellum.  The  year  1811 
is  passing  in  peace.  Yours  in  duty. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  59.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  22  July,  18 11. 

Sir: 

Mr.  Calhoun  of  Philadelphia  arrived  here  last  week 
after  a  short  passage  of  thirty-nine  days  from  the  Capes  of 
Delaware  to  Cronstadt.  He  brought  me  two  packets  under 
the  seal  of  your  Department,  containing  a  file  of  the  National 
Intelligencer  from  16  February  to  1  June,  and  informed  me 
that  you  had  not  sent  any  other  despatches  by  him,  under 
the  expectation  that  upon  his  arrival  here  I  should  have 
embarked  already  upon  my  passage  to  the  United  States. 
This  expectation  would  have  been  realized  but  for  circum¬ 
stances  which  I  have  had  the  honor  of  intimating  to  you  in 
a  former  letter,  and  which  I  have  still  every  reason  to  expect 
will  necessarily  detain  me  here  until  next  June. 

This  state  of  things  was  already  suggested  by  me  to  the 
President  of  the  United  States  in  a  letter  which  I  had  the 
honor  of  writing  him  on  the  7th  of  January  last;  and  it  pre¬ 
scribed  to  me  the  duty  of  declining  the  appointment  as 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


149 


1811] 

judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  with  which 
I  had  been  honored.  I  have  hitherto  presumed  that  it  was 
not  the  President’s  intention  that  I  should  divest  myself  of 
my  official  character  here,  by  delivering  the  letter  of  leave 
without  being  prepared  immediately  afterwards  to  take  my 
departure.  But  I  informed  Count  Romanzoff  that  I  had 
received  that  letter,  and  that  I  should  keep  it  subject  to  the 
further  orders  which  I  might  receive.  It  may  be  proper 
for  me  now  to  add  my  wish,  that  the  President’s  final  arrange¬ 
ments  respecting  the  mission  to  this  Court  may  be  separated 
entirely  from  considerations  relating  personally  to  me  or 
to  the  situation  of  my  family.  Should  he  judge  the  appoint¬ 
ment  of  another  person  expedient,  or  should  he  deem  the 
continuance  of  a  minister  here  no  longer  necessary,  I  shall 
readily  deliver  the  letter  of  leave  whenever  I  shall  be  ap¬ 
prised  of  his  intentions. 

The  navigation  of  the  Baltic  has,  during  the  present  sea¬ 
son,  been  liberated  from  many  of  the  restrictions  and  vexa¬ 
tions  to  which  it  had  been  liable  for  the  American  flag 
during  the  two  preceding  years.  The  passage  of  the  Sound 
has  not  been  blockaded  by  the  British,  and  the  captures  by 
Danish  privateers  have  almost  entirely  ceased.  The  liber¬ 
ality  which  has  uniformly  characterized  the  policy  of  the 
Russian  government  in  regard  to  our  commerce,  has  been 
more  strongly  marked  than  at  any  former  period.  The 
general  measures  have  multiplied  the  facilities  of  admission 
to  our  vessels,  and  special  indulgences  have  been  in  many 
cases  granted  to  those  which  were  not  within  the  provisions 
of  the  law.  But  so  interwoven  is  the  struggle  between 
good  and  evil  in  human  affairs,  that  it  has  now  become 
questionable  whether  even  these  indulgences  and  these 
facilities  will  ultimately  prove  advantageous  to  those  for 
whom  they  have  been  granted.  Nearly  two  hundred 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


150 


[1811 


American  vessels  laden  with  valuable  cargoes  have  already 
entered  the  ports  of  Russia  since  the  commencement  of 
this  season’s  navigation — one  hundred  of  them  at  the  port 
of  Cronstadt — and  as  many  more  are  expected.  Their 
cargoes  consist  altogether  of  five  or  six  articles  of  what  are 
called  colonial  merchandise — sugar,  coffee,  cotton,  indigo 
and  dye-woods;  and  they  have  so  glutted  the  markets 
with  these  articles  that  scarcely  any  sales  of  them  can  now 
be  effected  at  any  prices,  and  those  who  are  compelled  to 
sell,  do  it  to  the  total  loss  of  the  article.  The  prices  of  the 
articles  which  are  to  be  taken  for  return  cargoes  in  the  mean¬ 
time  rise  in  proportion  to  the  extraordinary  demand  for 
them  thus  produced,  and  the  course  of  exchange  rises  in  like 
manner.  The  French  tariff,  which  is  enforced  in  Saxony  and 
Prussia,  chokes  the  passage  to  reexportation,  and  the  national 
bankruptcy  of  Austria  is  followed  by  such  a  stagnation 
of  all  commercial  affairs  in  that  country  that  it  affords  no 
better  issue  than  its  neighbors. 

The  British  Orders  of  Council,  and  the  French  continental 
system  opposed  against  them,  are  undoubtedly  the  causes 
of  this  state  of  things.  The  object  of  the  former  being  to 
monopolize  the  commerce  of  the  world,  that  of  the  latter  is 
to  cramp  and  cripple  all  commerce,  as  a  medium  through 
which  Britain  must  receive  a  wound.  There  is  no  symptom 
of  relaxation  in  this  policy  on  either  side.  We  have  just 
been  informed  of  the  condemnation  in  England  of  the  Fox , 
and  many  other  American  vessels,  for  being  bound  to 
France.  At  the  same  time  the  French  minister,  Montalivet, 
was  telling  the  Legislative  Assembly  that  the  continental 
system  had  just  begun,  and  that  France  can  easily  bear  its 
inconveniences  for  ten  years  to  come.  Each  of  the  parties 
endeavors  to  keep  up  the  courage  of  its  subjects  and  de¬ 
pendent  allies,  by  representing  its  antagonist  as  at  the  last 


l8n] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


151 


gasp;  while  in  reality,  the  means  and  resources  for  its  con¬ 
tinuance  are  but  too  great  on  both  sides. 

Notwithstanding  the  threatened  thunderbolt  of  the 
Emperor  Napoleon,  and  the  reiteration  by  his  minister, 
Montalivet,  of  the  promise  that  Spain  shall  be  subdued, 
the  only  evidence  now  admissible  of  the  determination  to 
renew  that  contest,  will  be  the  sending  of  large  reenforce¬ 
ments  to  the  French  armies.  It  is  said  that  such  reenforce¬ 
ments  have  been  sent  and  an  intimation  has  been  given  me 
that  the  Emperor  Napoleon  intends  to  go  there  for  a  short 
time  in  person.  This  has  become  so  necessary  for  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  his  political  supremacy  in  Europe,  that  it  seems 
the  only  alternative  left  him,  if  he  seriously  adheres  to  the 
conquest  of  Spain.  But  upon  the  issue  of  that  campaign 
will  depend  more  than  ever  the  fate  of  Europe.  It  is  beyond 
a  doubt  that  he  will  not  be  molested  when  he  commences  it  by 
Russia.  If  he  succeeds ,  what  his  policy  to  Russia  will  be  I  will 
not  say.  If  he  fails  the  Emperor  Alexander’ s  personal  de¬ 
termination  and  the  system  of  the  present  Chancellor  are  essen¬ 
tially  pacific.  But  it  may  be  doubted  whether  either  of  them  would 
stand  the  test  of  another  successful  British  campaign  in  Spain. 

In  the  meantime  the  negotiations  between  France  and  Russia , 
tho 9  less  ambiguous ,  are  becoming  daily  more  equivocal  than  at 
the  period  when  instant  war  was  expected.  The  professions  of 
amity ,  tho 9  still  repeated ,  have  become  cooler ,  and  are  expressed 
with  more  reserve:  with  the  protestations  of  pacific  intentions 
on  the  part  of  France  and  promises  of  indemnity  for  the  Duchy 
of  Oldenburg  have  been  mingled  some  recriminations  on  account 
of  the  Russian  commercial  orders ,  and  some  manifestation  of 
displeasure  at  the  extraordinary  armaments  of  Russia  along 
the  frontiers  of  Poland.  To  all  this  it  has  not  been  difficult  for 
Russia  to  reply ,  and  so  the  questions  upon  which  the  parties 
are  at  variance  are  spinning  out  for  discussions.  There  is  how- 


152 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

ever  one  remarkable  fact  of  which  I  am  assured  from  a  quarter 
deserving  of  confidence.  It  is,  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon  has 
expressly  declared  to  the  Russian  ambassador  that  he  is  satis¬ 
fied  with  the  conduct  of  Russia  in  reference  to  the  continental 
system  and  perfectly  convinced  that  she  has  had  no  communica¬ 
tion  with  England  incompatible  with  her  engagements  with 
France.  It  does  not  appear  even  that  he  has  taken  amiss  the 
arrival  of  a  Portuguese  minister  here  in  a  British  frigate ,  or 
the  restoration  of  the  Russian  prisoners  who  have  been  landed 
from  another  British  frigate  at  Reval.1 

A  Te  Deum  was  yesterday  celebrated  at  the  imperial 
chapel  for  a  victory  obtained  by  General  Kutuzoff,  (the 
successor  of  the  late  General  Count  Kaminsky)  over  the 
Turkish  army  under  the  immediate  command  of  the  Grand 
Vizier.  It  was  in  the  neighborhood  of  Rustchuk.  But  the 
Russians  are  altogether  on  the  defensive.  The  hopes  of 
peace  are  less  sanguine  that  they  were  last  month.  The 
Turks  demand  not  only  their  lost  provinces,  but  a  sum  of 
money  and  the  Crimea,  by  way  of  indemnity. 

I  have  received  from  Liebau,  a  small  packet,  enclosing 
a  third  copy  of  the  National  Intelligencer  of  6  and  8  December 
last.  I  mention  it  merely  from  the  principle  of  acknowledg¬ 
ing  the  receipt  of  every  packet  coming  from  your  Department. 
I  am  very  respectfully  etc. 


1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


j8ii] 


153 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  60.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  28  July,  1811. 

Sir: 

I  went  one  day  last  week,1  with  Mr.  Hazard,  and  intro¬ 
duced  him  personally  to  the  Chancellor  Count  Romanzoff, 
through  whose  department  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
the  exequatur  was  to  be  obtained.  For  this  purpose  I  had 
supposed  it  would  be  sufficient  for  Mr.  Hazard  to  exhibit 
his  commission,  together  with  a  French  translation  of  it, 
to  the  Count,  but  he  observed  that  it  would  be  necessary 
for  me  to  address  a  note  to  him  giving  him  notice  of  it,  upon 
which  the  exequatur  would  be  issued,  not  from  the  Chancery, 
but  from  the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  it  must 
be,  when  delivered,  carried  to  the  Senate  to  be  registered. 
I  wrote  the  Count  that  same  day,  and  as  the  want  of  a  consul 
at  Archangel  is  most  sensibly  felt  by  the  multitudes  of  Amer¬ 
icans  who  have  already  crowded  into  that  port,  I  suggested 
the  hope  that  the  forms  of  recognition  might  be  abridged  as 
much  as  possible  to  give  the  gentleman  appointed  the  means 
of  rendering  to  his  countrymen  there  the  official  services  of 
which  they  stand  so  much  in  need.  I  have  not  received  the 
Count’s  answer.  But  as  there  is  nothing  in  nature  so  callous 
to  the  spur  as  official  routine,  I  suppose  Mr.  Hazard’s  recog¬ 
nition  will  proceed  with  exactly  the  same  pace  as  if  I  had 
said  nothing  about  it. 

This  was  the  first  occasion  upon  which  the  Count  had  ever 
marked  a  special  discrimination  between  his  functions  as 
Chancellor,  and  those  as  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs;  I 

1  Adams,  Memoirs ,  July  25, 1811. 


154 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ii 

remarked  it  the  more  particularly,  because  the  plan  has  for 
some  months  been  in  agitation  of  removing  him  from  the 
Foreign  Department  by  accumulating  his  dignities  and 
perhaps  his  occupations  as  Chancellor.  They  call  it  going  out 
by  a  good  door .  But  if  the  peace  can  be  kept  with  France ,  the 
Count  has  neither  inclination  nor  occasion  to  quit  the  office  of 
Foreign  Affairs ,  an  office  less  elevated ,  but  far  otherwise  (more) 
efficient  than  that  of  Chancellor,  If  the  rupture  with  France 
comes  he  must  inevitably  withdraw  from  the  same  Department , 
and  would  doubtless  himself  be  glad  to  have  a  ladder  provided 
by  which  he  might  ascend  to  a  more  serene  and  tranquil  station, 
I  hear  that  he  has  received  a  letter  from  the  Duke  de  Bassano, 
written  by  command  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon ,  expressing  the 
regret  that  he  had  felt  on  learning  that  the  Count  had  intimated 
a  disposition  to  retirement  and  the  earnest  wish  that  he  would 
continue  in  office ,  as  that  event  must  have  the  most  essential 
tendency  to  the  preservation  of  peace  upon  the  Continent.  Since 
then  the  Emperor  Alexander  himself  has  signified  his  intentions 
to  keep  the  Count  in  the  Foreign  Office ,  and  the  Count  has  not 
concealed  his  own  intention  to  remain.  All  this  I  learn  from 
persons  usually  well  informed ,  and  it  may  all  be  true.  The  proj¬ 
ect  which  was  in  discussion  before  the  Imperial  Council  sleeps 
perhaps  upon  the  files.  But  it  may  be  taken  up  again ,  if  the 
rupture  with  France  should  ensue.1 

The  Chancellor  told  me  that  they  were  going  to  remove 
Count  Pahlen  from  the  United  States,  but  that  another  per¬ 
son  would  be  sent  there  to  replace  him.  He  has  accepted 
the  offer  of  the  mission  to  Brazil,  which  was  made  him  some 
months  since,  and  the  commission  will  be  sent  out  to  him 
immediately.2  But  he  has  stipulated  that  he  should  not  be 
required  to  stay  longer  than  two  years,  and  that  within  that 

1  Cypher. 

*  On  July  30  Adams  received  notice  of  the  appointment  of  Andre  Daschkoff. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


155 


18 1 1] 

time  he  should  be  provided  with  some  place  nearer  home. 
To  this  condition  Count  Romanzoff  said  the  Emperor  had 
assented;  that  Count  Pahlen  would  have  the  peculiar  fortune 
of  commencing  the  diplomatic  relations  on  the  part  of  Russia 
with  both  parts  of  the  American  hemisphere,  and  if  still 
another  sovereign  power  should  arise  in  that  quarter  of  the 
globe,  he  would  probably  be  accredited  there  too.  This 
allusion  was  undoubtedly  to  the  existing  state  of  the  coun¬ 
tries  which  have  been  Spanish  colonies  in  South  America; 
but  to  whom  I  do  not  imagine  it  is  probable  that  Russia 
will  send  a  minister  within  two  years.  He  added  that  he  was 
convinced  Count  Pahlen  would  in  future  thank  him  for 
having  thus  given  him  the  opportunity  of  becoming  ac¬ 
quainted  so  advantageously  with  both  the  American  con¬ 
tinents;  it  must  be  far  preferable  to  a  mission  at  Stuttgart 
or  at  Cassel,  which  a  Russian  might  visit  and  which  many 
Russians  did  visit,  as  well  without  a  diplomatic  mission  as 
with  one.  I  said  I  hoped  that  at  least  Count  Pahlen  would 
have  reason  to  recollect  with  pleasure  his  residence  with  us. 
All  his  letters,  he  replied,  were  expressive  of  the  strongest 
satisfaction  with  our  country. 

The  state  of  our  relations  with  England  is  a  subject  upon 
which  the  Chancellor  never  fails  to  make  inquiries,  in  con¬ 
versing  with  me.  I  was  now  as  little  informed  concerning 
it  as  himself.  The  affair  between  the  frigate  President  and 
the  Little  Belt  had  been  known  here  these  ten  days.  The 
Count  said  he  had  seen  the  English  gazettes  down  to  the 
28th  of  June  and  this  event  had  occasioned  there  great  agita¬ 
tion  in  the  public  mind.  The  report  of  Captain  Bingham 
had  not  been  received,  but  the  ministerial  papers  already 
asserted  as  unquestionable  that  the  first  fire  came  from  the 
American  frigate.  A  squadron  under  the  command  of 
Sir  Joseph  York  was  fitting  out  to  sail  for  America.  But  it 


156 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

appeared  the  whole  struggle  for  Spain  and  Portugal,  was  to 
be  gone  over  again.  Lord  Wellington  had  been  obliged  to 
raise  the  siege  of  Badajos,  and  another  general  action  was  ex¬ 
pected.  This  the  Count  said  was  a  very  different  result  from 
what  had  been  lately  and  very  generally  expected.  It  had 
been  thought  that  the  issue  of  the  late  campaign  had  given 
the  English,  if  not  undisputed  possession,  at  least  a  decisive 
preponderancy  in  Spain.  Now  it  appeared  that  all  was 
to  be  fought  for  again.  I  observed  that  the  Emperor  Na¬ 
poleon  and  his  Minister  of  the  Interior  had  both  declared 
that  France  would  persevere  in  this  struggle,  but  that  it 
would  require  large  reenforcements  to  the  French  armies. 
He  said  that  such  reenforcements  had  been  sent  both  from 
Toulon  and  Marseilles,  and  also,  as  he  was  informed  by 
the  Ambassador  Prince  Kurakin,  from  Paris. 

The  victory  of  the  Russian  army  commanded  by  General 
Kutuzoff,  for  which  the  Te  Deum  was  celebrated  last  Sunday 
in  the  imperial  chapel,  was  obtained  over  the  Grand  Vizier 
in  person  at  the  head,  as  the  Russian  official  account  asserts, 
of  sixty  thousand  men.  The  Russian  force  engaged,  by  the 
same  account,  was  less  than  twenty  thousand.  They  were 
attacked  in  their  entrenched  camp  before  Rustchuk,  and 
not  only  repulsed  the  Turks  with  great  slaughter,  but  pur¬ 
sued  them  six  or  seven  miles  in  their  retreat.  The  Russian 
loss  is  stated  to  be  about  five  hundred  men  killed  and 
wounded.  It  was  on  the  22nd  of  June.  In  all  these  actions 
with  the  Turks ,  there  is  a  rumor  in  circulation  differing 
materially  from  the  official  report .  It  is  said  that  the  victory 
was  not  so  complete ,  nor  gained  with  so  little  loss  as  the  gazettes 
announce .  In  evidence  of  this  it  is  alleged  that  General 
Kutuzoff,  since  the  action,  has  abandoned  his  entrenched  camp, 
Bas  Rustchuk ,  and  that  place  itself,  and  with  his  whole  army 
has  withdrawn  to  the  left  banks  of  the  Danube .  It  has  been 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


157 


1811] 

found  necessary  to  send  back  to  the  army  two  divisions  of  thirty 
thousand  men  which  had  been  drawn  to  form  the  line  on  the 
borders  of  Poland.  The  Turks  have  the  offensive ,  and  the  hopes 
of  peace  have  nearly  vanished.1  I  am  with  great  respect  etc. 

TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  29  July,  1811. 

My  Dear  Mother: 

•  •••••• 

The  death  of  my  worthy  and  respected  friends,  Judge 
Dana  2  and  Mr.  Emerson,3  has  given  me  great  concern,  and 
the  state  of  health  in  which  my  brother’s  own  letters  and 
yours  represent  him  occasion  deep  anxiety.  Mr.  Dana  had 
a  harshness  of  temper,  arising  from  a  constitutional  nervous 
irritability,  and  the  perpetual  terrors  of  that  disease  which 
finally  proved  fatal  to  him,  and  had  hung  over  him  nearly 
five  and  twenty  years.  I  saw  him  under  the  operation  of 
his  first  paralytic  attack,  and  then  watched  one  night  with 
him  at  his  bedside.  It  was  in  the  spring  of  1787,  while  I 
was  a  student  at  college.  I  had  then  no  expectation  that 
he  would  ever  recover  from  it,  nor  had  he  himself,  nor  his 
family  nor  his  physician.  He  never  did  recover  from  it  en¬ 
tirely,  for  although  he  retained  for  twenty  years  afterwards 
the  powers  of  his  mind  to  a  surprising  and,  I  believe  after 
such  an  attack,  to  an  unexampled  degree,  yet  his  nervous 
system  was  so  shattered,  and  his  fears  of  a  relapse  so  inces¬ 
sant,  that  it  embittered  all  the  remnant  of  his  days.  This 
state  of  habitual  distemper  sharpened  the  natural  asperities 

1  Cypher. 

2  Francis  Dana  died  April  25,  1811. 

3  William  Emerson  died  May  12,  1811. 


158 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i  8 1 1 

of  his  disposition,  narrowed  the  means  of  his  intercourse 
with  society,  and  confined  him  in  a  great  measure  to  his 
family  relations.  He  was  always  very  highly  respected  as 
a  judge,  and  until  the  last  moment  when  he  held  that  sta¬ 
tion,  I  believe  his  learning  and  his  judgment  remained  unim¬ 
paired.  His  integrity  was  never  questioned.  He  had  been 
a  distinguished  patriot  of  our  revolution,  an  enlightened 
and  upright  judge,  a  virtuous  citizen  and  excellent  father  of 
a  family;  but  of  all  the  men  whom  I  ever  knew,  moving  in 
so  enlarged  a  sphere  he  had  the  fewest  friends .  I  was  there¬ 
fore  not  surprised  to  learn  with  how  little  public  notice  his 
decease  had  been  attended.1  Had  I  been  at  Boston  assuredly 
the  ordinary  tribute  usual  to  the  memory  of  the  obscurest 
citizens  should  not  have  been  denied  to  him.  But  I  have 
had  intimations  for  several  years  that  he  was  engaged  in  a 
manner  which  will  leave  a  durable  memorial  of  himself. 
Mrs.  Warren’s  Aspasian  remarks  upon  his  mission  to  Russia,2 
which  the  good  woman  borrowed  from  the  political  Adonises 
of  our  revolutionary  age,  and  which  she  never  asked  herself 
whether  they  were  fit  for  the  chastity  of  a  female  historian 
to  retail,  had  affected  the  feelings  of  Judge  Dana,  as  it  was 
natural  they  should,  and  I  have  some  reason  to  believe  that 

1  “Judge  Dana  died,  and  his  funeral  is  attended  by  his  relations,  his  pall  bearers, 
and  a  few  individuals.  Not  a  word  of  notice  taken  of  a  man  who  had  sustained 
various  important  offices,  and  who  for  many  years  was  Chief  Justice  of  the  State; 
who  discharged  the  duties  of  his  office  as  an  honest,  upright  and  learned  judge;  who 
was  a  religious  man;  as  husband  and  parent,  fond,  affectionate  and  tender;  as  a 
public  man,  without  a  stain.  Yet  not  one  solitary  paragraph  in  a  newspaper,  to 
say  more  than  upon  such  a  day  he  died!  This  would  not  have  been,  if  you  had 
been  here.  It  has  really  hurt  me  for  his  family.  But  he  was  not  a  party  man;  he 
had  not  popular  talents,  nor,  what  Lord  Chesterfield  calls  suavity  of  manners,  which 
attract  more  forcibly,  than  sound  sense  and  learning.,,  Abigail  Adams  to  John 
Quincy  Adams ,  May  28,  1811.  Ms. 

2  Warren,  History  of  the  Rise ,  Progress  and  Termination  of  the  American  Revolu¬ 
tion,  II.  302. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


i59 


3811] 

he  was  preparing  for  publication,  either  memoirs  of  his  own 
life,  or  some  historical  work  relative  to  the  American  revolu¬ 
tion  in  which  he  meant  to  treat  that  blushless  and  ridiculous 
comment  of  his  person  as  it  deserved. 

Mr.  Emerson  had  been  one  of  my  college  acquaintances, 
but  as  he  was  there  my  junior  by  two  years  I  had  never  had 
much  intimacy  with  him,  until  my  last  return  to  the  United 
States.  I  found  him  settled  pastor  of  the  church,  where  I 
had  been  accustomed  to  attend  at  the  public  ministrations 
of  his  predecessor,  Dr.  Clarke.  I  then  became  associated 
with  him  in  various  pursuits  of  science,  a  member  of  his 
congregation  and  a  joint  member  with  him  of  a  social  weekly 
club.  He  was  always  an  amiable  and  respectable  man,  and 
he  was  one  of  the  very  few  friends  who  looked  at  me  with 
unaltered  eye,  after  the  Junto  had  let  loose  their  pack  upon 
me,  and  the  legislature  of  Patriotic  Proceedings  had  dismissed 
me.  I  felt  a  strong  attachment  to  him  and  lament  his  loss. 
I  had  always  regretted  that  after  the  severe  illness  which 
he  had  three  years  ago,  he  persisted  in  resuming  his  profes¬ 
sional  labors,  from  which  his  physicians  warned  him  of  the 
inevitable  consequence.  But  his  motives  were  obligations 
of  the  highest  duty,  which  even  when  taxable  with  impru¬ 
dence  can  never  cease  to  be  respectable.  I  hope  his  family 
has  not  been  left  destitute,  and  that  his  children  will  have 
from  his  friends  whatever  assistance  they  may  need. 


i6o 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  31  July,  1811. 

My  Dear  Brother: 

•  •••••• 

A  letter  of  28  May  from  my  mother  would  in  some  sort 
have  tranquillized  my  mind  in  respect  to  you,  if  it  had  not 
at  the  same  time  alarmed  me  by  mentioning  the  severe  and 
dangerous  accident  which  you  had  met  with  by  a  fall  from 
your  horse.  She  says  that  you  intended  to  write  me  by  the 
same  opportunity,  and  as  I  have  not  received  the  letter,  I 
am  afraid  that  it  was  because  you  found  yourself  unable  to 
write.  But  in  general  she  observes  that  your  health  had  im¬ 
proved  by  your  excursion  to  the  district  of  Maine,  and  I  re¬ 
joice  to  find  in  Governor  Gerry’s  speech  to  the  Legislature, 
that  your  mission  with  your  colleagues  1  had  been  satisfac¬ 
tory  and  successful.  By  the  same  gazette,  too,  which  we 
have  received  to  4  June,  I  learn  your  appointment  as  a  mem¬ 
ber  of  the  Council,  an  event  upon  which  I  cannot  congratu¬ 
late  you  as  being  likely  to  contribute  to  your  tranquillity. 
The  time  is  apparently  coming  when  the  temper  and  charac¬ 
ter  of  the  American  people  will  be  tried  by  a  test  to  which, 
since  the  war  of  our  revolution,  they  have  been  strangers. 
And  unfortunately,  the  unparalleled  prosperity  which  for 
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century  they  have  enjoyed  has 
been  constantly  unfitting  them  from  year  to  year  for  the  re¬ 
verse  of  fortune,  which  they  now  have  to  encounter.  The 
school  of  affliction  is,  however,  as  necessary  to  form  the  moral 
character  of  nations  as  of  individuals.  I  hope  that  ours  will 
be  purified  by  it.  The  prospect  of  a  war  with  England  has 

t 

1  The  Attorney  General  [Perez  Morton]  and  John  Smith  of  Springfield.  The 
object  was  to  settle  land  claims  in  Maine. 


i8ii] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


161 


been  so  long  approaching  us,  that  we  ought  to  have  been 
better  prepared  for  it  than  we  are.  It  was  to  prevent  this 
war,  which  I  believed  altogether  otherwise  unavoidable, 
that  I  assented  to  and  voted  for  the  embargo,  when  a  member 
of  the  Senate.  I  hoped  it  would  have  saved  us  from  the  war. 
I  have  ever  been  convinced,  and  now  believe  more  firmly 
than  ever,  that  it  did  save  us  from  the  war  for  that  time, 
and  postponed  it  for  four  years.  The  same  causes  which 
would  have  produced  it  then  are  producing  it  now,  and  ac¬ 
cording  to  all  appearance,  if  anything  can  possibly  save  us 
from  it  again  it  will  be  another  embargo. 

Whether  our  government  will  have  the  time,  or  the  in¬ 
clination,  or  the  resolution,  to  resort  to  this  expedient  again, 
I  do  not  know.  From  the  accounts  received  here  from 
England,  since  the  news  of  the  rencounter  between  the 
President  frigate  and  the  Little  Belt ,  measures  appear  to 
have  been  adopted  for  the  express  purpose  of  “  humbling 
the  Yankees/’  and  a  squadron  of  five  ships  of  the  line, 
to  be  followed  it  is  said  by  a  regiment  of  troops,  has  sailed 
for  America  with  sealed  orders  to  be  opened  west  of  Scilly. 
Their  object  will  doubtless  be  known  to  you  long  before 
you  receive  this  letter.  Whether  it  be  of  mere  menace  or 
direct  hostility,  I  trust  the  spirit  of  my  country  will  prove 
true  to  itself.  But  it  opens  in  either  case  a  prospect  before 
|  [us],  at  least  as  formidable  as  that  of  1775  and  1776  was  to 
i  our  fathers. 

You  tell  me  that  you  sent  me  a  letter,  which  you  had 
1  written  me,  expressing  perhaps  too  freely  your  opinions  of 
certain  late  measures  of  our  government.  Perhaps  I  ought 
to  have  burnt  two  letters  which  I  wrote  you  expressing  my 
opinions  with  regard  to  the  non-intercourse  or  non-importa¬ 
tion  act  of  the  last  session  of  Congress.  I  do  sincerely  re¬ 
spect  and  honor  the  motives,  and  I  fully  approve  the  spirit  of 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


162 


[1811 


those  by  whom  it  was  passed.  They  had  given  a  pledge  by 
the  act  of  the  former  session,  which  they  thought  they  were 
bound  to  redeem,  and  they  might  justly  expect  that  France 
would  carry  into  effect  her  engagements  on  her  part,  so 
positively  and  explicitly  stated  by  the  Duke  de  Cadore. 
But  it  was  my  opinion  that  France  had  already  violated  her 
own  engagements  in  a  manner  which  absolved  us  from  all 
obligation  contracted  by  the  act  of  the  former  session,  and 
I  strongly  apprehended  that  the  tendency  of  the  new  act 
would  be  to  precipitate  a  war  with  England.  The  new  inci¬ 
dent  which  has  occurred,  and  upon  which  the  accounts  of 
the  two  parties  differ  so  materially  with  regard  to  the  facts, 
undoubtedly  increases  the  danger,  and  seems  to  render  the 
war  unavoidable. 

If  the  war  must  come  I  hope  that  the  temper  and  the  en¬ 
ergy  of  the  government  and  people  will  rise  to  a  dignity  and 
firmness  adapted  to  the  emergency.  So  far  as  it  may  be  de¬ 
fensive,  I  can  only  pray,  that  as  our  day  is,  so  our  strength 
may  prove.  But  the  first  and  most  important  quality  for 
war,  in  my  estimation,  is  justice;  and  may  God  Almighty 
grant  that  we  may  be  careful  to  keep  that  on  our  side.  That 
we  may  not  undertake  it  presumptuously,  nor  impelled  by 
passion,  nor  without  a  precise  and  definite  object  for  which 
to  contend. 

At  all  events  there  is  no  doubt  but  a  war  will  produce 
great  and  extraordinary  changes  of  popular  sentiments  of 
administrations,  and  perhaps  of  constitutions  in  our  country. 
It  is  probable  the  time  in  which  you  are  coming  forward  as 
a  public  man  will  be  a  time  of  turbulence  and  of  difficulty. 
This  reflection  increases  my  anxiety  on  account  of  your 
health.  But  on  the  other  hand  it  will  be  the  time  for  the 
virtues  to  be  brought  into  action,  and  I  flatter  myself  that 
you  will  be  equal  to  it. 


18 1 1] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


163 


This  state  of  affairs  is  also  calculated  to  turn  back  my  re¬ 
flections  upon  myself.  It  has  led  me  to  review  my  own 
public  conduct  in  past  times,  and  to  consider  my  prospects 
and  my  duties  for  the  future.  You  will  already  see  that  I 
find  in  it  an  additional  justification  to  my  own  mind  for  the 
part  I  took  in  relation  to  our  foreign  affairs,  during  the  last 
session  of  Congress  in  which  I  held  a  seat  in  the  Senate. 
My  principle  was  one  which  no  result  of  events  could  possi¬ 
bly  shake.  But  in  respect  to  policy ,  I  always  considered  the 
embargo  as  justifiable  on  no  other  ground,  than  that  its 
only  alternative  was  war.  This  opinion  from  the  necessity 
of  the  thing  was  conjectural.  It  is  even  now  not  demon¬ 
strable  that  war  would  have  followed  without  it;  but  if  war 
comes  from  the  same  operative  causes  as  I  believed  would 
have  produced  it  then,  I  shall  certainly  consider  my  reason¬ 
ing  at  that  time  as  more  completely  sanctioned  by  the  events 
than  I  could  if  it  should  not  ensue. 

Since  my  residence  in  Russia  our  relations  both  with 
France  and  England  have  taken  a  variety  of  turns,  and  new 
incidents  affecting  them  have  occurred,  but  in  which  it  has 
not  been  my  duty  to  take  any  part.  I  have  of  course  none 
of  the  responsibility  connected  with  them  upon  me.  I  have 
had  nothing  English  to  guard  against  but  forgery.  My 
most  difficult  and  important  labors  have  been  to  struggle 
against  another  influence.  But  let  me  tell  you  an  anecdote. 
In  the  month  of  February  last  I  heard  that  there  was  an 
American  vessel,  somewhere  in  the  river  Elbe  going  shortly 
with  a  special  permission  from  the  French  government  to 
Boston.  Thinking  this  might  be  a  good  opportunity  to 
write  a  private  letter  or  two,  (I  took  special  care  not  to  send 
by  that  way  any  public  ones,)  I  wrote  you  on  the  5th  of 
March,  No.  12,  and  inclosed  it  together  with  a  duplicate  of 
No.  11,  under  a  cover  directed  to  my  father,  and  sent  it  by 


164 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

post  to  Mr.  Forbes  at  Hamburg,  with  a  request  that  he 
would  forward  it  by  the  first  safe  opportunity  to  the  United 
States. 

On  the  26th  of  March  Mr.  Forbes  wrote  me  that  he  had 
received  my  letters,  and  should  send  the  inclosures  by  the 
ship  Packet ,  Captain  Hinkley,  which  was  to  sail  for  Boston 
in  a  very  few  days.  I  congratulated  myself  on  having  thus 
found  one  more  chance  of  conveyance  for  my  winter  letters, 
and  was  indulging  the  hope  that  my  number  twelve  had 
reached  you  at  least  in  June,  until  about  ten  days  since  I 
received  a  subsequent  letter  from  Mr.  Forbes,  informing 
me  that  a  few  days  previous  to  the  departure  of  Captain 
Hinkley,  at  7  o’clock  in  the  morning,  his  bedchamber  was 
entered  by  order  of  the  police,  and  all  his  letters  amounting 
to  seven  or  eight  were  taken  from  him,  and  that  my  letter 
directed  to  my  father  was  among  them.  Mr.  Forbes  made 
immediately  a  written  application  for  the  restoration  of 
my  letter.  He  was  referred  from  the  police  to  the  post  office, 
and  from  the  post  office  to  the  police,  but  never  obtained 
the  letter. 

You  may  perhaps  have  thought  me  particularly  cautious 
of  writing  you  and  my  other  friends  at  Quincy  upon  topics 
of  political  interest,  and  if  you  receive  my  letters  Nos.  11 
and  12,  you  may  wonder  what  motives  there  could  be,  not 
for  breaking  them  open,  but  for  eluding  the  return  of  them. 
And  I  trust  you  will  perceive  that  I  have  had  sufficient  rea¬ 
son  for  great  reserve  in  writing  politics,  and  that  you  will 
find  some  excuse  for  letters  on  subjects  which  might  be 
thought  too  trifling  for  a  man  of  my  years  and  gravity. 

To  resume  the  thread  of  my  reflections,  if  we  have  a  war 
with  England  I  may  perhaps  find  it  difficult  to  get  home, 
but  I  suppose  a  passport  for  myself  and  family  would  be  ob¬ 
tainable.  I  am  now  on  a  new  account  glad  that  I  had  a 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


l8n] 


substantial  reason  for  declining  the  seat  on  the  bench.  It 
is  now  (setting  aside  all  my  old  objections)  one  of  the  last 
places  that  I  could  be  willing  to  hold.  I  need  not  enlarge. 
For  myself,  for  my  family,  the  private  station  to  which  I 
expect  to  return  has,  besides  all  its  other  advantages,  an 
attraction  of  safety  from  the  storm,  to  which  I  look  with 
comfort  and  hope.  Do  not  understand  me,  however,  as  in¬ 
tending  to  shrink  from  any  station  which  my  country 
through  her  constitutional  organs  may  assign  to  me.  I  owe 
her  too  much  to  decline  any  post  of  danger  to  which  she  may 
ever  think  fit  to  call  me.  Hitherto  I  thank  her  equally  for 
what  she  has  given,  for  what  she  has  offered,  and  for  what 
she  has  overlooked.  I  shall  be  equally  grateful,  if  she  over¬ 
looks  me  again.  .  .  . 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  61.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  2  August,  18 11. 

Sir: 

I  have  the  honor  to  enclose  copies  of  my  note  to  the 
Chancellor,  Count  Romanzoff,  respecting  the  recognition 
of  Mr.  Hazard,  as  Consul  of  the  United  States  at  Archangel, 
and  of  the  Chancellor’s  answer.  In  my  last  letter  I  intimated 
to  you  an  apprehension  that  owing  to  the  delays  incident 
to  the  routine  of  official  forms,  it  would  be  some  time  before 
Mr.  Hazard  could  enter  upon  the  exercise  of  his  functions. 
From  Count  Romanzoff  s  answer  to  my  note  you  will  per¬ 
ceive  that  by  a  special  order  of  the  Emperor  to  the  military 
governor  of  Archangel,  the  ordinary  delays  which  arise  from 
the  usage  of  transmitting  to  the  Senate  and  of  waiting  for 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


1 66 


[1811 


their  publication  of  the  imperial  ukaze,  will  in  this  case  be 
altogether  avoided.  I  am  the  more  sensible  to  this  mark  of 
the  Emperor’s  attention  to  the  interests  of  our  commerce, 
because  it  was  unexpected.  Before  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Haz¬ 
ard’s  commission,  Mr.  Harris,  under  his  authority  as  consul 
general,  had  appointed  Mr.  Francis  Dana,  vice  consul  of 
the  United  States  at  that  port.  He  had  been  recognized  by 
the  Emperor,  and  the  ukaze  had  been  registered  by  the 
Senate.  But  it  had  not  been  published;  and  at  Mr.  Harris’s 
request  I  had  spoken  to  the  Chancellor  to  urge  the  publica¬ 
tion  necessary  to  enable  Mr.  Dana  to  exercise  his  functions. 
The  Count  had  then  told  me  that  the  publication  of  all  the 
imperial  ukazes  was  made  in  regular  course  by  the  Senate, 
and  he  had  expressed  doubts  whether  it  would  be  in  his 
power  to  accelerate  its  motion.  This  circumstance  had  been 
my  inducement  for  expressing  in  my  note  to  the  Count, 
concerning  Mr.  Hazard,  my  wish  that  he  might  be  effect¬ 
ually  acknowledged  without  any  delay  which  could  be  pre¬ 
vented;  and  it  led  me  at  the  same  time  to  suggest  the  doubt 
with  regard  to  the  success  of  my  application,  contained  in 
my  last  letter.  It  was  in  this  instance,  as  I  have  found  it 
in  several  others,  from  the  personal  good  will  of  the  Emperor 
that  the  favor  was  obtained,  which  it  was  not  in  the  power 
of  his  Minister  to  grant. 

From  a  passage  in  my  letter  of  22  ult.,  you  will  recollect 
that  the  struggle  of  French  influence  for  the  exclusion  of  all 
American  commerce  from  the  Russian  ports  has  for  the 
present  been  abandoned.  The  present  ambassador ,  on  his 
first  arrival  here ,  was  less  reserved  and  cautious  in  his  conversa¬ 
tions  on  subjects  than  his  predecessor ,  the  Duke  de  Vicence .  / 
am  persuaded  that  he  upon  his  return  to  France  convinced  his 
government  that  this  was  a  point  upon  which  Russia  would  not 
yield ,  and  that  it  would  be  in  vain  to  urge  her  any  more  upon  it. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


167 


1811] 

Since  the  speech  of  24th  March  to  the  Council  of  Commerce , 
the  Emperor  Napoleon  has  had  time  for  further  reflection ,  and 
I  consider  his  declaration ,  that  in  regard  to  the  continental  sys¬ 
tem  he  was  satisfied  with  the  conduct  of  Russia ,  as  indicating 
the  determination  to  waive  that  point  of  controversy ,  at  least 
for  the  present.1  But  the  other  objects  of  difference  be¬ 
tween  the  two  empires  not  only  remain  unadjusted  but  are 
increasing  in  asperity  and  aggravation.  I  am  not  able  to 
this  day  to  assure  you  with  undoubting  confidence  that  the 
peace  will  continue  through  the  present  year.  France  has 
often  commenced  her  military  operations  in  the  north  of 
Europe  during  the  months  of  September  and  October,  nor 
will  it  be  safe  to  affirm,  until  these  months  are  past,  that  she 
will  not  now  repeat  the  example.  A  new  point  of  discussion 
has  recently  occurred  which  is  of  a  character  calculated  to 
hasten  the  crisis.  The  Russian  government  some  time  since 
issued  a  circular  notification  that  the  ports  of  Anatolia  upon 
the  Black  Sea  were  in  a  state  of  blockade.  The  Russian 
squadron  there  have  lately  taken  eight  Greek  ships  laden 
with  firearms  and  other  articles  of  contraband  of  war,  but 
sailing  under  the  French  flag  and  furnished  with  papers  from 
the  French  legation  at  Constantinople.  The  Chancellor 
has  within  a  few  days  addressed  to  the  French  ambassador 
a  long  note  couched  in  very  strong  language  on  this  subject. 
The  ambassador  alleges  that  the  vessels  were  bound  to  ports 
within  the  Russian  dominions.  But  the  Russian  forces 
needed  no  supplies  of  warlike  stores  from  that  quarter,  and 
the  destination  of  the  ships  was  at  all  events  to  a  place  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  Georgians  and  other  tribes  of  Mount  Cauca¬ 
sus,  who  are  in  a  state  of  fermentation  and  revolt  against 
the  Russian  authority.  This  incident,  though  intended  to 
be  kept  secret,  has  occasioned  within  the  last  week  a  renewed 

1  Cypher. 


i68 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

rumor  of  war  in  this  city,  and  the  most  recent  communica¬ 
tions  from  France  are  not  of  a  nature  to  remove  the  alarm. 
Another  scene  in  the  horrible  tragedy  of  Spain  and  Portugal 
has  displayed  itself,  and  the  French  arms  appear  to  have 
recovered  their  preponderancy  on  the  borders  of  Portugal, 
and  to  have  established  it  in  Catalonia,  nearly  at  the  same 
moment.  These  successes  have  changed  the  determination 
which  the  Emperor  Napoleon  had  taken  to  go  there  in  person, 
which  I  mentioned  to  you  in  one  of  my  late  letters,  and  leave 
him  at  liberty  to  take  any  other  course  which  he  may  deem 
advisable. 

I  believe  that  henceforth  we  shall  have  little  reason  to  dread 
the  operation  of  any  French  influence  against  our  trade  with 
Russia  that  can  be  exercised  here .  The  day  of  mutual  accommo¬ 
dations  and  deferences  between  the  two  Empires  is  irretrievably 
past .  That  of  the  compliances  on  the  part  of  Russia  is  also 
gone .  At  this  moment  Russia  has  a  confidence  in  her  strength 
and  state  of  preparation  which ,  since  the  peace  of  Tilsit ,  she 
has  never  felt  before ,  and  between  her  and  France  there  is 
probably  not  in  a  single  point  of  general  politics  a  conformity  of 
views  or  of  interests .  The  American  commerce  has  certainly 
not  been  in  the  idea  of  either  party  the  most  important  object 
upon  which  they  have  clashed ,  but  until  very  lately  it  has  been 
one  of  deep  interest  to  both .  It  cannot  be  doubted  but  that  the 
interest  of  Russia  herself  formed  the  decisive  motives  to  that 
resistance  which  this  government  has  maintained  against  the 
pretensions  of  France ,  and  which  Count  Romanzojf  termed 
their  obstinate  attachment  to  the  United  States .  I  am  however 
sincerely  persuaded  that  a  personal  sentiment  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander ,  a  sentiment  resulting  from  the  natural  generosity 
and  magnanimity  of  his  character ,  did  contribute ,  together  with 
the  interests  of  his  Empire ,  to  that  cool  and  inflexible  resolution 
which  he  did  preserve  and  in  which  he  settled ,  after  long  and 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


169 


1811] 

mature  deliberation .  This  sentiment  may  justly  be  termed 
attachment  to  the  United  State s,  and  I  wish  that  their  govern¬ 
ment  may  be  sensible  of  it.  On  this  occasion ,  as  my  letter  may 
; probably  reach  you  about  the  time  when  Congress  will  convene , 
I  ask  the  permission  to  suggest  the  idea  that  some  notice  in 
general  terms  by  the  President ,  in  his  message  at  the  opening 
of  the  session ,  of  the  manner  in  which  Russia  has  been  distin¬ 
guished  by  her  regard  to  our  rights  and  some  complimentary 
expressions  with  reference  personally  to  the  Emperor  might 
have  a  favorable  effect ,  not  only  as  manifesting  a  suitable  return 
to  such  a  disposition ,  but  as  calculated  to  confirm  it ,  when  it 
may  be  liable  to  the  opposition  of  an  influence  still  more  formid¬ 
able  than  that  of  France.1 

Count  Romanzoff  has  also  addressed  me  another  note 
containing  the  information  that  his  Imperial  Majesty  has 
been  pleased  to  appoint  Mr.  Daschkoff,  his  envoy  extraor¬ 
dinary  and  minister  plenipotentiary  to  the  United  States, 
in  the  place  of  Count  Pahlen,  whom  he  destines  to  his  mis¬ 
sion  to  Brazil.  The  motives  assigned  for  the  appointment 
of  Mr.  Daschkoff  are  conformable  to  the  same  amicable 
disposition  which  has  invariably  been  manifested  by  the 
Emperor  to  the  United  States.  I  enclose  a  copy  of  the 
Count’s  note  and  of  my  answer.  I  am  with  sincere  re¬ 
spect,  etc. 

1  Cypher.  The  President’s  message  merely  stated  that  relations  “with  Russia 
are  on  the  best  footing  of  friendship.” 


170  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1811 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  62.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  9  August,  18 n. 

Sir: 

Soon  after  my  arrival  in  this  country,  in  conformity  to 
instructions  which  I  had  received  from  the  Secretary  of 
State,  I  addressed  an  official  note  to  the  Chancellor  Count 
Romanzoff  concerning  two  American  vessels  which  had 
been  captured,  one  by  a  Russian  privateer,  and  the  other 
by  a  frigate  in  the  fleet  of  Admiral  Siniavin,  while  cruising 
in  the  Mediterranean.  I  enclosed  a  copy  of  my  note  in  my 
letter  of  4  December,  1809,  to  your  predecessor. 

Having  lately  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Thorndike,  the 
owner  of  one  of  the  vessels  in  -question,  requesting  me  to 
call  the  attention  of  the  Russian  government  to  this  subject, 
I  had  last  Tuesday  the  6th  instant  an  interview  with  Count 
Romanzoff,  in  which  I  reminded  him  of  it.  He  said  that  my 
note  had  been  referred  to  the  Minister  of  the  Marine,  from 
whom  no  report  in  relation  to  it  had  been  made,  which  was 
the  reason  why  no  answer  had  yet  been  made  to  me.  But 
he  took  a  minute  of  the  date  of  my  note,  and  promised  me 
that  the  answer  should  not  be  much  longer  delayed. 

With  respect  to  the  discussion  of  articles  for  a  commercial 
treaty  I  told  the  Count  that 1  the  extraordinary  uncertainty 
of  the  present  state  of  political  affairs,  as  well  as  the  uncer¬ 
tainty  of  my  own  situation  here,  not  knowing  what  deter¬ 
mination  the  President  of  the  United  States  had  taken,  bx 
might  ultimately  take,  in  regard  to  the  mission  at  this  Court, 
had  deterred  me  from  making  further  communications  to 


1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1811] 


171 


him,  in  addition  to  that  which  I  had  verbally  made  him  in 
our  conference  on  the  4th  of  June.  He  said  that  while  this 
extreme  uncertainty  continued  there  could  he  no  use  in  under¬ 
taking  any  such  discussion .  The  determination  of  the  Russian 
government  still  was  to  shew  all  possible  favor  and  encourage¬ 
ment  to  the  American  commerce ,  hut  to  provide  for  the  day  as 
it  passed  out  of  our  hands  was  all  that  the  nature  of  things  now 
admitted  of.  From  hour  to  hour  was  it  possible  to  say  that  there 
would  he  any  such  commerce  to  favor?  A  war  between  the 
United  States  and  England  must  obviously  destroy  it  totally . 
Such  a  war  now  appeared  to  him  altogether  unavoidable ,  and 
he  was  sincerely  sorry  for  it.  He  regretted  it  particularly  as  it 
indicated  1  that  the  flames  of  war  instead  of  abating,  as  he 
most  ardently  wished,  were  to  be  still  extended.  And  when 
was  it  to  end?  What  was  my  opinion?  Did  I  think  there 
was  any  prospect  of  a  peace?  I  asked  him  whether  he  meant 
a  general  peace?  He  said  yes;  or  at  least  a  peace  between 
France  and  England.  That,  I  observed,  was  in  substance 
the  same  thing,  that  peace  would  make  all  others  easy; 
but  I  must  confess  that  never  appeared  to  me  more  remote 
than  at  this  moment.  He  said  that  greatly  to  his  affliction  he 
perfectly  agreed  with  me  in  this  opinion.1  The  conversation 
now  becoming  altogether  general,  rambled  without  much 
coherency  over  the  scene  of  passing  events,  and  was  too 
long  and  in  many  respects  of  too  little  interest  to  be  worth 
detailing  minutely  to  you. 

I  observed  that  besides  the  state  of  affairs  between  the  United 
States  and  England  which ,  with  him ,  I  believed  and  deeply 
lamented  could  terminate  no  otherwise  than  in  war ,  the  state 
of  affairs  and  the  discussions  which  had  arisen  between  Russia 
and  France  (at  least  as  they  were  considered  and  repre¬ 
sented  in  the  public  opinion)  threatened  at  least  as  much  the 

1  Cypher. 


172 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

prolongation  of  the  war .  It  was  the  first  time  I  had  thought 
proper  to  speak  to  him  on  this  subject ,  and  the  occasion  so 
naturally  introduced  it ,  that  there  would  have  been  rather  an 
affectation  than  the  substance  of  delicacy  in  avoiding  it.  He 
said  that  as  to  the  relations  between  Russia  and  France  there 
was  doubtless  much  public  discourse ,  for  which  there  was  no 
foundation;  but  thus  much  he  could  say  to  me ,  that  if  the  whole 
budget  were  turned  inside  out ,  and  exposed  to  the  view  of  the 
public ,  it  would  by  no  means  tend  to  weaken  the  same  conclu¬ 
sions  which  were  drawn  from  what  was  known ,  or  to  brighten 
the  prospect  of  peace. 

He  told  me  that  the  French  Ambassador  had  just  been  with 
him.  He  had  received  a  courier  the  day  before ,  who  had  brought 
him  an  account  of  the  dissolution  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Council 
at  Paris ,  and  the  imprisonment  of  three  of  the  bishops.  He 
was  surprised  at  this  symptom  of  resistance  to  the  will  of  the 
Emperor  Napoleon ,  for  he  was  satisfied ,  from  his  own  personal 
observation f  that  there  was  very  little  attachment  to  reli¬ 
gion  in  France.  It  was  not  as  it  had  been  thirty  or  forty 
years  before  a  fashion  of  infidelity,  but  a  profound  indiffer¬ 
ence,  or  rather  an  almost  universal  absence  of  all  religious 
ideas.  And  it  was  not  particularly  confined  to  France.  It 
seemed  to  extend  to  the  Roman  Catholics  all  over  Europe. 
Considering  what  the  Pope  was,  in  the  principle  of  the  Ro¬ 
man  Catholics,  how,  but  from  this  general  indifference, 
could  it  be  accounted  for  that  no  mark  of  interest  or  of 
sensibility  had  been  manifested  from  any  part  of  the  Cath¬ 
olic  world  to  the  situation  of  the  Pope.  Yet  the  Catholics 
formed  the  great  mass  of  population  in  several  important 
European  states.  To  instance  only  Austria.  I  suggested 
that  the  Austrian  government ,  from  motives  of  policy ,  might 
perhaps  restrain  the  expression  of  such  sentiments ,  though 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


173 


1811] 

otherwise  they  might  he  entertained:  hut  he  replied  that  the 
sentiment  to  which  he  alluded  was  precisely  of  a  nature  which 
the  policy  of  the  government  could  not  control .  Were  it  felt , 
it  would  hurst  through  all  such  restraint;  hut  he  was  not  aware 
that  any  had  been  used .  Here  he  was  at  least  sure  that  none  had. 
There  were  provinces  of  the  Russian  empire  inhabited  almost 
entirely  by  Catholics .  They  were  not  only  unrestrained  in  re¬ 
gard  to  their  religious  sentiments ,  hut  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
well  knew — he  had  been  explicitly  informed  long  ago — that 
in  case  of  any  difference  between  him  and  the  Pope ,  by  which 
the  consciences  of  that  class  of  the  Russian  subjects  might  be 
affected ,  the  Russian  government  would  not  side  with  him 
against  them. 

The  approaches  to  hostility  may  perhaps  be  indicated  more 
accurately  by  gradations  of  temper  than  by  the  particular  sub¬ 
jects  in  discussion  between  the  parties.  How  serious  the  dif¬ 
ferences  in  altercation  between  the  two  Empires  appear  to  this 
government  you  will  easily  infer  from  this  conversation ,  when 
you  recollect  that  Count  Romanzoff  is  the  man  of  the  Russian 
dominions  most  deeply  pledged  and  most  strongly  attached  to 
the  French  alliance.  The  same  inference  may  be  drawn  from 
language  very  recently  held  by  the  Emperor  Alexander  himself. 
The  Sunday  before  last  Count  Luxburg ,  the  Bavarian  charge 
d'affaires,  had  a  private  audience  to  take  leave  of  his  Majesty. 
The  Emperor ,  after  charging  him  with  his  compliments  to  the 
King  of  Bavaria ,  said:  “I  hope  the  peace  of  the  north  of  Europe 
will  not  be  disturbed.  There  is  a  great  deal  of  talk  abroad 
among  the  public ,  but  all  that  signifies  nothing.  For  what 
purpose  should  there  be  war?  It  is  time  that  the  world  should 
be  allowed  a  little  tranquillity.  I  suppose  it  is  not  expected  to 
make  conquests  here.  What  end  could  that  answer?  As  for 
the  rest ,  we  are  ready  (Au  reste,  nous  sommes  pret).”  I  have 
these  particulars  from  Count  Luxburg  himself ,  who  was  much 


174 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

surprised ,  and  not  a  little  embarrassed  at  this  unexpected  dis¬ 
course.  The  King  of  Bavaria  is  a  member  of  the  Rhenish 
confederation . 

There  is  a  rumor  in  circulation  that  the  king  of  Prussia  has 
acceded ,  or  rather  been  admitted  to  that  league.  It  is  reported 
to  me  from  sources  which  induce  me  now  to  notice  it,  but  not 
from  such  as  I  consider  indisputably  authentic.  It  is  obvious 
that  in  the  event  of  war  between  France  and  Russia,  Prussia 
must  rely  on  a  protector,  and  as  clear  that  her  own  policy  would 
give  the  preference  to  France.1  I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 


TO  GEORGE  WILLIAM  ERVING 

St.  Petersburg,  13  August,  1811. 

Dear  Sir: 

•  •••••• 

I  congratulate  you  cordially  upon  the  success  which  has 
hitherto  attended  your  u special  mission .”  It  is  felt  and  ac¬ 
knowledged  by  the  Americans,  who  have  found  their  way 
here  so  much  more  easily  since  your  arrival  than  they  could 
before.  I  hope  it  will  terminate  as  much  to  your  satisfaction 
as  you  could  anticipate.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that 
the  Danish  government  still  refuses  to  listen  to  reason  with 
regard  to  the  convoy  cases.  If  however  the  British  do  not 
renew  the  blockade  of  the  Sound,  there  will  be  no  convoy 
cases  after  this;  and  if  Denmark  who  takes  a  toll  will  perform 
her  corresponding  part  of  keeping  the  passage  free,  none  of 
our  countrymen  will  ever  resort  to  a  British  protection  to 
effect  it. 

That  the  alliance  of  which  you  speak  will  be  defeated,  if 
they  set  up  a  party  of  their  own,  I  firmly  believe  with  you. 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


I7S 


l8u] 

I  had  heard  something  of  it  before  I  received  your  letter, 
but  I  confess  to  you  when  I  heard  such  names  as  candidates 
for  the  next  Presidency,  I  thought  those  who  told  me  that 
such  would  be  the  case  were  joking.  I  should  even  now  not 
believe  it  possible,  had  I  not  seen  upon  what  foundation 
Aaron  Burr  seriously  undertook  to  make  himself  an  Emperor, 
and  how  much  newspaper  eloquence  was  wasted  before  the 
last  election,  to  make  a  candidate,  whose  chance  of  success 
was  no  better  than  that  of  the  allies  will  be  at  the  next. 
The  rumor  of  Mr.  Randolph’s  appointment  to  England  was 
at  least  premature,  and  I  suppose  naturally  sprung  from 
Mr.  Monroe’s  accession  to  the  Department  of  State.  After 
what  has  happened  I  think  we  shall  not  soon  have  an  envoy 
of  any  kind  at  the  Court  of  St.  James,  but  when  we  do,  I 
should  be  glad  to  see  there  a  man  of  Mr.  Randolph’s  spirit, 
with  a  little  more  discretion  of  conduct,  and  much  more 
delicacy  of  language  and  deportment.  I  have  some  curiosity 
to  see  what  his  line  of  politics  will  be,  since  his  friend  1  has 
become  a  member  of  the  administration.  You  do  not  com¬ 
prehend  the  policy  of  the  Perceval-Wellesley  ministry  in  the 
order  to  encourage  a  trade  between  France  and  England 
in  French  ships  manned  by  French  seamen.  Will  you  allow 
me  to  suggest  my  solution  of  the  problem?  It  is,  that  the 
Perceval-Wellesley  tribe,  composing  alas!  too  large  a  part  of 
their  nation,  hate  a  Frenchman  more  than  they  do  anything 
on  this  side  the  infernal  regions,  excepting  a  Yankee .  The 
reason  is  because  in  their  hatred  of  France  their  pride  is 
gratified  as  by  the  consciousness  of  struggling  against  su¬ 
perior  power — they  think  the  strife  glorious.  Their  hatred 
of  America  is  mingled  with  the  mortification  of  having  in  her 
an  enemy  whom  they  wish  to  despise,  and  cannot.  As  a 
commercial  rival  they  dread  America  much  more  than  France. 

1  Monroe.  See  Henry  Adams,  History ,  V.  367. 


176 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

I  think  as  you  do,  that  they  will  force  America  into  a  war 
against  them,  though  they  might  see  as  clearly  as  you  and 
I  do,  that  in  this  policy  they  make  themselves  the  tool  of 
Bonaparte. 

The  difficulties  between  France  and  Russia  are  not 
smoothed  over,  and  Oldenburg  is  but  one  among  many  of 
their  causes.  There  has  been  ever  since  the  peace  of  Tilsit 
a  sort  of  instinct  in  the  public  opinion  that  another  war 
between  the  two  empires  must  soon  come.  Hence  at  the 
first  moment  when  it  was  known  there  was  a  variance  in 
their  cabinets,  the  speculative  politicians  made  a  somerset 
over  all  the  intermediate  gradations,  and  at  the  first  word  of 
discussion,  proclaimed  the  war  in  which  it  may  terminate. 
The  parties  have  not  yet  come  to  avow  their  altercations 
in  public,  but  they  are  acquiring  asperity  and  growing  in 
number.  The  late  ambassador  on  his  return  hence  to  Paris 
administered  a  cooling  and  quieting  potion,  which  oper¬ 
ated  remarkably  well  for  a  time,  and  that  was  the  time  when 
you  must  have  heard  that  the  cure  was  effected.  But  there 
has  been  since  then  another  paroxysm,  which  I  hope  will 
not  end  in  a  convulsion  before  winter.  And  then  there  will 
be  time  gained  to  try  new  and  more  durable  pacific  expedi¬ 
ents.  I  am  etc. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


177 


1811] 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  63.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  16  August,  1811. 

Sir: 

The  state  of  affairs  between  Russia  and  France  still  con¬ 
tinues  to  be  critical.  The  negotiations  between  the  parties 
have  lately  acquired  a  degree  of  activity,  but  with  regard  to 
their  particulars  there  is  an  unusual  secrecy  affected  on  both 
sides.  The  rumor  that  the  king  of  Prussia  has  acceded  to  the 
confederation  of  the  Rhine  is  still  maintained,  but  the  fact 
is  known  to  none  of  the  ministers  from  the  princes  of  that 
confederation  at  this  court.  The  kings  of  Saxony,  Bavaria, 
Wiirtemburg,  and  Westphalia  have  ministers  here  with  the 
rank  of  envoy  and  minister  plenipotentiary.  So  has  the 
king  of  Prussia.  Not  one  of  them  is  informed  whether  the 
Autumn  will  pass  in  peace,  and  their  courts  are  as  ignorant  of 
ivhat  is  to  happen  as  themselves ,1 

The  following  article,  translated  from  the  St.  Petersburg 
gazette  of  this  day,  was  probably  inserted  for  the  purpose  of 
quieting  a  new  alarm,  which  during  the  last  fortnight  has 
existed  here,  that  the  war  was  on  the  point  of  breaking  out. 

From  the  Rhine,  28  June,  they  write  as  follows:  The  rumors  of 
the  possibility  of  a  new  war  upon  the  continent  had  indeed  never 
obtained  credit  with  persons  of  penetration,  because  there  was  not 
a  single  fact  to  support  them,  but  even  these  rumors  have  now 
entirely  ceased  to  be  heard.  Every  one  is  convinced  that  the  con¬ 
tinental  peace  is  more  firmly  established  than  ever,  and  Europe 
has  well  grounded  hopes  of  enjoying  a  long  repose,  which  after  so 
many  bloody  efforts  it  so  truly  needs.  The  termination  of  the 

1  Cypher. 


1 78 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


disturbances  in  Spain  and  the  subjugation  of  its  neighboring 
Portugal,  together  with  the  expulsion  of  the  English  from  the 
Pyrenean  peninsula  appear  now  to  be  the  principal  objects  of  the 
French  government.  In  order  the  more  speedily  to  accomplish 
this  end,  it  is  understood  that  orders  have  been  dispatched  to  a 
very  considerable  number  of  troops  distributed  in  the  interior  of 
the  empire  to  march  immediately  for  Spain.  It  is  said  that  even 
some  of  the  columns  which  had  previously  been  ordered  to  the 
Rhine,  have  also  had  their  destination  altered,  and  taken  the  same 
direction.  New  convoys  of  artillery  and  of  warlike  stores  of  all 
kinds  are  in  the  like  manner  taking  the  road  to  Spain.  The  Berne 
gazette  contradicts  the  report  that  the  French  troops  have  quitted 
the  canton  of  Tessin. 

The  date  of  this  article  is  prior  to  the  most  recent  rumors 
of  war,  but  its  publication  here  in  a  sort  of  official  gazette 
at  this  time  is  the  strongest  indication  which  has  yet  oc¬ 
curred  that  the  peace  will  survive  the  present  year.  It 
is  probable  that  France  has  expostulated,  and  perhaps 
warmly,  against  the  extraordinary  number  of  troops  on  the 
Polish  frontier,  with  intimations  that  unless  part  of  those 
forces  should  be  removed,  her  own  armaments  in  the  same 
quarter  must  be  proportioned  to  them.  That  such  immense 
preparations  on  the  borders  of  a  friend  were  the  more 
strongly  calculated  to  excite  uneasiness  at  a  time  when  there 
was  an  enemy,  against  whom  Russia  had  so  recently  shewn 
a  spirit  so  highly  animated,  to  employ  them.  In  fine  that 
France  considered  it  as  indispensable  that  Russia  should 
assume  in  that  quarter  an  attitude  less  menacing.  To  these 
suggestions  it  has  been  natural  to  answer  that  France  herself 
must  set  the  example  and  suspend  her  counter-armaments. 
Intead  of  two  divisions  as  mentioned  in  my  letter  of  28  July 
I  now  hear  that  double  that  number,  or  sixty  thousand  men, 
have  been  ordered  to  join  again  the  Turkish  army  from  which 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


179 


1811] 

they  had  been  detached;  and  as  this  has  been  thus  far  in 
compliance  with  the  requisitions  of  France,  it  may  be  deemed 
proper  to  turn  the  attention  of  the  public  to  the  like  com¬ 
pliance  on  her  part. 

It  is  certain  that  the  French  Ambassador  now  speaks  more 
confidently  of  the  preservation  of  peace  than  he  did  last  week . 
He  1  gave  yesterday  a  great  entertainment  on  the  occasion 
of  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s  birthday,  which  was  attended  by 
the  Chancellor  and  principal  ministers  and  crown  officers 
of  this  empire.2 

The  Ambassador ,  whom  I  frequently  see ,  by  no  means  accords 
with  the  Russian  government  respecting  the  relations  between 
the  United  States  and  Britain .  I  have  often  reported  to  you 
the  earnestness  with  which  it  is  here  desired  that  our  peace  with 
England  may  be  preserved.  You  will  see  by  my  last  conversa¬ 
tion  with  the  Chancellor  that  he  expressed  this  sentiment  with¬ 
out  reserve.  The  Ambassador  is  equally  candid  and  explicit 
in  his  wishes  and  his  hopes ,  that  it  will  come  to  a  war.  I  believe 
that  he  and  his  government  estimate  too  highly  the  advantage  to 
them  of  this  war;  but  that  it  will  be  advantageous  to  them  is  so 
obvious  that  it  is  surprising  it  should  not  be  perceived  by  a 
British  minis  try. 3 

Among  the  vessels  under  the  American  flag  which  have 
arrived  within  a  few  weeks  at  Cronstadt  was  one  called  the 
Angerona ,  Captain  John  T.  Marks.  She  had  been  chartered 
in  London  to  come  here  in  ballast  and  take  a  cargo.  Im¬ 
mediately  after  her  arrival  I  received  an  intimation  that 
she  came  with  forged  papers,  of  which  I  gave  notice  to  Mr. 
Harris,  that  he  might  be  prepared  for  the  detection  of  the 
fraud  when  the  papers  should  be  put  into  his  hands.  They 
passed  through  the  examination  of  the  Neutral  Commission, 
where  after  some  difficulty  they  were  admitted  as  genuine. 

1  Cypher.  2  Adams,  Memoirs ,  August  15,  1811.  3  Cypher. 


180  THE  WRITINGS  OF  (i8n 

Just  at  the  time  when  they  were  to  be  sent  to  Mr.  Harris, 
Captain  Marks  informed  him  that  he  had  lost  them  from 
his  pocketbook  at  Cronstadt,  together  with  some  other 
valuable  papers,  and  he  advertised  them  offering  a  hand¬ 
some  reward  to  any  person  who  should  find  them,  but  with¬ 
out  effect.  Captain  Marks  then  came  to  me,  requesting 
my  assistance  to  obtain  for  him  a  document  to  serve  him  as 
a  substitute  for  genuine  American  papers  instead  of  those 
he  alleged  to  have  lost.  I  could  give  him  no  such  assistance. 
I  explicitly  stated  to  him  that  I  had  reason  to  believe  that 
he  came  with  forged  papers.  He  said  if  they  were,  it  was  not 
to  his  knowledge,  that  he  had  received  them  from  Mr. 
Maury  at  Liverpool,  and  that  they  had  passed  through  the 
hands  of  Mr.  Lyman  at  London.  I  referred  him  to  Mr. 
Harris,  who  since  told  me  that  he  should  take  bonds  equal  to 
the  value  of  the  vessel,  to  be  forfeited  unless  proof  should 
hereafter  be  produced  by  Captain  Marks  that  his  papers 
were  genuine.  It  may  be  observed  on  this  occasion  that  now 
all  difficulties  here  with  regard  to  the  papers  of  vessels  com¬ 
ing  in  ballast  are  merely  formal,  or  raised  for  the  benefit 
of  having  them  removed.  It  is  a  matter  of  indifference 
where  or  to  whom  the  vessel  belong,  if  she  brings  no  cargo 
and  comes  to  take  one  of  Russian  produce  or  manufactures 
away.  It  is  however  so  far  from  being  indifferent  to  us,  that 
I  should  regret  the  success  in  a  single  instance  here,  of  the 
London  forgeries  of  ships-papers  attempted  to  be  passed 
off  for  American  registers.  If  peace  and  any  commerce 
should  be  left  us,  it  would  deserve  to  be  considered,  whether 
some  further  legislative  provisions  might  not  be  expedient, 
to  secure  the  fair  and  authentic  papers  from  the  too  close 
resemblance  of  the  counterfeits.  I  am  very  respectfully  etc. 

P.  S.  I  take  the  liberty  to  enclose  a  letter  to  the  President 
of  the  United  States,  and  two  others. 


i8ii] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


181 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  20  August,  1811. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

•  •••••• 

As  I  declined  the  seat  upon  the  bench  upon  the  foresight 
of  this  state  of  things,  I  conclude  that  another  judge  will  be 
appointed  during  the  next  session  of  the  United  States 
Senate.  The  place  here  will  remain  to  be  disposed  of  at 
the  pleasure  of  the  President.  I  foresee  no  insuperable  im¬ 
pediment  to  my  return  home  the  next  summer,  if  he  deems 
my  recall  to  be  still  expedient.  If  at  any  time  I  could  have 
harbored  an  ambition  or  desire  to  go  elsewhere,  the  state 
of  affairs  in  the  only  places  where  I  could  be  transferred  is 
sufficient  to  damp  a  fiercer  flame  than  I  ever  felt.  Among 
the  good  natured  friends  that  I  have  both  in  Europe  and 
America,  who  speculate  and  foretell  upon  persons  and  ap¬ 
pointments,  there  have  been  enough  to  give  me  notice  of 
destinations  which  might  have  been  assigned  to  me.  I  as¬ 
sure  you  in  the  sincerity  of  my  heart  that  I  have  never  had 
an  intimation  of  these  possibilities  without  serious  concern 
lest  they  should  prove  true,  and  that  I  have  felt  a  real 
satisfaction  at  finding  the  lot  cast  upon  others,  which  it 
was  supposed  by  many,  hoped  by  a  few,  and  feared  perhaps 
by  more  than  either,  might  fall  to  me.  In  justice  to  my  own 
feelings  I  ought  to  tell  you,  to  whom  my  whole  soul  is  as 
open  as  to  itself,  that  I  never  will  shrink  from  any  post 
which  the  constitutional  organs  of  my  country  shall  assign 
to  me,  for  any  difficulty  or  danger  with  which  it  may  be 
beset.  But  I  may  be  allowed  to  feel  a  satisfaction  when  I 
see  myself  passed  by,  in  the  assignment  of  a  place  where  I 
know  there  is  nothing  but  difficulty  and  danger  to  be  ex- 


1 82  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1811 

pected.  You  have  in  some  of  your  letters  suggested  the  idea 
that  the  motives  of  some  of  those  whose  suffrages  concurred 
to  the  appointment  last  offered  me,  were  neither  pure  nor 
friendly  to  me.  Of  those  which  actuated  the  President  I  am 
as  sure  as  if  they  were  in  my  own  heart.  I  know  they  were 
both  honest  and  kind  to  me.  Among  the  Senators  there  were 
certainly  two,  whom  no  personal  regard  for  me  would  have 
withheld  from  recording  their  votes  against  me,  and  who  not 
having  done  it,  must  have  been  actuated  by  motives  of  a 
different  kind.  If  it  were  in  my  nature  to  suspect  dishonest 
intentions  in  conduct  apparently  fair,  my  own  interest  in 
this  case  would  lead  me  to  more  favorable  conclusions.  It 
is  more  honorable  to  myself  as  well  as  to  the  voters,  to  be¬ 
lieve  that  they  gave  their  assent  to  the  nomination  from  the 
conviction  that  I  was  well  qualified  for  the  office,  than  to 
imagine  that  they  foresaw  it  would  be  a  place  where  I  should 
be  stowed  away  from  public  view,  or  unavoidably  forfeit 
any  popularity  which  I  might  possess.  These  at  least  are 
motives  which  no  one  will  acknowledge,  and  considering 
the  unanimity  of  the  vote  in  the  Senate  as  a  testimony  of 
confidence  in  my  integrity  from  political  opponents  as  well  as 
friends,  it  has  been  the  most  gratifying  occurrence  of  my  life. 
The  office  itself  of  a  judge  nothing  could  ever  reconcile  to 
my  own  inclinations,  but  with  this  testimony  in  my  favor, 
I  can  return  to  private  life,  not  with  a  prouder  consciousness 
of  my  own  uprightness,  than  when  I  was  turned  out  of  the 
Senate  by  my  constituents,  the  Massachusetts  legislature, 
but  at  least  with  a  dismissal  less  offensive  in  form  and  more 
agreeable  in  substance. 

My  good  friend  Quincy  whom,  notwithstanding  his  great 
and  manifold  political  errors,  I  still  adhere  to  in  heart  as  a 
friend,  made  last  winter  an  eloquent,  satirical  and  witty 
speech  upon  the  ungovernable  passion  of  Americans  for 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1811] 


place.  He  seems  to  assume  it  as  the  basis  of  his  whole  dis¬ 
course,  that  the  desire  for  public  office  is  a  crime ,  and  with  a 
very  magnanimous  patriotism  he  pours  forth  his  indignation 
and  contempt  without  respect  to  persons,  both  upon  friend 
and  foe  guilty  of  soliciting  themselves,  or  of  having  relations 
in  Congress  who  solicit  for  them,  the  distinctions  and  the 
profits  which  may  be  derived  from  public  service.  Mr. 
Quincy  is  not  the  first  whom  I  have  heard  talk,  as  if  the  con¬ 
summation  of  human  virtue  consisted  in  the  aversion  or  dis¬ 
dain  to  hold  public  office.  Longe  die  mihi  est  mens. 

It  is  my  opinion  that  the  wish  even  for  the  honors  and 
emoluments  of  public  office  is  not  in  itself  a  culpable  senti¬ 
ment.  That  there  is  nothing  disgraceful  or  despicable  in 
avowing  it,  nor  yet  in  seeking  its  gratification  by  fair  and 
ingenuous  means.  Still  less  can  I  find  it  in  my  heart  to 
despise  the  member  of  Congress,  who  by  the  same  means 
endeavors  to  procure  these  advantages  to  his  father,  son  or 
brother,  if  deserving  of  them;  nor  the  father,  son  or  brother, 
who  by  the  honest  influence  of  such  a  member  of  Congress 
should  obtain  them.  In  all  this  I  see  nothing  despicable  and 
nothing  dangerous,  but  the  excess  to  which  in  common  with 
other  human  passions  it  is  liable.  I  have  too  good  an  opinion 
of  the  social  affections  of  Quincy  himself  to  believe  that, 
when  his  son  Josiah  shall  have  grown  to  manhood,  his  father 
would  without  reluctance  see  him  proscribed  from  all  public 
service,  an  outcast  from  all  the  favors  of  his  country,  be¬ 
cause  he,  the  father,  might  still  be  serving  that  country  as  a 
member  of  Congress. 

But  although  there  is  nothing  dishonorable  or  unjust  in 
the  pursuit  of  public  office,  I  always  have  considered  and  yet 
consider  it  as  a  passion,  which  requires  great  moderation, 
self-management,  and  control.  I  never  solicited  any  public 
office  whatsoever  for  myself,  nor  that  I  recollect  for  any  of 


184 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[18 1 1 

my  relations.  My  own  maxim  has  been  to  wait  until  called 
by  the  voice  of  my  country,  and  to  repair  without  hesitation 
to  the  post  assigned  me  by  that.  I  have  in  several  instances 
indeed  interfered  to  prevent  the  call,  and  in  this  single  case 
have  answered  it  by  denial.  But  I  have  never  withstood  it 
but  from  solid  and  cogent  reasons,  nor,  if  my  present  station 
should  be  the  last  to  which  I  may  ever  be  destined,  shall 
it  be  from  any  fastidious  delicacy  of  mine  to  reject  any  office, 
for  which  I  may  be  thought  and  may  think  myself  suitably 
qualified. 

After  the  multitude  of  high,  honorable  and  profitable 
trusts  which  have  been  committed  to  me  by  my  country, 
I  should  indeed  deserve  the  reproach  of  unbridled  ambition 
and  of  base  ingratitude  could  I  not  with  cheerful  heart 
retire  for  the  remainder  of  my  days  to  private  life,  and  see 
her  henceforth  distribute  to  others  of  her  children  those 
favors  of  which  she  has  hitherto  been  so  lavish  to  me.  And 
surely  there  never  could  be  a  time  when  for  the  peace  and 
tranquillity  of  my  own  life,  or  for  the  future  prospects  of  my 
children,  I  could  withdraw  from  the  responsibilities  of  the 
approaching  events  with  more  comfort  and  satisfaction. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  64.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  23  August,  1811. 

Sir: 

The  day  before  yesterday  I  received  from  Mr.  Erving  a 
letter,  dated  the  9th  instant  at  Copenhagen,  containing  the 
information  that  a  privateer  under  French  colors  had  taken 
and  carried  into  that  port  two  American  vessels,  the  brig 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1811] 


Hero ,  Bladder  master,  of  Marblehead,  bound  from  that 
place  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  the  brig  Radius ,  B.  Lander 
master,  of  Boston,  and  bound  from  Newport,  also  to  St. 
Petersburg.  That  the  papers  of  these  two  vessels  had  been 
delivered  to  Mr.  Desangiers,  the  French  consul  and  charge 
d’affaires,  and  by  him  sent  to  Paris,  and  that  he,  Mr.  Erving, 
had  made  every  effort  both  with  Mr.  Desangiers,  and  with 
the  Danish  government,  to  prevent  this,  and  to  obtain  that 
the  matter  should  be  decided  in  the  tribunals  of  Denmark; 
but  unhappily  without  effect.  The  letter  adds  that  the 
privateer  was  going  out  again  that  night,  and  it  was  very 
much  to  be  feared,  intended  to  fill  that  port  with  our  vessels 
upon  their  return  from  this  quarter. 

On  receiving  this  letter  I  immediately  enclosed  to  Mr. 
Harris  an  extract  from  it  including  all  the  material  parts  of 
its  information,  requesting  him  to  communicate  the  same  as 
expeditiously  as  possible  to  the  masters  of  all  the  American 
vessels  now  at  Cronstadt  (amounting  to  nearly  one  hundred) 
and  to  all  other  persons  here  known  to  him  as  particularly 
interested  in  them.  And  I  suggest  to  him  the  propriety  of 
giving  the  same  notice  to  the  consular  agents  at  Riga  and  at 
Reval. 

There  may  perhaps  he  one  half  of  the  American  vessels  now 
here  who  came  in  ballast  and  entered  with  clearances  from  Gothen¬ 
burg:  but  they  really  come  from  England ,  where  they  were 
chartered  at  very  high  freights  to  come  and  take  cargoes  of  hemp 
to  carry  back  to  England.  All  these  came  into  the  Baltic 
through  the  Belt ,  and  probably  under  English  convoy .  They  will 
return ,  I  suppose ,  in  like  manner ,  and  will  be  in  no  danger 
from  this  privateer  or  any  other.1  Among  these  vessels  there 
are  at  least  two  which  came  with  forged  papers.  One  the 
Angerona ,  Captain  Marks,  mentioned  in  my  last  letter,  and 

1  Cypher. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i  8 1 1 


1 86 

the  other  a  vessel  called  the  Philadelphia  Packet ,  Captain 
Thorburn,  which  was  detected  by  Mr.  Harris.  Both  of  these 
I  understand  will  incur  the  penalty  of  having  produced 
false  papers,  Mr.  Harris  having  found  upon  further  exami¬ 
nation  that  Marks  could  not  give  bonds  to  his  satisfaction, 
to  prove  hereafter  that  the  papers  which  he  had  brought  and 
pretended  to  have  lost  w’ere  genuine.  I  have  heard  sugges¬ 
tions  that  several  of  the  vessels  which  came  with  cargoes  are 
really  from  England  and  laden  on  English  account .  But  of 
this  I  have  not  the  means  of  obtaining  certain  knowledge ,  nor  is 
it  within  my  province  to  be  informed.1 

But  as  the  English  have  not  during  the  present  season 
blockaded  the  passage  of  the  Sound,  almost  all  the  American 
vessels  directly  from  the  United  States  came  regularly 
through  the  Sound  and  paid  the  duties  at  Elsineur.  Having 
no  need  of  English  convoy  they  have  not  taken  it.  The 
appearance  of  this  privateer  may  however  render  it  indis¬ 
pensable  for  them  to  resort  to  that  protection  upon  their 
return.  I  have  been  asked  for  an  opinion  by  the  supercargo 
of  one  vessel  about  to  sail,  and  recommended  to  him,  not 
indeed  to  take  English  convoy,  but  to  keep  out  of  reach 
from  that  privateer. 

It  is  far  from  being  certain  what  treatment  our  vessels 
will  henceforth  experience  from  the  English  ships  in  the 
Baltic  themselves.  There  are  daily  rumors  of  vessels  which 
have  recently  sailed  from  this  port  having  been  captured 
by  the  British  cruisers,  and  the  latest  accounts  from  Eng¬ 
land  mention  the  name  of  a  vessel  direct  from  New  York 
to  St.  Petersburg  taken  and  carried  into  Portsmouth.  I 
have  the  honor  to  be  etc. 


1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


187 


1811J 


TO  WILLIAM  EUSTIS 

{Private,)  St.  Petersburg,  24  August,  1811. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  ought  not  at  this  time  to  have  still  to  acknowledge 
the  receipt  of  your  obliging  favor  of  4  January  last,  which 
I  received  about  the  last  of  May.  With  regard  to  any  in¬ 
formation  of  a  public  nature  that  my  correspondence  could 
afford,  I  have  presumed  that  if  you  remained  at  the  head  of 
the  War  Department,  you  would  have  as  much  of  it  and  as 
frequently  as  would  be  agreeable;  and  in  the  uncertainty 
both  as  to  your  situation  and  of  my  own,  which  the  changes, 
real  and  rumored,  of  the  late  times  have  produced,  I  was 
under  a  sort  of  necessity  to  wait,  that  I  might  [write]  with 
something  more  of  knowledge  what  to  say  and  where  to 
address  you,  than  I  have  hitherto  been  able  to  possess. 

I  must  thank  you  particularly  for  the  view  of  the  three 
great  subjects,  which  were  to  occupy  the  attention  of  Con¬ 
gress  at  that,  as  you  justly  termed  it,  eventful  session — 
Florida,  the  bank,  and  the  non-intercourse,  since  modified 
into  a  non-importation.  Your  reflections  upon  all  these 
topics  appear  to  me  strikingly  just,  and  with  regard  to  the 
course  which  was  eventually  pursued  in  respect  to  the  two 
last,  any  doubts  which  may  remain  upon  my  mind  respect¬ 
ing  its  policy  are  entirely  subordinate  to  the  conviction  that 
nothing  now  remains  but  to  support  what  was  then  done. 

My  situation  in  Europe,  though  almost  as  distant  from 
Paris  as  you  are  at  Washington,  had  given  me  the  means 
of  seeing  the  real  course  of  the  French  policy  perhaps  more 
clearly,  than  it  could  be  discerned  across  the  Atlantic. 
The  revocation  of  the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan  I  believe 


188  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1811 

to  have  been  intentionally  a  fair  offer  to  England,  combined 
with  a  contingent  snare  to  the  United  States.  If  England 
gave  up  her  Orders  in  Council  and  her  paper  blockades, 
France  was  perfectly  willing  to  restore  neutral  commerce 
to  all  its  privileges,  substituting  the  tariff  as  her  weapon 
against  colonial  merchandise,  the  commerce  of  which  she 
believed  could  yield  no  profit  in  any  part  of  the  world  which 
would  not  in  the  nature  of  things  centre  in  England.  If 
England  rejected  or  evaded  the  offer,  as  France  foresaw  she 
would,  then  she  had  granted  substantially  nothing  to 
America,  but  had  laid  the  trap  which  she  concluded  would 
catch  us  in  an  English  war.  Of  the  duplicity  which  pre¬ 
vailed  in  the  French  cabinet  at  that  time  I  have  had  proofs 
that  would  give  sight  to  the  blind.  If  my  whole  public 
correspondence  since  last  February  has  not  miscarried  on 
its  passage,  some  of  these  proofs  must  long  ere  this  be  known 
to  you.  Even  now  France  must  studiously  withhold  all 
evidence  of  her  having  practically  revoked  the  two  decrees 
with  regard  to  us,  because  the  English  government  with 
the  same  cunning  have  declared,  that  upon  such  evidence 
being  given  they  will  revoke  the  Orders  in  Council.  From 
the  moment  that  an  American  vessel  which  entered  a  French 
port  after  the  first  of  November  had  been  seized  and  se¬ 
questered,  I  considered  the  pledge,  given  by  our  non¬ 
intercourse  act  of  the  former  session  and  accepted  by  the 
counterpledge  of  France  in  the  Duke  de  Cadore’s  letter  of 
5  August,  as  totally  forfeited,  and  not  only  forfeited  by  such 
a  gross  and  palpable  violation  of  France’s  own  engagement, 
but  doubly  so  by  the  insulting  pretence  that  this  sequester 
was  to  satisfy  herself  how  we  should  carry  our  promise  into 
effect.  I  did,  therefore,  most  devoutly  hope  that  neither 
the  non-intercourse,  nor  any  measure  specially  pointed  at 
England,  would  have  passed  at  the  last  session;  not  that 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


189 


1811] 

England  did  not  most  richly  deserve  it,  but  because  I  ap¬ 
prehended  that  her  mulish  obstinacy,  combining  with  our 
punctilious  sense  of  our  own  engagements,  would  play  the 
game  into  the  hands  of  France,  and  make  us  both  the  dupes 
of  her  craft  and  perfidy. 

After  saying  thus  much  I  ought  to  add,  that  I  honor  and 
venerate  the  motives  upon  which  the  majority  of  both 
Houses  of  Congress  did  finally  determine  upon  the  non¬ 
importation  act  of  the  last  session.  That  sense  of  a  promise 
given,  which  sacrifices  to  its  fulfilment  the  resentment  of 
ill-usage  and  even  the  imminent  prospect  of  a  treacherous 
return,  has  the  sincerest  homage  of  my  heart,  even  when  I 
cannot  reconcile  its  effects  to  the  coolness  of  my  judgment. 
It  would  seem  that  a  policy  dictated  by  the  purest  and  no¬ 
blest  principles  of  honor  ought  to  be  successful.  I  pray 
that  in  this  instance  it  may  be  so.  At  all  events  good  faith, 
however  insulted  and  abused,  can  never  be  dishonored,  and 
if  our  country  must  suffer,  let  it  be  in  the  cause  of  justice. 
But  the  temper  which  a  long  series  of  outrages  on  the  one 
part  and  of  insulted  forbearance  on  the  other,  has  excited 
between  our  countrymen  and  the  British,  is  daily  producing 
new  incidents  of  irritation  and  new  approximations  to  war. 
The  affair  of  the  President  and  Little  Belt ,  so  contested  on 
the  point  of  fact,  but  which  I  believe  was  unpremeditated 
at  least  by  the  governments  on  both  sides,  has  every  appear¬ 
ance  of  hastening  the  crisis,  and  may  have  brought  it  on  at 
the  moment  when  I  am  writing.  The  prospect  opening  be¬ 
fore  our  country  is  formidable,  but  not  hopeless. 

I  have  reflected  perhaps  more  than  the  subject  deserves 
upon  that  part  of  your  letters  which  personally  concerns 
myself,  and  the  regret  you  express  at  my  absence  under  the 
present  circumstances  of  affairs  from  home.  I  am  certainly, 
comparatively  speaking,  here  in  a  quiet  harbor,  while  those 


190 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

of  you  who  have  so  large  a  portion  in  the  administration 
are  threatened  with  the  pelting  of  a  pitiless  storm.  But  as 
certainly  my  expedition  here  in  the  first  instance  was  not 
more  pleasing  to  myself  than  to  you,  I  assented  to  the  des¬ 
tination,  but  by  no  means  desired  it.  I  have  declined  the 
seat  upon  the  bench,  because  I  could  not  return  in  time  to 
take  it.  I  should  nevertheless  have  been  by  this  time  more 
than  half  way  home,  but  for  circumstances  in  my  family 
which  will  detain  me  another  twelve  months.  When  I  do 
return,  however,  I  shall  have  no  partiality  for  any  share  in 
the  government,  and  least  of  all  for  a  judicial  office.  A 
sentiment  of  my  own,  long  entertained,  would  deter  me  from 
that.  Yet  were  it  possible  for  the  duties  which  a  citizen 
owes  to  his  country  to  be  increased  by  the  obligations  he 
has  received  from  her,  I  should  feel  mine  already  great  be¬ 
yond  the  possibility  of  adequate  return,  to  have  been  yet 
more  accumulated  by  the  honorable  appointment  which 
was  offered  me. 

The  change  which  took  place  in  one  of  the  executive  de¬ 
partments  1  last  spring  has  occasioned  a  multitude  of  rumors, 
which  have  reached  me  either  by  the  public  newspapers  or 
by  private  letters  to  myself  and  to  other  Americans  here. 
There  is  yet  a  thick  veil  of  obscurity  over  the  real  state  of 
things  to  my  eyes,  and  no  immediate  probability  of  its  re¬ 
moval  otherwise  than  by  events.  I  hear  and  read  much  of 
discussions  and  schisms  in  the  republican  party,  of  new 
candidates  to  be  started  at  the  next  presidential  election, 
and  of  the  federalists  having  the  balance  in  their  hands. 
All  this  comes  from  republican  sources,  though  I  am  at  a 
loss  to  believe  one  part  of  it,  and  to  understand  another. 
Most  of  the  federalists  have  unfortunately  placed  themselves 

1  The  Department  of  State.  For  the  President’s  statement,  see  Works  of  Madison 
(Rives),  II.  495. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1811] 


191 


in  such  a  position  that  they  cannot  act  from  any  other  im¬ 
pulse  than  faction.  But  to  some  of  them  and  to  all  of  the 
republicans  I  hope  the  dangers  of  the  country  will  have  the 
effect  which  a  philosophical  historian  says  they  always 
[have]  upon  virtuous  nations,  to  cement  Union,  and  not  as 
in  corrupted  countries,  to  embitter  discussion. 

I  say  little  to  you  about  the  state  of  my  affairs  for  the 
reasons  I  have  already  assigned  in  justification  for  not  hav¬ 
ing  written  to  you  sooner.  Our  commerce  here  has  been 
constantly  favored,  in  spite  of  every  obstacle  thrown  in  its 
way  from  external  quarters.  It  suffers  principally  at  this 
time  from  the  consequences  of  that  favor.  The  markets 
are  crowded  and  overstocked.  The  Danes  had  nearly  es¬ 
caped  their  depredations.  The  English,  though  according 
to  the  Wellesley  doctrine  they  have  two  if  not  three  block¬ 
ades  of  the  Sound  still  subsisting  because  not  formally  re¬ 
voked,  have  not  in  fact  blockaded  the  passage  at  all  this 
year.  Our  vessels,  therefore,  would  come  and  go  perfectly 
secure,  but  for  certain  pirates  with  French  colors  which  at 
Dantzig  on  the  coast  of  Holstein,  and  now  recently  at  Copen¬ 
hagen,  take  every  loaded  vessel  that  they  can  catch,  and 
prey  upon  Americans,  because  they  do  not  have  recourse 
to  the  English  protection.  France  and  Russia  do  not  agree 
well  together,  but  both  declare  they  will  remain  at  peace 
for  the  present.  The  English  government  with  no  small 
ostentation  sent  a  frigate  here,  with  a  few  Russian  prisoners 
that  had  been  left  in  England,  but  she  was  allowed  to  have 
no  other  communication  with  the  shore.  The  war  between 
Russia  and  the  Turks  continues,  but  excepting  on  one  occa¬ 
sion  we  have  scarcely  heard  anything  of  it  this  year.  There 
has  been  a  new  levy  of  troops  in  Sweden  which  has  occa¬ 
sioned  some  popular  disturbances,  but  they  are  now  sub¬ 
dued.  I  am  etc. 


192 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


TO  GEORGE  WILLIAM  ERVING 

St.  Petersburg,  26  August,  18 11. 

Dear  Sir: 

Your  favor  of  the  9th  instant  was  but  twelve  days  from 
its  date  when  I  received  it.  If  it  were  not  for  these  pestifer¬ 
ous  privateers,  we  could  correspond  much  more  expeditiously, 
and  more  safely  too  by  our  own  countrymen,  who  are  com¬ 
ing  and  going  through  the  Sound  than  by  the  post.  But  while 
the  danger  of  capture  by  English,  French  and  Danes  hangs 
over  them,  whatever  it  may  be  advisable  to  write,  it  will  be 
equally  prudent  to  send  by  duplicates.  I  therefore  inclose 
you  a  copy  of  my  last,  and  have  numbered  this  as  I  shall 
continue  to  do  in  future,  that  we  may  ascertain  whether 
all  those  I  write  you  are  received  and,  if  not,  which  of  them 
may  fail. 

This  open  Deal  pilot  boat,  with  French  colors  and  a  crew 
partly  of  Americans  issuing  from  Copenhagen,  taking  Ameri¬ 
cans  within  the  Swedish  jurisdiction,  and  sending  their 
papers  to  Paris,  has  excited  feelings  which  you  will  readily 
conceive.  If  the  Danish  government  cannot  assert  its  own 
jurisdiction  within  its  own  capital  against  a  piratical  Deal 
pilot  boat,  how  can  they  possibly  expect  that  duties  should 
be  paid  them  for  the  passage  of  the  Sound.  All  the  vessels 
directly  from  America  which  have  arrived  here  this  season, 
have  come  through  the  Sound,  or  without  convoy  through 
the  Belt.  If  they  return  in  a  different  manner,  it  will  be 
only  to  keep  out  of  the  reach  of  the  French  privateers. 
Immediately  on  receiving  your  letter  I  had  notice  of  its 
contents  given  to  all  masters  of  vessels  and  others  inter¬ 
ested  here  at  Reval  and  at  Riga.  All  those  who  came  with 
convoy  will  no  doubt  return  in  the  same  manner.  They  are 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


i93 


1811] 

very  little  concerned  about  French  privateers  or  any  others. 
I  regret  very  much  that  the  inflexibility  of  Denmark  upon 
what  she  has  chosen  to  call  convoy  cases  and  those  new  dep¬ 
redations  of  soi-disant  French  privateers,  has  tended  so 
strongly  to  spread  the  opinion  among  our  countrymen  here, 
that  the  safest  course  for  Americans  to  come  or  go  will  be 
by  taking  real  convoy. 

I  forgot  in  my  last  letter,  and  I  ought  to  be  ashamed  at 
having  forgotten,  to  thank  you  for  your  very  obliging  offer  of 
a  bed  in  your  house  at  my  passage  upon  my  return.  If  you 
should  not  be  disappointed  in  your  expectation  of  winding 
up  by  the  month  of  December,  I  shall  be  deprived  of  the 
pleasure  of  meeting  you  there,  as  I  have  no  chance  of  getting 
away  from  hence  until  next  June.  But  unless  Denmark 
has  the  grace  of  a  nimbler  speed  towards  justice,  than  is  too 
common  to  belligerent  spoilers,  you  will  hardly  be  able  to 
finish  so  soon  as  December.  I  am  so  far  from  anticipating 
that  you  will  escape  from  your  island  of  Seeland  the  next 
winter,  that  I  am  thinking  how  we  shall  manage  our  corre¬ 
spondence  when  the  passages  by  water  will  be  barred.  I 
have  had  experience  of  a  curiosity  to  be  acquainted  with 
my  epistolary  style  at  Hamburg  since  the  reunion  of  the 
Hanseatic  cities,  and  I  wish  not  to  give  the  police  or  the 
post  office  any  unnecessary  and  unprofitable  trouble  in  the 
perusal  of  my  letters.  If  they  are  of  my  mind,  they  would  be 
much  gratified  and  amused  by  the  inspection  of  yours;  but 
there  is  so  much  of  selfishness  in  the  pleasure  I  derive  from 
them,  that  I  am  not  altogether  willing  they  should  share  it 
with  me. 

The  precise  state  of  actual  negotiation  between  France  and 
Russia  is  not  sufficiently  critical  to  be  known  without  the 
pale  of  the  two  cabinets.  The  details  that  are  known  would 
not  interest  you  much.  There  has  been  recently  a  relaxation 


194 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

of  preparations  on  both  sides.  Both  the  Emperors  have  said 
they  hoped  the  peace  of  the  north  would  not  be  disturbed, 
but  each  has  in  a  civil  manner  dared  the  other  to  fire  the 
first  gun.  This  fear  of  being  charged  with  having  fired  the 
first  gun  seems  to  be  the  only  thread  by  which  the  peace  of 
the  world  hangs.  What  a  spider’s  web  it  is  the  affair  of  the 
Little  Belt  may  show. 

England  is  no  doubt  anxious  for  a  reconciliation  with  Rus¬ 
sia,  which  becomes  important  to  her  in  proportion  as  she 
approaches  to  the  turn  of  rupture  with  us.  Hitherto,  how¬ 
ever,  her  advances  have  been  received  with  great  coolness. 
A  Portuguese  minister  landed  from  a  British  frigate  at 
Reval  in  June,  and  since  then  another  frigate  has  brought 
home  a  few  Russian  prisoners  who  had  been  left  in  England. 
She  was  received  however  in  a  manner  by  no  means  flatter¬ 
ing,  and  allowed  no  communication  with  the  shore  excepting 
to  land  the  prisoners.  Some  English  people  who  were  here, 
and  had  received  permission  from  the  Emperor  to  embark 
in  her  and  return  to  England,  found  her  already  gone  when 
they  arrived  at  Reval,  and  were  sent  after  her  in  a  flag  of 
truce.  The  English  partisans  here  have  indulged  them¬ 
selves  in  hopes  that  this  indulgence  of  the  Emperor  to  a  few 
individuals  portended  a  great  advance  towards  peace;  but  in 
reality  it  was  nothing  but  the  result  of  a  personal  and  gen¬ 
erous  sentiment  of  the  Emperor’s,  to  return  in  kind  the 
politeness  of  the  English  government,  without  having  any 
connection  whatever  with  the  political  system  of  the  Empire. 

A  large  number  of  vessels,  American  and  others,  have  ar¬ 
rived  here  indirectly  from  England  in  ballast.  They  came  to 
carry  back  hemp,  which  is  in  great  demand  and  at  very  high 
prices  in  England.  This  is  paid  for  almost  entirely  in  cash, 
for  there  has  been  no  importation  of  English  goods,  and 
scarcely  any  of  colonial  articles  from  England.  The  course 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


195 


l8u] 

of  exchange  therefore  upon  England  has  risen  from  thirty 
to  forty  per  cent,  and  nearly  in  the  same  proportion  upon 
Hamburg,  Paris  and  Amsterdam.  It  has  even  arrested  the 
depreciation  in  the  paper  currency  of  this  country,  but  has 
not  raised  its  credit  in  the  same  degree  with  the  rate  of  ex¬ 
change. 

We  have  become  acquainted  with  a  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bent- 
zon,  who  we  are  informed  were  your  fellow  passengers  from 
Newport  to  L’Orient.  The  lady  is  the  first  of  our  fair 
country-women  that  we  have  seen  here.  They  are  lately 
from  Paris,  and  propose  to  return  there  before  winter.  Mr. 
Bentzon  is  now  laid  up  with  the  gout  or  rheumatism1.  I 
am  etc. 


TO  BENJAMIN  WATERHOUSE 

St.  Petersburg,  28  August,  1811. 

Dear  Sir: 

Your  favor  of  19  February  and  20  May  were  received  by 
me  within  a  short  time  of  one  another.  The  first  was 
brought  as  far  as  Paris  by  Mr.  Erving,  and  forwarded  to  me 
from  that  city  by  an  occasional  Russian  courier.  The  second 
was  delivered  me  by  Captain  Lovett,  who  arrived  here  in  a 
vessel  owned  by  Mr.  Thorndike.  Both  of  them  gave  me  great 
pleasure  by  the  information  of  your  own  health  and  that 
of  your  lady  and  family,  and  by  much  pleasing  intelli¬ 
gence  respecting  your  own  concerns  and  those  of  public 
affairs. 

I  have  seen  in  the  newspapers  I  believe  all  the  numbers 


1  “This  is  a  Danish  gentleman,  who  belonged  to  the  island  of  Santa  Cruz,  and  was 
a  member  of  the  government  there  until  it  was  taken  by  the  English.  He  then 
went  to  New  York,  and  there  married  a  Miss  Astor  of  that  city.”  Ms.  Diary, 
August  8,  1811. 


196 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

addressed  by  Leolin  to  Mr.  Otis,  one  of  which  you  inclosed 
in  your  last  letter;  but  I  have  never  heard  and  am  unable  to 
conjecture  who  was  the  author.1  His  manner  is  respectful 
and  moderate  perhaps  even  to  excess.  When  men  have 
got  to  that  stage  of  political  violence,  indicated  by  the  res¬ 
olutions  which  Mr.  Otis  did  not  think  it  unbecoming  or 
unjustifiable  in  him  to  support,  the  mild  and  soothing  forms 
of  Leolin  can  have  no  more  effect  upon  them  than  a  barrel 
of  oil  would  have  to  allay  a  hurricane.  As  however  there 
may  be  still  some  well  meaning  citizens,  whom  cool  reasoning 
and  soft  persuasion  may  recall  from  treason  and  rebellion, 
I  am  fully  of  opinion  that  Leolin  deserves  well  of  his  country, 
and  I  hope  that  his  writings  had  the  effect  for  which  they 
were  intended. 

I  have  also  seen  some  of  the  numbers  addressed  to  the 
People  of  the  United  States,  and  published  in  the  newspapers 
by  Mr.  Pickering.  As  I  had  long  known  this  man’s  honesty, 
and  in  particular  his  regard  to  truth,  was  subordinate  to  the 
violence  of  his  passions  and  to  his  vanity,  I  was  not  at  all 
surprised  either  at  the  coarseness  or  at  the  falsehood  of  his 
attacks  upon  the  reputation  of  my  father.  His  primary 
object  in  writing  at  that  time  was  so  obviously  to  secure 
his  own  reelection,  that  it  was  natural  for  him  to  suspect 
others  of  passions  as  selfish  and  contracted  as  his  own,  and 
with  him,  suspicion  confirmed  by  a  proper  dose  of  hatred 
is  systematically  equivalent  to  proof.  I  certainly  felt  in¬ 
dignant  at  the  effusions  of  his  malice  against  my  father, 
but  as  there  was  no  immediate  effect  injurious  to  him  that 
they  could  produce,  I  should  have  thought  them  in  America, 
as  I  think  them  here,  deserving  only  of  silent  contempt. 

1  These  letters,  four  in  number,  written  by  James  Trecothick  Austin,  were 
printed  in  the  Boston  Patriot ,  and  republished  in  a  pamphlet,  Resistance  to  Laws 
of  the  United  States ,  considered  in  four  letters  to  Hon.  H.  G.  Otis ,  1811. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


197 


1811] 

My  father’s  reputation  with  posterity  has  a  foundation  which 
it  is  not  in  such  men  as  Pickering  to  shake. 

The  general  policy  of  all  the  American  states  ever  since 
the  acknowledgment  of  their  independence  has  been  peace 
with  all  the  world,  and  seclusion  from  the  political  system  of 
Europe.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  under  our  federal  con¬ 
stitution  such  must  be  the  policy  of  their  executive,  in  whose 
hands  soever  it  may  be  placed.  But  Europe  is  perpetually 
struggling  to  draw  us  into  the  vortex  of  her  policy  and  her 
views.  More  than  once  there  has  been  imminent  danger 
that  we  should  be  so  drawn  in,  but  at  no  period  so  great 
danger  as  at  present.  The  folly  of  England  and  the  arti¬ 
fices  of  France  alike  tend  to  produce  this  crisis,  which  will 
probably  be  further  precipitated  by  our  internal  factions 
and  the  turbulent  ambition  of  our  party  leaders.  A  war  with 
England  will  so  totally  change  the  face  of  everything  in 
the  United  States,  that  I,  who  delight  in  peace  as  much  as 
Fleury,  have  as  long  as  possible  turned  my  eyes  away  from 
the  contemplation  of  it.  I  hope  there  are  those  in  our  country 
who  have  duly  reflected,  and  with  an  eye  to  events  now  more 
than  probable,  upon  the  difficulties,  dangers  and  unavoid¬ 
able  evils  which  will  attend  a  war,  and  upon  the  resources 
which  may  be  brought  into  operation  to  carry  it  on  and  bring 
it  to  a  just  and  honorable  conclusion.  Some  of  its  miseries 
have  been  anticipated  and  foretold,  but  there  are  many 
others  equally  menacing  which,  by  being  thought  of  in 
season,  may  perhaps  be  averted.  As  to  our  resources  and 
means  they  have  been  depreciated  and  underrated  by  party 
writers,  and  perhaps  as  much  exaggerated  by  others.  They 
are  indeed  great,  but  the  most  formidable  difficulty  will  be 
to  bring  them  forth. 

I  have  learnt  by  accounts  of  a  later  date  than  your  letter, 
that  both  branches  of  our  legislature  this  year  are  republican. 


198 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

Considering  the  great  and  increasing  difficulties  of  our  public 
affairs,  and  the  extraordinary  exertions  made  by  the  feder¬ 
alists,  the  result  was  honorable  to  the  steadiness  and  sober 
sense  of  the  people.  The  remarks  of  Governor  Gerry’s 
speech  upon  the  resolutions  of  the  Boston  caucus  were  not 
only  just,  but  they  contained  some  hints  and  cautions  to 
their  author  and  supporters  which  I  hope  will  make  some  im¬ 
pression  upon  their  feelings.  Those  gentlemen  needed  a 
little  admonition  to  inform  them  what  game  they  were 
playing.  It  is  a  strange  thing  to  me  that  the  Boston  feder¬ 
alists  in  particular  should  have  yielded  up  to  the  guidance  of 
the  weakest  heads  and  most  furious  tempers  of  their  party. 
Such  people,  it  is  true,  are  always  the  busiest  and  the  noisiest 
partisans,  and  in  times  of  heat  often  push  themselves  by 
their  mere  bustle  much  above  their  natural  level,  but  they 
can  bring  nothing  but  discomfiture  and  shame  to  their  as¬ 
sociates,  and  were  it  possible  they  could  acquire  an  ascend¬ 
ency  in  the  government,  their  accession  to  power  would  be  a 
signal  of  calamity  to  the  nation. 

It  gives  me  much  pleasure  to  learn  that  you  have  hitherto 
been  so  successful  in  your  struggles  against  a  persecution, 
much  of  which  I  never  could  attribute  to  anything  but  a 
wretched  bias  of  party  politics.  I  wish  you  may  derive  as 
much  profit  and  pleasure  from  the  publication  of  the  Botan¬ 
ist  as  you  did  from  the  delivery  of  your  lectures.  Mr.  Gray’s 
establishment  and  patronage  of  the  vaccine  institution  for 
seamen  is  worthy  of  his  judicious  and  benevolent  mind, 
always  bent  upon  purposes  of  usefulness.  I  rejoice  too  that 
it  is  placed  under  your  management.  I  wish  as  much  as  you 
that  you  could  spend  a  month  at  St.  Petersburg  without 
the  labor  of  getting  here.  Besides  the  motives,  which  while 
I  am  here  myself  would  always  prompt  me  to  join  in  this 
wish,  I  have  now  a  particular  and  additional  one — for  I  could 


199 


i8n]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 

then  ask  you  to  vaccinate  my  little  daughter  who  is  not  quite 
three  weeks  old. 

News  I  suppose  you  will  not  expect  from  the  North  Pole; 
here  I  could  scarcely  give  you  any  other.  We  are  already  far 
advanced  in  autumn  and  begin  to  make  fires.  I  have  none 
yet  in  the  room  where  I  write  you,  but  my  fingers  are  so 
pinched  with  cold,  that  I  can  scarcely  hold  the  pen;  yet  I  can¬ 
not  lay  it  aside  without  requesting  to  be  respectfully  re¬ 
membered  to  Mrs.  Waterhouse,  and  offering  my  best  regards 
to  all  your  young  family.  Being,  dear  sir,  with  sincere  at¬ 
tachment,  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  65.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  30  August,  1811. 

Sir: 

In  the  London  Courier ,  a  ministerial  paper  of  30  July, 
there  is  a  letter  or  a  memoir,  announced  by  an  editorial 
article  with  inflated  solemnity,  as  perhaps  the  most  impor¬ 
tant  state  paper  ever  laid  before  the  English  nation,  and 
purporting  to  have  been  addressed  by  the  Duke  of  Cadore, 
whose  name  appears  to  it  in  form  of  signature,  to  Prince 
Kurakin  the  Russian  ambassador  in  France.1  It  bears  date 
30  October,  1810,  and  is  repeatedly  declared  by  the  English 
gazetteer  to  be  of  unquestionable  authenticity.  It  is  a  very 
stupid  fabrication,  which  appears  from  its  internal  evidence 
to  have  been  written  by  some  hireling  scribbler  of  the  pres¬ 
ent  British  ministry,  who  after  a  clumsy  distortion  of  the 
commonplace  accusations  against  Britain  and  British  policy, 

1  Adams,  Memoirs,  August  28,  18 11. 


200 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ii 

which  are  often  introduced  into  French  state  papers,  and  a 
silly  declamation  against  the  constitution  and  present 
reigning  family  of  England,  imputes  to  the  Duke  of  Cadore 
language  and  sentiments  about  as  suitable  to  his  character 
as  would  be  a  panegyric  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  from  the 
lips  of  Mr.  Perceval  or  Lord  Wellesley.  But  the  editorial 
history  of  this  publication  is  more  curious  than  the  perform¬ 
ance  itself.  It  says  that  during  the  last  autumn  there  was 
some  apparent  wavering  in  the  political  system  of  Russia. 
That  this  memoir  was  then  written  by  the  Duke  of  Cadore 
to  convince  the  Emperor  Alexander  that  it  was  necessary 
for  the  peace  and  safety  of  the  continent  of  Europe  that 
the  British  constitution  should  be  changed,  or  that  the  pres¬ 
ent  reigning  family  of  England  should  be  removed  from  the 
throne.  That  it  was  sent  by  the  Russian  ambassador  to 
his  court,  where  it  did  not  succeed  in  obtaining  its  intended 
effect.  That  it  was  communicated  by  the  Russian  govern¬ 
ment  to  me,  that  the  United  States  might  know  how  the 
French  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  spoke  of  them.  That  a 
copy  of  it  was  sent  by  me  to  my  government,  and  to  my 
father,  through  whom  it  was  first  published. 

It  will  be  well  known  to  you,  sir,  that  I  never  sent  a  copy 
of  this  paper  or  of  anything  like  it  to  my  government,  and 
I  presume  it  will  be  needless  for  me  to  add  that  I  never  sent 
any  such  to  my  father,  and  never  received  any  such  com¬ 
munication  from  the  Russian  government.  So  far  as  my 
name  is  concerned  the  whole  story  is  a  fiction,  as  to  my 
mind  there  is  not  a  doubt  but  is  all  the  rest. 

Having  met  the  French  ambassador  yesterday  at  Count 
Romanzoff’s,  he  spoke  to  me  of  this  paper,  which  he  had 
not  then  seen.  But  as  he  expected  to  receive  it  in  the  even¬ 
ing,  he  promised  to  call  upon  me  this  day  at  noon.  He  ac¬ 
cordingly  came  having  seen  the  paper  in  a  different  gazette, 


i8n]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  201 

The  Pilot ,  of  31  July,  but  extracted  from  the  publication  in 
the  Courier  of  the  preceding  day.  He  supposes  it  to  have 
been  published  with  the  countenance  or  connivance  of  the 
British  ministry,  to  hold  up  an  appearance  in  the  public 
mind  of  a  good  understanding  between  the  British  and 
Russian  governments,  and  to  sow  or  inflame  dissensions  be¬ 
tween  France  and  Russia  and  between  France  and  the 
United  States.  Notwithstanding  the  contemptuous  neglect 
with  which  Lord  Wellesley  treated  the  complaint  addressed 
to  him  by  Mr.  Pinkney,  respecting  the  forgery  of  ships 
papers,  I  do  not  believe  that  this  publication  was  made  with 
the  previous  knowledge  of  the  British  ministers,  though  it 
is  clearly  the  production  of  one  of  their  partisans.  Its  aim 
appears  rather  to  recommend  their  wisdom  and  virtue  to 
the  Prince  Regent  in  preference  to  the  opposition,  and  to 
convince  the  nation  of  the  absolute  necessity  of  continuing 
the  war.  As  an  experiment  upon  the  credulity  of  the  public 
it  is  not  an  ingenious  contrivance,  and  perhaps  it  may  only 
be  an  article  from  the  shop  of  Mr.  Van  Sander,  to  affect  the 
prices  on  the  stock  exchange  for  a  day. 

There  are,  however,  other  indications  that  the  British 
government  wish  to  foster  an  opinion  among  their  own 
people,  that  there  is  already  a  good  harmony  prevailing 
between  them  and  Russia.  Precisely  at  the  same  time  when 
this  notable  state  paper  was  circulated,  four  or  five  vessels 
loaded  with  lead,  saltpetre,  sulphur  and  gunpowder  were 
dispatched  from  an  English  port,  under  convoy  of  a  sloop 
of  war,  and  destined  to  Reval;  their  departure  was  emphat¬ 
ically  announced  in  the  gazettes  as  demonstrating  the  per¬ 
fect  good  understanding  already  subsisting  between  England 
and  Russia.  The  sloop  of  war  was  commanded  by  a  Captain 
F.enthan,1  whose  father  and  two  brothers  are  officers  in  the 

1  In  the  American  Historical  Review ,  XI.  89,  the  name  is  printed  Fenshaw. 


202 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

Russian  service.  They  all  arrived  last  week  at  Reval,  and 
Captain  Fenthan  sent  a  request  to  his  father  and  brothers 
to  see  them,  stating  in  his  letter  that  he  had  arrived  there 
upon  an  important  service.  This  circumstance  has  occa¬ 
sioned  many  speculations  here,  and  an  opinion  was  becoming 
very  general  that  the  concert  and  good  understanding  of 
which  the  English  gazettes  boasted  had  really  existed.  The 
Emperor  permitted  General  Fenthan  and  his  sons  to  visit 
their  kinsman  according  to  his  request,  but  he  directed  that 
all  the  vessels,  as  well  the  storeships  as  the  sloop  of  war, 
should  be  ordered  immediately  to  depart.1  So  that  if  there 
has  been  any  concert  either  attempted  or  effected  between 
the  parties,  at  least  they  have  not  concerted  the  manner  in 
which  it  was  to  be  manifested.  A  similar  aversion  to  any 
external  appearance  of  agreement  on  the  part  of  Russia, 
had  occurred  before  on  the  arrival  of  the  frigate  which 
brought  the  prisoners.  She  was  allowed  to  land  them,  but 
the  captain  was  informed  that  he  must  have  no  other  com¬ 
munication  with  the  shore,  and  was  refused  the  permission 
which  he  asked  of  sending  even  his  surgeon  to  purchase 
some  medicinal  drugs  for  the  use  of  the  ship. 

It  is  not  impossible  that  the  English  government  may  have 
been  informed  from  this  country  that  the  articles  of  lead, 
saltpetre,  sulphur  and  gunpowder  were  wanted  here,  and 

1  “Those  newspapers  and  the  ships  arriving  here  at  the  same  time  put  us  all  here 
into  such  a  fluster,  as  you,  who  know  the  ground,  will  readily  conceive.  There  was 
much  chuckling  in  one  quarter.  Some  long  faces  in  another.  On  ’change  the 
whispering  and  the  buzzing,  and  the  asserting  and  the  denying,  and  the  head¬ 
shaking,  and  the  mysterious  look  of  wisdom,  lasted  longer  than  usual — four  or  five 
days  at  least.  At  last  it  turns  out  that  the  Emperor  gave  permission  to  General 
Fenthan  and  his  sons  to  visit  their  relation,  on  board  the  sloop  of  war,  and  then  he 
and  his  storeships  received  a  notification  to  depart  as  they  came,  and  that  if  they 
did  not  go  with  all  due  speed,  their  next  notice  would  be  that  there  was  still  powder 
and  ball  to  spare  in  Russia,  as  much  as  was  needed  to  be  employed  against  the 
Common  Enemy  [Napoleon.]”  To  Alexander  Hill  Everett ,  September  2,  181 1. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


203 


1811] 

would  be  received,  if  allowed  by  them  to  be  sent  hither  from 
England.  But  they  were  certainly  not  led  to  expect  that  it 
might  be  done  with  such  notoriety,  or  to  conclude  that  it 
was  by  Russia  considered  as  equivalent  to  a  treaty  of  peace. 

In  the  month  of  June  a  young  Polish  nobleman ,  a  chamber- 
lain  of  the  Emperor  Alexander ,  name  Prince  Lubomirski ,  was 
introduced  to  me ,  and  informed  me  that  he  had  it  in  contempla¬ 
tion  to  visit  the  United  States.  He  asked  me  for  letters  of  in¬ 
troduction, ,  and  I  gave  him  one  for  the  President ,  and  several 
others .  I  understood ,  though  not  from  himself ,  that  it  was 
probable  he  would  first  go  to  England.  He  actually  went  there , 
and  upon  his  arrival  had  a  special  permission  to  land ,  and  to 
go  to  London.  It  was  immediately  after  his  arrival  that  these 
vessels  were  dispatched ,  and  it  is  now  the  belief  of  different 
persons  here  that  he  was  charged  with  a  secret  mission  by  the 
Emperor  Alexander. 

The  ambassador  however  avowed  the  fullest  conviction  that 
there  is  no  political  intercourse  whatever  between  Russia  and 
England ,  and  this  day  assured  me,  in  the  most  positive  terms , 
that  there  was  no  present  prospect  of  a  war  between  Russia  and 
France.1  A  traveler  just  arrived  from  Germany,  asserts 
that  there  are  between  nine  and  ten  thousand  men  con¬ 
stantly  employed  to  strengthen  and  extend  the  fortifica¬ 
tions  of  Dantzig,  which  some  months  since  was  declared  by 
the  French  government  to  be  in  a  state  of  siege.  I  am  with 
high  respect,  etc. 


1  Cypher. 


204 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  31  August,  18 n. 

Dear  Sir: 

In  a  former  letter  I  have  thanked  you  for  the  two  pam¬ 
phlet  speeches  of  Mr.  Quincy  made  at  the  last  session  of 
Congress,  on  the  admission  of  the  Orleans  territory  as  a 
state  into  the  Union,  and  upon  his  proposed  amendment  to 
Mr.  Macon’s  proposed  amendment  of  the  constitution. 
But  I  have  not  yet  given  you  the  reflections  which  occurred 
to  my  mind  upon  the  perusal  of  them. 

It  was  my  opinion  at  the  time  of  the  Louisiana  purchase, 
that  upon  the  principles  on  which  the  constitution  of  the 
United  States  was  founded,  the  consent  both  of  the  people 
of  the  United  States  and  of  the  people  of  Louisiana  was 
necessary  to  make  the  latter  a  part  of  the  American  Union. 
I  considered  that  France  could  cede  only  her  right  of  prop¬ 
erty  to  the  territory,  and  that  the  right  of  sovereignty  in¬ 
herent  in  the  people  of  the  country,  when  the  jurisdiction 
of  France  had  ceased  by  the  cession,  could  be  ceded  only  by 
some  act  of  their  own,  and  acquired  by  some  act  of  the  people 
of  the  United  States.  I  deemed  an  amendment  to  the  con¬ 
stitution  the  most  proper  form  in  which  this  act  of  the  people 
could  be  performed,  and  moved  in  Senate  for  the  appoint¬ 
ment  of  a  committee  to  consider  the  subject  in  reference  to 
this  view  of  it,  and  report  their  opinion  concerning  it.  I 
drew  up  even  an  amendment,  which  I  supposed  adequate 
to  accomplish  the  business,  and  which  I  believed  if  it  could 
obtain  the  sanction  of  two-thirds  of  the  two  houses,  would 
easily  receive  that  of  the  State  legislatures  and  of  the  people 
of  Louisiana,  represented  as  they  might  think  proper.1  This 

1  See  Vol.  III.  20,  supra. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


205 


1811] 

was  my  homage  to  republican  principle,  that  the  sovereign 
power  originally  resides  in  the  people,  and  can  be  delegated 
only  by  their  free  consent.  I  showed  my  proposed  amend¬ 
ment  to  Mr.  Madison,  then  Secretary  of  State,  and  to  Mr. 
Pickering,  then  my  colleague  in  the  Senate.  It  was  not 
approved  by  either  of  them.  They  both,  however,  admitted 
the  correctness  of  the  principle.  Mr.  Madison’s  objection 
was  to  the  wording  of  the  amendment,  which  he  thought 
too  long  and  not  congenial  to  the  style  of  the  constitution. 
He  thought  that  the  amendment  in  these  words,  “  Louisiana 
is  admitted  as  a  part  of  this  Union,”  would  be  proper  and 
sufficient.  My  amendment  was  much  longer — a  general 
power  to  Congress  to  annex  new  territories  to  the  Union  at 
their  discretion,  the  very  thing  which  Mr.  Quincy’s  speech 
considers  a  power  so  monstrous.  It  was  exactly  that,  which 
my  statement  proposed  to  confer  upon  Congress  in  express 
terms.  Mr.  Pickering’s  objection  was  that  any  such  amend¬ 
ment  would  be  useless,  the  principle  of  the  sovereignty  of 
the  people  being  as  he  thought  altogether  theoretical,  and 
in  respect  to  such  cessions  of  jurisdiction  as  that  of  the 
Louisiana  treaty  always  disregarded  in  practice.  I  could 
not  obtain  in  Senate  even  the  appointment  of  the  committee 
for  which  I  had  moved.  I  then  moved  the  two  resolutions 
to  which  Mr.  Quincy  referred  in  his  speech.  I  have  neither 
the  Journals  of  the  Senate  nor  my  own  private  journal  of 
that  time  at  hand,  but  I  believe  there  were  three  resolutions, 
but  the  third  was  perhaps  only  the  proposition  of  a  measure 
resulting  from  the  principles  declared  in  the  others.  They 
excited  a  long  and  very  warm  debate  on  the  first  resolution, 
the  previous  question  was  moved  by  General  Jackson,  and 
afterwards  withdrawn  upon  a  suggestion  from  his  side  of 
the  House  that  the  previous  question  would  be  tantamount 
to  a  formal  admission  of  the  principle.  In  truth  I  never  saw 


206 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


men  more  embarrassed  with  a  principle  than  the  great 
majority  of  the  Senate  appeared  to  be  on  that  day.  But  in 
the  debate  I  was  perfectly  alone.  Mr.  Tracy,  who  seconded 
my  motion,  supported  me  on  the  question  which  immediately 
arose,  whether  it  should  he  considered ,  and  on  the  discussion 
concerning  the  previous  question  he  and  one  or  two  more 
voted  with  me  on  my  first  resolution.  Mr.  Pickering  took 
no  part  in  the  debate,  affected  to  be  very  busy  writing  letters 
or  reading  newspapers  while  it  was  going  on,  and  when  the 
question  was  taken,  desired  to  be  excused  from  voting,  be¬ 
cause  it  was  on  a  motion  of  his  colleague .  His  colleague 
thought  it  would  have  been  more  ingenuous  had  he  voted 
at  once  against  the  resolution,  and  more  delicate  if  abstain¬ 
ing  from  delicacy  to  vote,  he  had  left  his  place  as  was  usual 
in  such  cases  without  formally  assigning  his  motive.  The 
keen  and  even  angry  opposition  which  he  encountered  from 
others  did  not  displease  him  so  much  as  this  pretension  to 
indulgence.  General  Dayton  who  wished  the  Senate  to  re¬ 
fuse  to  consider  the  resolutions,  and  severely  tasked  Tracy 
for  seconding  my  motions,  was  at  least  candid  and  professed 
no  scruples  of  delicacy. 

So  it  was,  however,  that  my  propositions  were  rejected  in 
Senate  by  almost  a  unanimous  vote.  Congress  did  then  ex¬ 
ercise  the  powers  of  sovereignty  over  the  people  of  Louisiana, 
and  have  continued  to  do  from  that  time.  Notwithstanding 
this  fate  of  my  resolutions  I  still  think  that  on  republican 
principles,  it  was  the  assumption  of  power  which  had  not 
been  delegated,  and  thus  far  Mr.  Quincy’s  opinions  har¬ 
monize  with  mine.  But  the  consent  of  the  people,  which  I 
suppose  necessary  to  legitimate  power,  may  be  subsequent 
by  their  acquiescence  as  well  as  antecedent  by  express  grant. 
The  people  of  the  United  States,  including  the  inhabitants 
of  Louisiana,  have  now  for  eight  years  quietly  submitted 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


207 


1811I 

to  the  exercise  by  Congress  of  sovereign  jurisdiction  over 
the  whole  territory  of  Louisiana.  It  is  now  too  late  to  recur 
to  the  first  principles  of  human  association,  and  most  spe¬ 
cially  too  late  for  the  purpose  of  depriving  the  people  of 
Louisiana  of  the  rights,  privileges  and  advantages,  to  which 
as  citizens  of  the  United  States  they  are  entitled.  Among 
which  perhaps  the  most  important  to  them  is  the  right  to 
form  a  state  government  of  their  own,  and  to  be  admitted 
as  a  member  of  the  Uniorf  into  the  national  councils.  After 
denying  them  for  eight  years  the  benefit  of  an  abstract 
principle,  and  ruling  them  by  an  authority  which  they  had 
not  granted,  it  would  be  equally  unjust  and  absurd  to  recur 
to  that  very  abstract  principle,  to  exclude  them  forever 
from  its  benefits  and  even  from  the  common  rights  of  Amer¬ 
ican  freemen. 

The  question  whether  Louisiana  should  become  a  part  of 
the  American  Union  and  in  what  manner ,  was  therefore 
settled  eight  years  ago,  and  at  this  time  I  can  see  no  basis 
for  a  constitutional  question.  The  express  authority  to 
Congress  to  admit  new  states  into  the  Union  covers  the  whole 
ground,  and  where  the  express  letter  is  so  explicit,  my  under¬ 
standing  is  not  very  accessible  to  a  constructive  restriction 
to  be  inferred  from  a  conjectural  intention  of  those  who 
made  the  constitution  of  the  United  States.  Yet  on  such  a 
pin’s  point  rests  the  whole  of  Mr.  Quincy’s  argument.  I 
neither  admit  nor  believe,  that  the  framers  of  the  constitu¬ 
tion  intended  to  limit  the  admission  of  new  states  into  the 
Union  to  the  original  territory  of  the  United  States.  If  such 
a  limitation  had  been  intended,  it  would  have  been  expressed. 
By  the  old  confederation  there  was  an  express  provision  for 
the  admission  of  Canada,  though  Mr.  Quincy  does  not  in 
his  speech  appear  to  know  it.  The  constitution  having 
been  made  after  the  peace,  it  became  improper  to  retain 


208 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

this  clause,  and  therefore  the  power  was  given  to  Congress 
in  general  terms;  but  a  mere  comparison  between  the  con¬ 
federation  and  the  constitution,  if  Mr.  Quincy  will  take  the 
trouble  to  make  it,  will  show  him  that  the  power  to  admit 
new  States  was  substituted  for  the  clause  authorizing  the 
admission  of  Canada.  I  think,  though  of  this  I  am  not  sure, 
he  will  find  the  same  thing  expressly  stated  in  the  Federal¬ 
ist. 1  It  is  true  the  power  in  the  constitution  applies  to  the 
admission  of  states  within  the  original  territory  of  the 
Union;  but  excepting  Mr.  Quincy’s  gratuitous  supposition, 
I  see  not  the  shadow  of  a  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  in¬ 
tended  to  apply  so  exclusively. 

The  rest  of  Mr.  Quincy’s  speech  seems  to  me  a  mere  appeal 
to  small  passions  and  local  jealousies.  If  in  a  Boston  town 
meeting  a  North  End  orator  should  arise  and  say  that  for 
his  part,  all  the  fire  of  his  patriotism  spent  itself  between 
the  Mill-Bridge  and  the  Winnisimmet  Ferry,  that  he  warned 
the  long  skirted  gentlemen  of  Fort  Hill  and  Mount  Vernon, 
that  the  North  End  would  not  long  submit  to  be  trampled 
upon  by  them,  and  that  if  after  having  purchased  and  an¬ 
nexed  to  the  town  a  part  of  Dorchester,  anybody  should 
ever  presume  to  build  houses  there,  and  to  dwell  in  them, 
and  then  come  to  town  meeting  and  out-vote  the  neighbor¬ 
hood  of  Charles  river,  then  it  would  be  the  right  and  the  duty 
of  the  End  to  put  up  an  independent  sovereignty  of  their 
own,  amicably  if  they  could,  violently  if  they  must;  the  dis¬ 
course  would  certainly  not  be  so  eloquent  as  Mr.  Quincy’s, 
but  would  be  quite  as  reasonable,  and  perhaps  at  the  North 
End  quite  as  popular.  I  love  my  native  land,  I  believe,  as 
much  as  Mr.  Quincy,  and  I  feel  an  attachment  of  sentiment 
to  the  very  spot  of  my  birth  which  will  quit  me  only  with 
my  life.  But  I  could  take  by  the  hand  as  a  fellow-citizen  a 

1  See  Federalist ,  No.  XLIII. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


209 


1811] 

man  born  on  the  banks  of  the  Red  River  or  the  Missouri 
with  just  the  same  cordiality,  that  I  could  at  least  half  a 
million  of  natives  of  Massachusetts,  with  whom  I  never  had 
and  probably  never  shall  have  any  other  relation  than  that 
of  being  their  fellow-citizen.  To  attempt  to  limit  the  rights 
and  duties  and  relations  resulting  from  political  association 
within  the  necessarily  narrow  bounds  of  personal  affection, 
friendship  or  consanguinity,  is  to  look  at  the  moon  through 
a  microscope.  The  whole  continent  of  North  America  ap¬ 
pears  to  be  destined  by  Divine  Providence  to  be  peopled  by 
one  nation ,  speaking  one  language,  professing  one  general 
system  of  religious  and  political  principles,  and  accustomed 
to  one  general  tenor  of  social  usages  and  customs.  For  the 
common  happiness  of  them  all,  for  their  peace  and  prosper¬ 
ity,  I  believe  it  indispensable  that  they  should  be  associated 
in  one  federal  Union.  The  relative  proportion  of  power  be¬ 
tween  the  different  members  of  this  Union  is  as  insignificant, 
as  the  same  question  between  North  End  and  South  End. 
This  is  totally  subordinate  to  all  important  and  all  absorb¬ 
ing  principle  of  union.  I  have  no  apprehension  that  the 
people  of  Massachusetts  will  be  trampled  upon  by  the  power 
of  the  Union,  though  their  relative  proportion  of  that  power 
should  become  as  small  as  that  of  Rhode  Island  or  Delaware 
is  now  in  comparison  to  the  whole.  But  let  that  federal 
Union  which  secures  to  each  member  the  sympathies  of  the 
same  body  once  be  dissolved,  and  every  part  will  in  turn 
inevitably  be  trampled  upon  by  the  others,  and  America 
like  the  rest  of  the  earth  will  sink  into  a  common  field  of 
battle  for  conquerors  and  tyrants. 

I  have  not  left  myself  room  for  my  animadversions  upon 
the  oration  against  patronage  and  place.  Your  own  re¬ 
marks  upon  it  are  enough,  perhaps  it  was  meant  only  as 
a  jeu  cT esprit.  My  duty  to  my  mother  and  love  to  my 


210 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[  1 8 1 1 


boys.  My  wife  is  getting  well  and  my  daughter  craves  your 
blessing. 


TO  WILLIAM  PLUMER 


St.  Petersburg,  8  September,  1 8 1 1 . 

Dear  Sir: 

«•••••• 

I  give  you  many  thanks  for  the  view  of  public  affairs  and 
of  the  state  of  parties  contained  in  your  letter.  Since  you 
wrote  many  and  great  changes  have  taken  place.  Some  of 
them  have  been  made  known  to  us  here  by  the  letters  and 
newspapers  which  we  have  received,  and  of  many  we  must 
of  course  still  be  uninformed.  The  state  of  our  foreign  rela¬ 
tions  as  marked  out  by  the  non-intercourse  act  of  last  ses¬ 
sion  of  Congress;  by  the  condemnation  of  thirty  or  forty  of 
our  vessels  in  England  under  the  Orders  in  Council,  and 
merely  for  having  been  bound  for  France;  by  the  continued 
misconduct  and  outrages  of  France  herself;  by  the  extraor¬ 
dinary  and  unaccountable  transaction  between  the  President 
Frigate  and  the  Little  Belt  sloop  of  war;  by  the  termination 
of  Mr.  Pinkney’s  mission  to  England  and  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  that  of  Mr.  Foster  to  the  United  States,  appear 
approaching  to  a  crisis  which  seems  to  render  a  foreign  war 
utterly  unavoidable.  If  anything  can  avert  it,  the  death  of 
George  the  Third  will  be  that  event.  As  yet  no  account  of 
it  has  been  received  here;  but  in  all  probability  it  must  take 
place  and  be  known  in  the  United  States  before  you  receive 
this  letter.1  The  accession  of  a  new  King  in  England  will 
undoubtedly  produce  some  important  changes  of  policy, 
but  whether  it  will  bring  among  them  a  system  founded  on 

1  In  this  year  the  reign  of  George  III  practically  came  to  an  end,  though  he  lived 
in  insanity  and  blindness  until  January  29,  1820. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


211 


1811] 


common  sense  in  regard  to  their  relations  with  America, 
can  only  be  ascertained  by  time.  During  the  whole  reign 
which  is  terminating  with  circumstances  so  striking  that  the 
hand  of  Heaven  seems  visible  in  them,  the  spirit  of  delirium 
and  of  stubbornness,  the  Evil  Spirit  from  the  Lord  which 
troubled  Saul,  has  had  almost  constant  rule  over  the  king¬ 
dom  of  Great  Britain.  It  has  had  tremendous  consequences 
upon  the  destinies  of  our  generation,  consequences  far  be¬ 
yond  the  calculation  of  contemporaneous  politicians.  In 
our  country,  the  theatre  upon  which  it  first  carried  fire  and 
sword,  the  benevolence  of  Providence  has  long  since  brought 
great  and  preeminent  good  out  of  evil.  In  Europe  darkness 
and  gloom,  blood  and  desolation  yet  prevail.  Humane 
and  pious  minds  can  only  pray  and  hope  that  out  of  this 
darkness  light  will  also  in  due  time  be  made  to  appear. 


TO  GEORGE  WASHINGTON  ADAMS1 

St.  Petersburg,  i  and  8  September,  1811. 
My  Dear  Son: 

In  your  letter  of  18  January  to  your  mama  you  mentioned 
that  you  read  to  your  Aunt  Cranch  a  chapter  in  the  Bible, 


1  September  i,  1811.  “I  began  this  morning  the  first  of  a  series  of  letters  which 
I  intend  to  write  to  my  son  George  upon  subjects  of  serious  import.  I  have  had  this 
project  in  contemplation  several  months,  and  have  hitherto  done  nothing.  My 
intention  is  extensive,  but  not  well  defined  in  my  own  mind.  I  reflected  upon  it  so 
much  this  morning  that  I  wrote  but  little.  .  .  . 

8.  “After  finishing  a  letter  begun  three  or  four  days  ago  I  continued  that  to  my 
son  George,  which  I  intend  to  be  the  first  of  a  series.  But  as  I  advance,  I  find  the 
want  of  a  plan  arranged  in  my  own  mind.  I  am  already  so  much  dissatisfied  with 
what  I  have  written,  find  my  ideas  so  undigested  and  confused,  feel  so  much  my 
own  ignorance  upon  the  subjects  concerning  which  I  mean  to  instruct  him,  and 


212 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

or  a  lecture  of  Dr.  Doddridge’s  annotations  every  evening. 
This  information  gave  me  great  pleasure,  for  so  great  is  my 
veneration  for  the  Bible,  and  so  strong  my  belief  that  when 
duly  read  and  meditated  upon  it  is  of  all  the  books  in  the 
world  that  which  contributes  most  to  make  men  good,  wise 
and  happy,  that  the  earlier  my  children  begin  to  read  it, 
and  the  more  steadily  they  pursue  the  practice  of  reading  it 
throughout  their  lives,  the  more  lively  and  confident  will 
be  my  hopes  that  they  will  prove  useful  citizens  to  their 
country,  respectable  members  of  society,  and  a  real  blessing 
to  their  parents. 

But  I  hope  that  you  have  now  arrived  at  an  age  to  under¬ 
stand  that  reading,  even  of  the  Bible,  is  a  thing  in  itself 
neither  good  nor  bad,  but  that  all  the  good  that  can  be  drawn 
from  it  is  by  the  use  and  improvement  of  what  you  have 
read  with  the  help  of  your  own  reflections.  Young  people 
sometimes  boast  of  how  many  books  and  how  much  they 
have  read ;  when  instead  of  boasting  they  ought  to  be  ashamed 
of  having  wasted  so  much  time  to  so  little  profit.  I  advise 
you,  my  son,  in  whatever  you  read,  and  most  of  all  in  reading 
the  Bible  to  remember  that  it  is  for  the  purpose  of  making 
you  wiser  and  more  virtuous. 

I  have  myself  for  many  years  made  it  a  practice  to  read 
through  the  Bible  once  every  year.  I  have  always  endeavored 
to  read  it  with  the  same  spirit  and  temper  of  mind  which  I 
now  recommend  to  you.  That  is,  with  the  intention  and 
desire  that  it  may  contribute  to  my  advancement  in  wisdom 
and  virtue.  My  desire  is  indeed  very  imperfectly  successful, 
for  like  you  and  like  the  Apostle  Paul,  I  find  a  law  in  my 
members  warring  against  the  law  of  my  mind.  But  as  I 

am  so  remote  from  the  helps  to  which  I  might  recur  for  assistance,  that  I  am  afraid 
I  have  in  this  instance,  as  in  numberless  others,  undertaken  more  than  I  can  execute. 
I  have  not  yet  however  abandoned  it  entirely.”  Ms.  Diary. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


213 


1811] 

know  that  it  is  my  nature  to  be  imperfect,  so  I  know  it  is 
my  duty  to  aim  at  perfection;  and  feeling  and  deploring  my 
own  frailties,  I  can  only  pray  Almighty  God  for  the  aid  of  his 
spirit  to  strengthen  my  good  desires  and  to  subdue  my 
propensities  to  evil,  for  it  is  from  him  that  every  good  and 
every  perfect  gift  descends. 

My  custom  is  to  read  four  or  five  chapters  of  the  Bible 
every  morning  immediately  after  rising  from  bed.  It  em¬ 
ploys  about  an  hour  of  my  time,  and  seems  to  me  the  most 
suitable  manner  of  beginning  the  day.  But  as  other  cares, 
duties  and  occupations  engage  the  remainder  of  it,  I  have 
perhaps  never  devoted  a  sufficient  portion  of  my  hours  to 
meditation  upon  what  I  have  read  thus.  Even  meditation 
itself  is  often  fruitless,  unless  it  has  some  special  object  in 
view.  Useful  thoughts  arise  in  the  mind  and  pass  away 
without  being  remembered,  or  even  applied  to  any  good 
purpose.  Like  seed  scattered  upon  the  surface  of  the  ground 
which  the  birds  devour,  or  the  wind  blows  away,  or  which 
rots  without  taking  root,  however  good  the  soil  may  be  upon 
which  it  is  cast. 

We  are  all,  my  dear  George,  unwilling  to  confess  our  own 
infirmities,  even  to  ourselves;  and  when  our  own  consciences 
are  too  honest  to  conceal  them  from  us,  our  self  love  is  al¬ 
ways  busy  either  in  attempting  to  disguise  them  to  us  under 
false  and  delusive  colors,  or  in  seeking  out  excuses  and 
apologies  to  conceal  them  to  our  own  minds.  Thus,  although 
I  am  always  sensible  that  I  have  not  derived  from  my 
assiduous  perusal  of  the  Bible  (and  I  might  apply  the  same 
remark  to  almost  everything  else  that  I  do)  all  the  benefit 
that  I  might  and  ought,  I  am  as  constantly  endeavoring  to 
persuade  myself  that  it  is  not  my  own  fault.  Sometimes  I 
say  to  myself  I  do  not  undertsand  what  I  have  read.  I 
cannot  help  it.  I  did  not  make  my  own  understanding. 


214 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

There  are  many  things  in  the  Bible  hard  to  be  understood, 
as  St.  Peter  expressly  says  of  Paul’s  Epistles.  Some  are  hard 
in  the  Hebrew  and  Greek,  the  original  languages  in  which 
the  Scriptures  were  written.  Some  are  harder  still  in  the 
translations.  I  have  been  obliged  to  lead  a  wandering  life 
about  the  world,  and  scarcely  ever  have  had  at  hand  the 
books  which  might  help  me  to  surmount  the  difficulties. 
Conscience  sometimes  asks  the  question,  whether  my  not 
understanding  many  passages  is  not  owing  to  my  want  of 
attention  in  reading  them.  I  must  admit  that  it  is;  a  full 
proof  of  which  is  that  every  time  I  read  the  Book  through, 
I  do  understand  some  passages  which  I  never  understood 
before,  and  which  I  should  have  understood  at  a  former 
reading  had  it  been  effected  with  a  sufficient  degree  of  atten¬ 
tion.  Then  in  answer  to  myself  I  say,  it  is  true.  But  I  can¬ 
not  always  command  at  all  my  own  attention,  and  never 
can  to  the  degree  that  I  should  wish.  My  mind  is  oftentimes 
so  full  of  other  things,  absorbed  in  bodily  pain,  or  engrossed 
by  passions,  or  distracted  by  pleasures,  or  exhausted  by 
dissipation,  that  I  cannot  give  to  my  proper  daily  employ¬ 
ment  the  attention  that  I  gladly  would,  and  that  is  abso¬ 
lutely  necessary  to  make  it  “  fruitful  of  good  works.”  This 
acknowledgment  of  my  weakness  is  just;  but  for  how  much 
of  it  I  am  still  accountable  to  myself  and  to  God,  I  hardly 
dare  acknowledge  to  myself.  Is  it  bodily  pain?  How  often 
was  that  brought  upon  me  by  my  own  imprudence  and  folly? 
Was  it  passion?  Heaven  has  given  to  every  human  being 
the  power  of  controlling  his  passions,  and  if  he  neglects  or 
uses  it,  the  fault  is  his  own  and  he  must  be  answerable  for  it. 
Was  it  pleasure?  Why  did  I  indulge  in  it?  Was  it  dissipa¬ 
tion?  This  is  the  most  inexcusable  of  all,  for  it  must  have 
been  occasioned  by  my  own  thoughtlessness  or  irresolution. 

It  is  of  no  use  to  discover  our  own  faults  and  infirmities, 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1 8 1 1  ] 


21 S 


unless  the  discovery  prompts  us  to  amendment.  I  have 
thought  that  if  in  addition  to  the  daily  hour  which  I  give  to 
the  reading  of  the  Bible,  I  should  also  from  time  to  time,  and 
especially  on  Sundays,  apply  another  occasional  hour  to 
communicate  to  you  the  reflections  which  arose  in  my 
mind  upon  its  perusal,  it  might  not  only  tend  to  fix  and 
promote  my  own  attention  to  the  excellent  instructions  of 
that  book,  but  perhaps  also  your  advancement  in  its  knowl¬ 
edge  and  wisdom.  At  your  age  it  is  probable  that  you  have 
the  greater  difficulties  to  understand  all  that  you  read  in  the 
Bible,  than  I  have  at  mine,  and  if  you  have  as  much  self 
observation  as  your  letters  show,  you  will  be  sensible  of  as 
much  want  of  attention,  both  voluntary  and  involuntary,  as 
I  have  acknowledged  in  myself.  I  intend,  therefore,  for  the 
purpose  of  contributing  to  your  improvement  and  my  own, 
to  write  you  several  letters,  in  due  time  to  follow  this,  and  in 
which  I  shall  endeavor  to  show  you  how  you  may  derive  the 
most  advantage  to  yourself  from  the  perusal  of  the  Script¬ 
ures.  It  is  probable  that  when  you  receive  the  letters,  you 
will  not  on  first  reading  them  entirely  understand  them.  If 
that  should  be  the  case,  ask  your  grandparents,  or  your 
uncle  or  aunt,  to  explain  them  to  you,  and  if  you  still  find 
them  too  hard,  put  them  upon  file  and  lay  them  by  two  or 
three  years;  after  which  read  them  again  and  you  will  find 
them  easy  enough. 

It  is  essential,  my  son,  in  order  that  you  may  go  through 
this  life  with  comfort  to  yourself  and  usefulness  to  your 
fellow  creatures,  that  you  should  form  and  adopt  certain 
rules  or  principles  for  the  government  of  your  own  conduct 
and  temper.  Unless  you  have  such  rules  and  principles 
there  will  be  numberless  occasions  on  which  you  will  have  no 
guide  for  your  government  but  your  passions.  In  your 
infancy  and  youth  you  have  been  and  will  be  for  some  years 


2l6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

under  the  authority  and  control  of  your  friends  and  instruc¬ 
tors.  You  must  soon  come  to  the  age  when  you  must  govern 
yourself.  You  have  already  come  to  that  age  in  many  re¬ 
spects.  You  know  the  difference  between  right  and  wrong. 
You  know  some  of  your  duties,  and  the  obligation  you  are 
under  of  becoming  acquainted  with  them  all.  It  is  in  the 
Bible  that  you  must  learn  them,  and  from  the  Bible  how 
to  practise  them. 

Those  duties  are  to  God ,  to  your  fellow  creatures ,  and  to 
yourself.  “Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy 
heart,  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all 
thy  strength,  and  thy  neighbor  as  thyself”  (Luke  x,  27; 
Mat.  xxii,  40).  “On  these  two  commandments  (Jesus 
Christ  expressly  says)  hang  all  the  law  and  the  prophets.” 
That  is  to  say  that  the  whole  purpose  of  divine  revelation  is 
to  inculcate  them  efficaciously  upon  the  minds  of  men. 

You  will  perceive  that  I  have  spoken  of  duties  to  yourself , 
distinct  from  those  to  God  and  to  your  fellow  creatures, 
while  Jesus  Christ  speaks  only  of  two  commandments.  The 
reason  is,  because  Christ  and  the  commandments  repeated 
by  him  consider  self-love  as  so  implanted  in  the  heart  of  every 
man  by  the  law  of  his  nature  that  it  required  no  other  com¬ 
mandment  to  establish  its  influence  over  the  heart.  And  so 
great  do  they  know  its  power  to  be  that  they  demand  no 
other  measure  for  the  love  of  your  neighbor  than  that  which 
they  know  we  shall  have  for  ourselves.  But  from  the  love  of 
God  and  the  love  of  our  neighbor  result  duties  to  ourselves 
as  well  as  to  them,  and  they  are  all  to  be  learnt  in  equal 
perfection  by  searching  the  Scriptures. 

Let  us  then  search  the  Scriptures,  and  in  order  to  pursue 
our  inquiries  with  methodical  order,  let  us  consider  the  va¬ 
rious  sources  of  instruction  that  we  may  draw  from  in  this 
study.  The  Bible  contains  the  revelation  of  the  will  of  God; 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


217 


1811] 

it  contains  the  history  of  the  creation,  of  the  world  and  of 
mankind;  and  afterwards  the  history  of  one  peculiar  nation, 
certainly  the  most  extraordinary  nation  that  has  ever 
appeared  upon  earth.  It  contains  a  system  of  religion  and 
morality,  which  we  may  examine  upon  its  own  merits, 
independent  of  the  sanction  it  receives  from  being  the  word 
of  God,  and  it  contains  a  numerous  collection  of  books, 
written  at  different  ages  of  the  world  by  different  authors, 
which  we  may  survey  as  curious  monuments  of  antiquity 
and  as  literary  compositions.  In  what  light  soever  we 
regard  it,  whether  with  reference  to  revelation ,  to  history ,  to 
morality  or  to  literature ,  it  is  an  invaluable  and  inexhaustible 
mine  of  knowledge  and  virtue. 

I  shall  number  separately  these  letters  that  I  mean  to 
write  you  on  the  subject  of  the  Bible.  And  as,  after  they  are 
finished,  I  shall  perhaps  ask  you  to  read  them  all  together  or 
to  look  over  them  again  myself,  you  must  keep  them  on  a 
separate  file.  I  wish  that  hereafter  they  may  be  useful  to 
your  brothers  and  sister  as  well  as  to  you.  As  you  will  re¬ 
ceive  every  one  of  them  as  a  token  of  my  affection  for  you 
during  my  absence,  I  pray  that  they  may  all  be  worthy  of 
being  read  by  them  all  with  benefit  to  themselves,  if  it  please 
God  that  they  may  live  to  be  able  to  understand  them. 

From  your  affectionate  father.1 

1  The  series  of  letters,  of  which  this  is  the  first,  was  printed  in  1848,  with 
the  letters  of  Abigail  Adams,  and  again,  separately,  in  1850. 


218 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS  1 
St.  Petersburg,  14  September,  1811. 

Dear  Sir: 

Some  time  in  the  month  of  June  last  there  was  published 
in  the  Boston  Patriot  a  pretended  state  paper,  purporting 
to  be  signed  by  the  Duke  of  Cadore,  and  addressed  to  his 
Excellency  2 — as  in  extreme  secrecy — and  containing  a  com¬ 
monplace  invective  against  the  British  nation,  constitu¬ 
tion  and  royal  family,  mixed  up  with  a  panegyric  upon  the 
Duke  of  York  and  the  incendiary  Jackson;  a  curse  upon  the 
murder  of  Louis  16  and  his  murderers,  a  dissertation  upon 
Wicliff,  Huss,  Luther  and  the  price  of  seats  at  Covent 
Garden  theatre,  abuse  upon  Erskine,  Cobbett,  the  Burdett 
party  and  ministerial  opposition  in  England;  and,  as  the 
choicest  effusion  of  gall,  of  which  all  the  rest  seems  to  be 
only  the  froth,  an  allusion  to  the  government  of  the  United 
States  as  the  “weakest  and  most  contemptible  of  govern¬ 
ments.” 

How  the  editors  of  the  Patriot  can  have  been  imposed 
upon  to  take  and  publish  as  a  genuine  state  paper  what 
appears  to  me  the  most  stupid,  because  the  most  glaring 

1  September  3.  “The  French  Ambassador  sent  me  the  Moniteur  from  the  nth 
to  the  16th  of  August  containing  the  Memoir  with  the  name  of  the  Duke  of  Cadore, 
in  a  translation  from  the  London  Courier  of  30  July,  and  also  a  number  of  para¬ 
graphs  extracted  from  several  other  English  newspapers  concerning  it.  The 
Moniteur  declares  it  an  English  forgery.  Count  Romanzoff  afterwards  sent  me  a 
packet  from  Mr.  Russell  at  Paris,  brought  by  a  courier.  Mr.  Russell  encloses  to 
me  the  Moniteur s  of  13  and  14  August  containing  the  Memoir,  and  some  paragraphs 
about  it,  and  the  New  York  Commercial  Advertiser  of  22  June,  also  containing  it,  and 
announcing  it  as  extracted  from  the  Boston  Patriot.  Mr.  Russell’s  letter  to  me 
expresses  great  doubts  whether  it  was  genuine  or  not.”  Ms.  Diary.  The  paper 
appeared  in  the  Boston  Patriot,  June  19,  1811. 

2  Prince  Kurakin,  Russian  Ambassador  at  Paris. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


219 


1811] 

forgery  that  I  ever  saw  is  not  for  me  to  explain.  They  do 
not  expressly  warrant  its  authenticity,  but  they  declare 
their  own  persuasion  of  it,  not  only  from  their  confidence 
in  the  source  from  which  they  received  it,  but  from  what 
they  consider  as  its  internal  evidence. 

It  appears  to  have  been  published  in  many  of  the  federal 
newspapers  in  the  United  States,  whose  editors  were  doubt¬ 
less  highly  delighted  with  the  terms  in  which  it  speaks  of 
their  government.  I  have  it  in  the  New  York  Commercial 
Advertiser  of  22  June,  which  has  been  sent  me  by  Mr.  Russell 
from  Paris,  and  in  which  the  paragraph  containing  this  in¬ 
sult  is  printed  over  a  second  time  in  a  different  page  of  the 
paper  with  evident  marks  of  exultation.  There  is  also  a 
little  comment  of  sympathy  and  love  for  the  English  king 
and  constitution,  natural  enough  for  its  place,  but  into 
which  the  Patriot ,  the  original  publisher,  had  not  been 
duped. 

But  the  great  fortune  of  this  state  paper  was  to  be  made  in 
England.  The  London  Courier  of  30  July  published  it  as 
the  most  important  state  paper  ever  laid  before  the  British 
nation;  and  instead  of  speaking  like  the  American  editors 
in  terms  of  doubt  or  hesitation  with  regard  to  its  authentic¬ 
ity,  the  Courier  not  only  solemnly  declares  that  it  is  beyond 
all  question  authentic,  but  undertakes  to  give  a  history  of 
its  publication.  It  says  that  during  the  last  autumn  (the 
piece  is  dated  30  October,  1810)  there  appeared  to  be  some 
wavering  and  irresolution  in  the  policy  of  the  Russian  cab¬ 
inet.  That  the  paper  was  then  written  and  addressed  by 
the  Duke  of  Cadore  to  the  Russian  ambassador  at  Paris, 
to  be  laid  before  his  government,  in  order  to  persuade  the 
Emperor  of  Russia  that  the  war  with  England  must  be  con¬ 
tinued  until  the  British  constitution  should  be  destroyed 
or  the  present  royal  family  driven  from  the  throne.  That 


220 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


the  Russian  ambassador  accordingly  sent  it  to  his  court, 
where  it  did  not  prove  successful.  That  the  Russian  govern¬ 
ment,  to  let  the  United  States  know  how  their  government 
was  spoken  of  by  the  French  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
and  perhaps  to  have  the  paper  made  known  in  England ,  com¬ 
municated  it  to  Mr.  J.  Q.  Adams,  American  minister  at 
St.  Petersburg,  who  transmitted  a  copy  of  it  to  his  own 
government  and  also  to  his  father,  through  whom  it  was 
first  published. 

From  the  Courier ,  a  ministerial  paper,  this  miserable 
fabrication  was  copied  into  many  of  the  other  English  news¬ 
papers,  but  in  most  of  them  is  recognized  as  a  forgery.  The 
Courier  persisted  in  asserting  its  authenticity,  and  in  the 
tale  of  its  having  been  transmitted  by  me  and  published  by 
you.  A  translation  of  it  was  soon  after  published  in  the 
Moniteur ,  and  copied  into  the  Journal  de  /’ Empire  with  a 
few  short  notes,  in  one  of  which  it  is  declared  to  have  been 
forged  in  England.  A  German  translation  with  the  notes 
of  the  Moniteur  has  appeared  in  the  Hamburg  Correspondent , 
so  that  it  has  been  now  thoroughly  circulated  all  over 
Europe,  together  with  the  falsehood  which  ascribes  its  trans¬ 
mission  from  this  country  to  me  and  its  publication  to  you. 

It  was  in  the  London  Courier  that  I  first  saw  it,  and  then 
considered  it  in  the  same  light  as  it  is  viewed  in  the  note  of 
the  Moniteur ,  as  a  mere  English  forgery.  I  did  not  suspect 
that  the  imposture  had  ever  appeared  in  the  Boston  Patriot , 
and  I  could  not  conjecture  what  motive  could  have  prompted 
the  editor  of  the  London  Courier  to  use  my  name  as  instru¬ 
mental  to  the  circulation  of  so  wretched  a  fable.  Some  days 
afterwards  I  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Russell,  inclosing 
the  New  York  paper  above  mentioned  and  the  Moniteur 
containing  the  translation.  Since  I  knew  that  the  first 
publication  was  in  the  Boston  Patriot  I  am  not  so  totally 


i8n]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  221 

at  a  loss  to  imagine  why  the  English  editors  so  boldly  palmed 
your  name  and  mine  upon  the  public  to  avouch  this  infamous 
fraud,  but  I  am  not  a  little  surprised  that  the  editor  of  the 
Patriot  should  have  been  misled  to  credit  so  far  the  authentic¬ 
ity  of  the  pretended  memoir  as  to  have  admitted  it  into  his 
paper,  and  to  have  avowed  his  belief  that  it  was  genuine. 
If  the  braying  of  the  animal  had  not  been  sufficiently 
audible  to  disclose  the  imposition  of  the  lion’s  skin,  I  should 
really  have  thought  that  the  editor  of  the  Patriot  would  have 
discovered  him  by  his  ears.  If  a  dramatic  author  were  to 
put  in  the  mouth  of  a  known  character  sentiments,  I  will 
not  say  so  foolish  and  absurd,  but  so  totally  at  war  with  the 
notorious  sentiments  of  the  person  represented,  he  would 
be  hooted  off  the  stage  for  ignorance  of  the  first  principles  of 
his  art.  That  there  should  have  been  in  human  nature 
baseness  enough  to  attempt  this  deception  is  not  at  all  re¬ 
markable;  but  that  there  should  have  been  in  men  of  worth 
and  discernment  blindness  enough  to  believe  in  it  for  a 
moment,  is  extraordinary.  I  am  not,  however,  at  present 
of  opinion  that  it  was  of  English  invention  altogether.  The 
editor  of  the  Patriot  must  know  whence  it  came  to  him,  and 
he  may  be  sure  it  was  a  cheat  practised  upon  him.1  No  such 

1  “It  is  utterly  unaccountable  to  me  how  the  Editor  of  the  Patriot  could  have 
been  made  the  dupe  of  what  appears  to  me  to  be  so  clear  an  imposition.  He  says 
it  bears  the  very  image  and  superscription  of  the  modern  Caesar — which  only 
shows  how  little  he  is  acquainted  with  that  personage,  and  how  open  he  has  suffered 
his  mind  to  the  rank  absurdities,  and  cunning  misrepresentations  of  Englishmen 
and  anglified  Americans.  Ames  tried  to  scare  all  our  federal  old  women  out  of  their 
senses  by  telling  them  with  a  grave  face  that  he  trembled  for  fear  Bonaparte  would 
take  his  and  their  children  for  a  conscription  against  St.  Domingo;  and  Walsh, 
with  a  little  mincing  of  the  matter,  just  enough  to  show  that  he  does  not  believe 
a  word  of  it,  says  that  indeed  he  does  not  know  but — he  is  no  coward — but  really 
there  may  be  some  danger  of  the  conscription  against  St.  Domingo.  In  all  this 
however  there  is  no  forgery.  Ames’s  fears  raised  a  spectre  before  his  mind’s  eye, 
which  he  really  believed  he  saw,  and  from  which  he  started  with  a  shriek  of  horror. 


222 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

paper  was  ever  written  by  the  Duke  de  Cadore,  or  sent  by 
the  Russian  ambassador  in  France  to  this  country,  or  com¬ 
municated  by  the  Russian  government  to  me,  or  transmitted 
by  me  to  any  person  in  the  United  States,  or  (without  a 
particle  of  hesitation  I  add)  first  published  through  you. 

It  is  more  to  be  regretted  that  the  Patriot  should  have 
given  countenance  and  currency  to  this  trick  of  political 
swindling,  because  its  intended  effect  and,  so  far  as  it  ob¬ 
tained  credit  its  real  effect,  must  be  to  propagate  and 
strengthen  those  false  opinions  and  groundless  jealousies 
which  the  present  English  ministry  and  their  faction  every¬ 
where  are  attempting  to  impose  upon  mankind.  Ignorant 
or  blind  to  the  real  state  of  the  world  and  to  the  necessity 
which  every  wise  statesman  must  feel  of  adapting  his  politi¬ 
cal  system  to  it,  the  English  ministry  of  this  day  have  come 
to  the  avowal  that  their  only  plan  for  futurity  is  perpetual, 
or  at  least  interminable  war.  They  will  neither  discuss 
nor  even  listen  to  any  proposition  of  peace,  and  as  in  this 
long  war,  like  that  of  the  house  of  Saul  against  the  house  of 
David,  they  are  waxing  weaker  and  weaker  while  their  ad¬ 
versary  waxes  stronger  and  stronger,  they  find  the  spirit  of 

Walsh  affects  to  partake  of  his  trepidation  because  he  has  his  purposes  to  answer 
by  spreading  it  among  others;  but  the  author  of  this  spurious  step  advances  one 
step  further  in  the  righteous  cause.  Hobgoblins  and  prophecies  are  not  highly 
seasoned  enough  for  his  palate.  Plain,  downright  forgery  is  his  fashion  of  raising 
bugbears,  and  so  he  puts  the  Duke  of  Cadore’s  name  to  a  jumble  of  materials  as 
incongruous,  and  ridiculous  as  the  composition  of  the  caldron  of  Macbeth’s  witches, 
the  result  of  which  is  to  be,  that  Bonaparte  intends  to  destroy  the  English  Consti¬ 
tution,  and  dethrone  the  house  of  Hanover,  and  that  he  considers  the  United  States 
as  ruled  by  the  weakest  and  most  contemptible  of  governments.  That  such  a  wretched 
piece  of  patch  work  should  have  passed  current  for  genuine  among  the  profound 
wiseacres  of  the  federal  gazettes,  that  Russell  or  Coleman  should  have  taken  or 
given  it  all  out  for  Gospel  would  have  been  natural  enough;  but  I  really  should 
never  have  suspected  quite  so  much  gullability  in  the  Editor  of  the  Patriot To 
Thomas  Boylston  Adams ,  September  25,  181 1.  Ms. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


223 


1811] 

their  people  beginning  to  flag,  and  think  it  necessary  to  make 
them  believe  they  are  fighting  for  their  existence,  for  their 
constitution,  or  for  their  sovereign,  when  in  truth  they  are 
only  fighting  for  the  Chateaux  en  Espagne  of  their  ministers. 
As  the  plain  truth  will  not  answer  to  justify  their  policy 
they  have  recourse  to  such  falsehoods  as  they  know  to  be 
best  calculated  to  stimulate  and  to  control  the  passions  of 
their  people.  Swift  in  his  art  of  political  lying  complains 
that  the  French  king  and  universal  monarchy  had  been  so 
prodigally  brought  out,  instead  of  being  kept  like  the  bears 
for  show  once  a  year,  that  they  had  almost  lost  their  effect 
of  terror.  But  Napoleon  is  a  more  durable  bugbear  than 
Louis  14;  and,  lavish  as  they  have  been  of  him  for  these 
nine  or  ten  years,  they  have  not  yet  worn  him  out.  The 
Bonaparte  panic  has  been  made  a  political  engine  in  America, 
too,  where  but  for  the  camel,  swallow  and  ostrich  man  of 
faction  it  would  have  been  only  ridiculous.  With  us,  too,  it 
has  howled  the  song  of  war  against  his  universal  empire 
until  it  grew  hoarse  upon  the  sky;  and  now,  when  the  whip- 
poor-will  warble  of  Walsh  and  the  raven  croak  of  Pickering 
waste  alike  their  sweetness  on  the  desert  air,  at  a  moment 
when  the  talk  of  British  outrage  and  insult  is  smarting  in 
every  honest  vein,  a  gross,  direct  and  palpable  forgery 
comes  with  unblushing  face  to  turn  the  public  indignation 
away  from  its  proper  object,  and  through  the  Boston  Patriot 
obtains  access  to  the  public  mind. 

Although  the  use  of  my  name  in  this  piece  of  villainy  was 
first  made  in  the  London  Courier  and  does  not  appear  in 
the  American  papers,  it  must  in  all  probability  have  been 
suggested  to  the  English  editors  from  America,  and  may  have 
been  intended  by  the  original  author  of  the  spurious  memoir 
certainly  with  views  of  no  friendship  or  kindness  for  me.  The 
Courier  has  even  been  grateful  enough  to  pronounce  a  pane- 


224 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

gyric  upon  yourself  and  me,  wisely  and  ingeniously  con¬ 
founding  us  together  as  one  and  the  same  person.  I  believe 
you  will  be  as  little  ambitious  as  myself  of  such  praise.  I 
have  written  to  Mr.  Russell  at  Paris  and  declared  to  the 
French  ambassador  here,  that  the  whole  of  the  story  so  far 
as  my  name  concerned  was  false  and  destitute  of  all  founda¬ 
tion.  Count  Romanzoff  declares  the  same  as  respects  the 
Russian  government,  and  the  Russian  ambassador  at 
Paris  has  equally  denied  having  ever  received  anything 
like  the  pretended  memoir.  I  have  no  doubt  you  will 
be  equally  surprised  as  I  was,  to  find  yourself  vouched 
for  as  an  authority  in  the  Courier  to  authenticate  this  de¬ 
ception. 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  25  September,  18 11. 


Since  I  wrote  you  last  I  have  also  read  in  the  Aurora  the 
whole  of  Mr.  R.  Smith’s  publication,1  and  I  have  seen  one  or 
two  more  of  Mr.  Pickering’s  addresses  to  the  people.  I  hear 
that  Mr.  Smith  has  been  answered  in  the  National  Intelli¬ 
gencer  ,  and  has  replied.2  There  seems  to  be  something  in 
that  office  of  Secretary  of  State  peculiarly  calculated  to 
overset  underballasted  minds.  Edmund  Randolph — peace 

1  Address  to  the  People  of  the  United  States,  Baltimore,  1811.  It  appeared  in  the 
Aurora,  June  2 6.  See  Henry  Adams,  History,  V.  378;  Writings  of  Madison  (Rives), 
II.  507,  513.  An  earlier  “authorized  explanation”  had  been  printed  in  the  Aurora , 
April  5,  drawing  out  Madison’s  memorandum  in  Writings  of  Madison  (Rives), 
II.  495. 

2  Joel  Barlow  wrote  the  reply  to  Smith  ( National  Intelligencer),  and  Smith  an¬ 
swered  in  the  Baltimore  American. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


225 


1811] 

be  to  his  remainders — but  he  like  Mr.  Smith  was  obliged  to 
vindicate  his  resignation.  Pickering  mistook  Mrs.  Reynolds’ 
paramour  for  President  of  the  United  States,  and  surrendered 
up  his  official  virtue  to  that  gay  deceiver  as  fondly  as  the 
lady  did  her  conjugal  virtue.  He  did  not  choose  to  resign, 
and  so  he  now  vindicates  his  going  out  upon  expulsion.  Mr. 
Smith  seems  to  have  mistaken  who  was  President  too,  but 
his  optical  illusion  terminated  in  himself.  As  a  party 
pamphlet  his  publication  is  written  with  some  address; 
but  do  you  think  he  ever  put  to  himself  the  question,  whether 
the  single  fact  of  the  publication  did  not  involve  in  it  a 
breach  of  trust ,  more  dishonorable  to  him  and  more  detri¬ 
mental  to  the  public,  than  everything  he  has  made  out 
against  Mr.  Madison?  If  he  did,  and  settled  it  to  his  own 
satisfaction  that  he  should  not  be  chargeable  with  such  a 
breach  of  trust,  he  ought  instead  of  the  hackneyed  and 
in  his  case  not  very  applicable  adage  about  measures  and  not 
men,  and  the  dramatic  parade  about  the  dangers  to  which 
he  was  exposing  himself,  to  have  begun  by  proving  as  much 
to  the  satisfaction  of  his  readers.  These  breaches  of  trust 
have,  indeed,  unfortunately  been  so  frequent  in  our  short 
history,  and  they  have  always  been  so  much  countenanced 
by  party  spirit,  and  so  secure  of  impunity,  that  I  am  afraid 
it  has  infected  the  very  principle  of  our  national  character. 
The  vote  of  censure  upon  Mr.  Pickering  last  winter  was  a 
tardy,  feeble,  and  I  fear  ineffectual  attempt  to  maintain 
the  rule  of  secrecy,  upon  which  alone  the  possibility  of  con¬ 
fidential  communication  between  the  President  and  Senate 
can  subsist;  and  even  that  was  too  much  an  affair  of  party.1 

1  “It  is  well  to  enforce  the  observance  of  their  injunctions  of  secrecy;  but  I  can¬ 
not  see  any  thing  very  heinous  in  Pickering’s  conduct  in  this  instance.  They  should 
have  begun  with  Stevens  Thomson  Mason.”  John  Adams  to  John  Quincy  Adams , 
January  25,  1811.  Ms. 


226 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

I  believe  that  our  heads  of  departments  and  our  ministers 
to  foreign  powers  ought  also  to  be  under  the  restriction  of  an 
official  oath,  and  I  wish  some  of  the  thoughtful  members 
of  our  national  legislature  would  bring  the  subject  before 
Congress  for  discussion.  Our  laws  do  not  contemn  the  aid 
of  oaths  as  ties  upon  human  conscience  in  matters  of  revenue, 
where  perhaps  their  efficacy  is  most  questionable,  and  we 
administer  quite  enough  of  them  in  our  custom  houses  to 
secure  the  payment  of  the  paltriest  impost.  In  the  act 
establishing  the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  of  War 
there  is  an  oath  of  office,  “well  and  faithfully  to  execute  the 
trust  committed  to  him,”  provided  to  be  taken  by  the  secre¬ 
taries.  But  there  is  none  required  by  the  acts  establishing 
the  Department  of  the  Treasury  and  of  the  Navy,  and  none 
anywhere  for  the  ministers  abroad. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  2  October,  1811. 

Your  favor  of  21  June,  without  a  number,  was  forwarded 
to  me  from  Copenhagen  by  Mr.  Erving,  who  received  it 
from  the  Radius ,  which  on  her  passage  to  this  place  was  taken 
by  a  French  privateer,  and  is  still  detained  in  Denmark. 
Like  almost  all  the  letters  which  we  have  received  this  year 
it  brought  tidings  of  sickness  and  affliction  among  our  friends. 
In  the  sorrow  which  they  have  so  often  inflicted,  I  still  bless 
God  that  they  assure  me  of  the  health  and  welfare  of  my 
parents  and  of  my  children. 

In  the  first  letter  which  you  wrote  me  this  year  there  was 
an  extract  of  a  letter  from  Burke  to  Barry,1  the  painter, 

1  “That  you  have  just  subjects  of  indignation  always,  and  of  anger  often,  I  do 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


227 


1811] 

upon  which  I  have  reflected  many  times  since  I  received  it. 
One  of  the  reasons  why  I  am  so  much  an  admirer  of  Burke 
is  because  he  always  thinks  so  much,  and  leads  his  reader  to 
think  so  much  upon  everything  that  occurred  within  his 
observations.  I  have  within  a  few  days  seen  the  Edinburgh 
Review  of  the  life  and  works  of  Barry,  from  which  you  took 
this  extract,  at  least  I  find  it  again  there,  and  the  history 
and  character  of  Barry  there  given  in  connection  with  it, 
explains  to  me  the  only  part  of  the  extract  upon  which  my 
mind  had  hesitated  a  little  in  assenting  to  its  accuracy. 
Moderation,  gentleness  and  indulgence  to  others  are  un¬ 
doubtedly  and  universally  of  “  strong  prevailment”  in  count¬ 
eracting  the  ill  disposition  of  the  world;  but  I  am  not  sure 
that  a  great  deal  of  distrust  of  ourselves  is  always  calculated 
to  produce  the  same  effect.  I  readily  perceive  why  Burke 
recommended  it  with  the  other  qualities  to  Barry,  because 
it  was  precisely  that  of  which  Barry  stood  most  in  need, 
and  that  for  the  want  of  which  he  was  most  severely  suffering. 
But  I  believe  there  are  many  tempers  and  dispositions  who 
carry  the  distrust  of  themselves  to  excess,  and  to  whom  it 
would  be  more  wise  and  just  to  recommend  confidence  in 
themselves,  and  reliance  upon  their  own  judgments.  My 
own  experience  of  life  and  self  observation  has  often  led  me 
to  the  conclusion  that  one  of  my  failings  was  too  much  dis¬ 
trust  of  myself.  In  the  scenes  of  political  life,  such  as  those 
that  I  have  been  engaged  in,  distrust  of  one’s  self  renders 
absolutely  indispensable  a  proportionate  confidence  in  others. 

no  ways  doubt.  Who  can  live  in  the  world  without  some  trials  of  his  patience? 
But  believe  me,  the  arms  with  which  the  ill  disposition  of  the  world  are  to  be  com¬ 
batted,  and  the  qualities  by  which  it  is  to  be  reconciled  to  us,  are  moderation, 
gentleness,  a  little  indulgence  to  others,  and  a  great  deal  of  distrust  of  ourselves, 
which  are  not  qualities  of  a  mean  spirit,  as  some  may  possibly  think  them,  but  vir¬ 
tues  of  a  great  and  noble  mind,  and  such  as  dignify  our  nature  as  much  as  they 
contribute  to  our  repose.” 


228 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

In  legislative  assemblies  every  man,  whether  a  leader  or  a 
follower,  must  often  sacrifice  more  or  less  his  own  judgment 
to  that  of  those  with  whom  he  associates;  and  in  time  of 
party  virulence  these  sacrifices  must  be  greater  and  more 
frequent  than  in  more  tranquil  periods.  It  is  then  that  the 
principle  of  distrusting,  and  that  of  confiding  in  himself, 
becomes  to  every  conscientious  man  a  question  of  no  small 
difficulty  and  delicacy,  and  even  in  the  ordinary  affairs  of 
life,  I  have  often  found  it  a  very  perplexing  question.  Of 
the  ill  dispositions  of  the  world  it  would  not  become  me  to 
complain.  The  confidence  of  my  country  in  me  has  for 
many  years  been  to  say  the  least  equal  to  anything  that  I 
had  a  right  to  expect,  and  in  a  very  recent  instance  has  far 
exceeded  my  own.  On  one  occasion,  however,  it  was  with¬ 
drawn  and  in  a  very  conspicuous  manner  by  the  legislature 
of  my  native  State.  It  was  for  having  confided  in  myself, 
and  for  having  acted  upon  questions  of  great  public  interest 
according  to  the  dictates  of  my  own  deliberate  judgment, 
in  opposition  to  the  momentary  feelings  and  heated  passions 
of  my  constituents.  Had  I  during  that  period  followed 
Mr.  Burke’s  principle  of  greatly  distrusting  myself,  and  of 
course  greatly  confiding  in  others,  my  conduct  would  have 
been  certainly  very  different,  and  I  might  possibly  have 
retained  the  confidence  of  those  to  whose  opinions  I  must 
have  sacrificed  my  own.  But  I  have  no  reason  to  believe 
that  the  general  confidence  of  my  country  in  me  would  now 
be  greater  than  it  is,  or,  which  is  infinitely  more  important, 
that  the  result  would  have  been  more  useful  or  more  honor¬ 
able  to  my  country. 

I  am  just  informed  by  the  French  and  German  gazettes 
that  Congress  are  called  together  by  proclamation,  to  meet 
on  the  4th  of  November,  and  in  the  English  newspapers  I 
find  that  there  is  a  sort  of  coalition  between  the  two  quon- 


l8n] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


229 


dam  Secretaries  of  State,  in  assailing,  through  the  medium 
of  the  press,  Mr.  Madison’s  administration.  Mr.  Pickering’s 
perseverance  and  tenacity  are  worthy  of  a  better  cause, 
though  his  mauvaise  foi  (he  would  certainly  impute  this  ex¬ 
pression  to  French  influence)  is  as  remarkable  in  his  present, 
as  it  has  been  in  many  of  his  former  publications,  and  his 
personalities  show  very  little  either  of  Mr.  Burke’s  distrust 
of  himself  or  of  moderation,  gentleness,  or  indulgence  to 
others.  I  know  not  how  Mr.  Smith  and  Mr.  Colvin  have 
settled  between  themselves  their  militating  claims  to  the  com¬ 
position  of  the  letters  which  were  to  ascertain  the  contested 
title  of  the  late  Secretary’s  abilities;  but  perhaps  Colvin  is 
only  one  of  the  parasites  of  power,  who  were  to  raise  the  storm 
which  Mr.  Smith  assured  the  people  of  the  United  States  he 
will  have  to  buffet.1 

There  are  very  few  American  vessels  left  here  and  we  can¬ 
not  expect  the  arrival  of  any  more  during  the  present  year. 
At  least  if^any  others  should  yet  arrive,  they  will  like  our¬ 
selves  be  obliged  to  remain  here  until  next  summer  before 
they  can  return.  I  expect  to  send  this  by  Mr.  Loring  Austin, 
a  young  gentleman  who  came  last  summer  to  Archangel, 
and  is  now  about  to  embark  for  Boston. 

Although  we  are  within  the  bounds  of  the  city  of  St. 
Petersburg,  the  situation  where  we  are  is  so  much  in  the 
country  that  it  begins  to  be  uncomfortable,  and  we  intend  to 
remove  next  week  into  the  city.2  If  you  have  the  English 
translation  of  Storck’s  Picture  of  Petersburg,  I  can  show  you 
where  we  are.  Please  to  open  the  plan  and  look  to  the  branch 
of  the  river  marked  C;  that  is  the  Nevka,  upon  the  borders 
of  which  is  our  residence.  This  river,  together  with  the  little 

1  Colvin  claimed  authorship  of  letters  to  Armstrong  and  Turreau. 

2  His  new  house  was  at  the  corner  of  the  Vosnesenskoi  and  the  Little  Officers* 


streets. 


230 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

Nevka,  marked  in  the  plan  D,  and  a  small  stream  called  the 
Karpoffka  marked  M,  forms  an  island  called  the  Apothe¬ 
caries  Island,  on  which  a  building  marked  123  is  designated 
in  the  explanation  of  the  plan  as  the  Surgery  School.  Our 
house  is  the  next  door  to  this  building,  and  with  only  the 
street  between  them.  Here  is  a  facsimile  of  that  part  of 
Storck’s  plan.  The  dotted  part  is  not  upon  the  plan.  I 
have  added  it  here  to  show  our  house,  garden  and  pier 
extending  out  upon  the  river,  at  the  end  of  which,  according 
to  the  fashion  of  the  country,  we  have  a  flagstaff,  and  on 
the  days  when  we  receive  company  hoist  the  flag  of  the 
United  States.  You  will  see  by  mere  inspection  of  the  plan 
that  the  situation  is  quite  rural,  and  as  a  mere  summer 
residence  it  is  as  pleasant  as  any  place  of  abode  that  ever 
fell  to  my  lot.  From  our  door  down  to  the  Karpoffka, 
there  is  a  wall  inclosed  by  low  railings  on  both  sides,  extend¬ 
ing  along  the  bank  of  the  river  and  kept  in  excellent  order  for 
the  sole  convenience  of  walkers.  The  plot  marked  122  is  a 
very  large  public  garden,  called  the  Apothecary’s  or  Botanic 
Garden,  containing  a  great  variety  of  plants,  and  always 
open  for  walking.  Beyond  the  river  at  the  separation  of  the 
two  Nevkas  the  figure  in  form  of  a  spade  and  marked  126 
indicates  the  Imperial  Palace,  the  usual  summer  residence 
of  the  Emperor  and  Empress,  in  front  of  which  upon  the 
River  are  stationed  two  yachts,  with  an  excellent  band  of 
music,  who  have  regularly  entertained  us  with  their  martial 
concerts  at  the  Emperor’s  dining  hour,  between  four  and  five 
o’clock,  and  at  nine  in  the  evening  almost  every  day  through¬ 
out  the  summer.  We  are  so  near,  that  with  the  open  doors 
and  windows  of  warm  weather  we  heard  it  as  if  it  had  been 
before  our  own  door.  The  palace  is  upon  an  island  formed  by 
the  two  Nevkas,  contiguous  to  the  isle  of  Apothecaries,  and 
called  Thamennoi  Ostroff ,  which  in  Russian  signifies  Stony 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


231 


1811] 

Island.  On  the  mainland  beyond  that  island,  and  in  sight 
from  our  windows,  is  the  country  seat  of  Count  Strogonoff, 
with  a  large  and  very  beautiful  English  garden,  likewise 
always  open  to  the  public,  and  sometimes  in  the  summer 
much  frequented.  Count  Strogonoff  is  one  of  the  most  dis¬ 
tinguished  noblemen  of  the  country,  and  is  yet  more  illus¬ 
trious  by  his  attachment  to  the  fine  arts  than  by  his  great 
wealth,  high  rank  and  venerable  years.  In  the  city  he  ha^ 
one  of  the  finest  collections  of  pictures  extant  in  Europe* 
But  his  garden  here  has  a  rarer  and  more  memorable  orna¬ 
ment — the  very  tomb  of  Achilles,  before  which  Alexander 
the  Great  and  Julius  Caesar  paid  their  homage  to  the  char¬ 
acter  of  the  hero.  It  was  brought  from  Greece  by  the  com¬ 
mander  of  a  Russian  fleet  which  was  so  much  celebrated 
for  its  naval  victories  over  the  Turks  during  the  reign  of 
Catherine,  and  by  him  presented  to  Count  Strogonoff,  who 
has  placed  it  with  many  other  monuments  of  antiquity  in 
his  garden.  There  are  two  other  large  and  handsome 
gardens  open  to  the  public  in  our  neighborhood,  and  over 
which  I  have  occasionally  varied  my  daily  walks.  The 
French  ambassador  and  the  Danish  minister  are  our  near 
neighbors,  and  many  others  with  whom  we  have  as  much 
intercourse  as  suits  our  mutual  convenience.  While  the 
weather  was  fine  we  never  wanted  company,  and  even  now 
we  have  no  reason  to  complain  of  being  solitary.  But  the 
leaves  before  my  windows  are  falling  in  showers  from  the 
trees  as  I  write.  The  river,  as  Charles  tells  me,  is  mechant, 
by  which  he  means  stormy.  The  days  of  dampness,  and 
darkness,  and  chilling  frigidity  are  at  hand  and  even  here. 
I  still  linger  in  my  Russian  arcadia,  but  the  ladies  and  the 
children  call  for  the  snug  comforts  of  the  city,  and  at  the 
next  letter  I  shall  write  you  I  shall  have  bid  a  last  farewell, 
as  a  residence,  to  the  pleasant  borders  of  the  Nevka  and  be 


232 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

once  more  “in  populous  city  pent.’’  In  the  meantime, 
adieu.  We  are  all  well. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  70.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  3  October,  1811. 

Sir: 

I  have  furnished  the  French  Ambassador,  as  he  requested, 
with  a  list  of  the  American  vessels  which  have  arrived  this 
year  at  Cronstadt,  and  have  sailed  again  for  the  United 
States.  I  have  also  sent  a  copy  of  the  same  list  to  Mr. 
Russell  at  Paris,  by  a  courier  dispatched  last  Monday  by 
Count  Lauriston;  and  have  mentioned  to  Mr.  Russell  in  a 
letter  the  motive  upon  which  it  was  requested — to  obtain  a 
more  speedy  liberation  of  any  of  them  which  might  be  cap¬ 
tured  by  the  French  privateers  said  to  be  stationed  at  the 
passage  of  the  Sound.  When  the  courier  was  dispatched  I 
had  already  heard  that  Mr.  Barlow  had  sailed  from  Annap¬ 
olis  for  France,  and  I  learn  this  morning  that  he  arrived  the 
6th  of  last  month  at  Cherbourg.  Having  understood  from 
Mr.  Russell  that  it  was  his  intention  to  leave  Paris  immedi¬ 
ately  after  the  minister  should  arrive,  I  have  requested  that 
Mr.  Barlow  would  in  that  case  open  the  letter  addressed  to 
Mr.  Russell.  I  hope  there  will  be  no  capture  of  any  of  the 
vessels,  to  make  the  interposition  of  either  of  those  gentle¬ 
men  with  the  French  government  necessary  to  obtain  their 
release.  But  if  there  should,  I  shall  be  happy  to  find  the  good 
intentions  of  the  Ambassador  in  asking  for  the  list  realized, 
by  its  contributing  to  their  immediate  liberation.  I  am  not 
inclined  to  suspect  any  unfriendly  intention  towards  us,  as 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


233 


1811] 

having  contributed  in  the  slightest  degree  to  this  request. 
There  is  a  frankness  and  good  humor  in  the  character  of 
the  Ambassador,  in  which  deep  dissimulation  is  not  con¬ 
genial.  He  has  often  very  freely  and  explicitly  avowed  to  me 
his  wish  for  a  war  between  the  United  States  and  England. 
Having  in  my  own  nature  as  little  dissimulation  as  I  think 
observable  in  his,  I  have  never  pretended  in  this  respect  to 
coincide  with  him  in  sentiment;  but  I  have  more  than  once 
suggested  to  him  that  if  his  government  really  wished  that  war 
should  be  the  result  of  English  ill-usage  towards  the  United 
States ,  it  was  a  strange  way  of  manifesting  that  desire  to  rivalize 
with  England  in  acts  of  the  like  ill-usage ,  and  I  have  not 
scrupled  to  avow  to  him  that  so  long  as  France  should  continue 
to  hold  towards  us  such  a  course  of  conduct ,  it  was  my  opinion 
that  neither  the  people  nor  the  government  of  the  United  States 
would  engage  themselves  in  a  war  which  would  be  so  conform¬ 
able  to  her  views  and  policy A  It  has  assured  me  in  strong 
terms  of  his  own  2  wish  that  his  government  should  do  us 
justice,  and  his  disposition  to  write  anything  that  might  be 
proper  to  promote  the  same  temper  there;  and  I  am  willing  to 
believethat  this  was  his  real  and  principal  inducement  forask- 
ing  the  information  contained  in  this  list.  At  the  same  time  I 
am  aware  that  it  might  be  for  purposes  of  an  opposite  nature  and 
I  know  that  the  French  Minister  of  Foreign  A  fairs  has  informed 
the  French  consul  here  that  he  had  received  advices  that  much 
English  property  had  been  introduced  here  under  the  American 
flag ,  and  had  enjoined  upon  him  a  most  vigilant  attention  and  a 
report  how  the  fact  in  this  was.  The  report  which  was  sent  by 
the  same  courier  with  my  letter  I  have  reason  to  believe  was  as 
favorable  so  far  as  concerns  Americans  as  the  truth  would 
warrant.  The  consul 3  has  declared  to  me  his  opinion  that 
every  vessel  which  has  arrived  this  year  at  Cronstadt  with 
1  Cypher.  2  Not  in  cypher.  3  Cypher. 


234 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

a  cargo  under  an y  other  than  American  colors,  was  loaded 
on  English  account.  The  number  of  those  vessels  however 
amounts  only  to  eleven.  As  to  those  Americans  he  assured  me 
that  he  fully  credited  the  statement  which  I  made  verbally 
to  him  in  conversation,  and  that  he  would  report  accordingly 
to  his  government.  I  told  him  that,  independent  of  any  credit 
which  he  might  be  disposed  to  give  me  from  confidence,  he 
might  observe  that  the  interest  of  my  countrymen  trading 
here  was  impulse  enough  for  them  and  me  to  detect  as  much 
as  we  could  the  counterfeit  who  came  as  their  competitors  in 
the  market,  and  as  to  the  introduction  of  English  property 
here,  I  asked  his  attention  to  two  facts  which  in  my  mind 
amounted  to  complete  demonstration  that  its  amount  had 
really  been  very  small.  The  first  was  that  during  the  whole 
season  no  insurance  had  been  obtainable  in  London,  upon 
shipments  of  goods  to  Russian  ports  in  the  Baltic;  and  the 
other  that  the  course  of  exchange  had  constantly  been  from 
fifty  to  sixty  per  cent  against  England  and  in  favor  of 
Russia.  He  admitted  the  right  of  these  facts,  of  the  first 
of  which  he  had  not  been  aware;  and  he  said  he  should  not 
fail  to  avail  himself  of  both  in  his  report.  Of  the  American 
vessels,  thirty-three  came  in  ballast,  and  I  presume  were 
either  freighted  in  England,  or  came  here  for  freights  to 
England.  In  all  these  cases  the  government  here  have 
scarcely  wished  to  look  at  the  papers.  Mr.  Gurieff ,  the 
Minister  of  Finance ,  to  whose  Department  this  matter  now 
belongs ,  once  told  me  in  express  terms  that  if  a  ship  came 
empty ,  he  did  not  care  whence  she  came ,  and  was  not  inclined 
to  scrutinize  what  she  was.1  This  disposition  obtained  ad¬ 
mission  for  the  Crescent ,  though  reported  by  Mr.  Harris  as 
irregular,  and  came  very  near  carrying  through  the  Angeronay 
when  the  Captain  lost  his  papers  to  secure  their  forgery 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


235 


1811] 

from  detection.  The  Ambassador  and  consul  knew  very  well 
that  these  ships  that  came  in  ballast  will  return  bound  to  Eng¬ 
land  for  whatever  port  they  may  have  cleared  out .  When  they 
have  been  real  Americans  I  have  not  felt  myself  obliged  to  be 
more  scrupulous  in  enquiring  whence  they  came  than  the 
Russian  government;  it  was  not  my  duty  to  accuse  them  nor  to 
point  them  out  by  any  discrimination  from  the  rest .  They  will 
doubtless  return  as  they  came ,  under  convoy ,  and  will  be  in  very 
little  danger  of  capture  either  by  French  or  Spanish  1  privateers . 
Their  freightings  are  certainly  profitable  to  the  general  mass  of 
our  commerce ,  but  I  think  it  necessary  to  say  to  you  that  abuse 
of  our  flag  is  more  difficult  to  detect  in  their  trading  than  in  the 
case  of  forgery.  I  have  my  suspicions  that  in  more  than  one 
instance  of  those  that  came  this  summer ,  altho 9  the  vessel  and 
papers  and  even  the  master  and  crew  were  really  American , 
the  property  was  English;  and  I  am  not  sure  there  were  not 
cases  in  which  everything  was  English  but  the  papers.  I  feel 
my  whole  bounden  duty  therefore  once  more  to  suggest  the 
expediency  of  further  legislative  provision  against  the  sale  of 
real  American  ship’s  papers ,  whether  with  or  without  the  ship , 
in  foreign  ports.2 

There  have  been  indeed  several  cases  of  American  vessels, 
which  came  with  cargoes  last  from  England;  the  admission 
of  which  I  have  obtained.  But  they  have  all  been  accom¬ 
panied  with  proof  that  they  were  dispatched  from  the  United 
States,  and  bound  here,  and  that  they  have  been  detained 
in  English  ports,  either  by  capture,  by  stress  of  weather,  or  by 
the  necessity  of  repairing  or  charging  the  ship.  The  proofs 
have  been  clear.  I  have  interfered  without  hesitation,  and 
in  every  instance  have  obtained  their  admission.  I  know  also 
of  several  instances  in  which  vessels  under  similar  circum¬ 
stance  obtained  admission  without  my  interference.  There 

2  Cypher. 


1  Danish? 


236 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8ll 

have  been  so  many  of  them  in  all  that  possibly  other  causes  than 
mere  compulsion  made  some  of  them  touch  at  English  ports . 
I  know  that  before  the  navigation  opened  this  government  re¬ 
ceived  notice  from  Mr.  Daschkoff  that  a  large  proportion  of 
the  American  vessels  coming  to  Russia  this  season  would  take 
England  in  their  way .  This  was  not  forbidden  by  any  law  of  the 
United  States.  How  far  it  was  compatible  with  the  law  of 
Russia  was  for  this  government  to  determine.  I  never  dis¬ 
guised  or  even  concealed  a  fact  from  them  which  could  bear  upon 
the  principle  when  I  asked  for  a  favor  or  an  exemption  from  the 
rigor  of  the  ukaze ,  and  many  vessels  have  been  admitted  which 
the  rigor  of  the  ukaze  would  have  excluded.  It  is  not  probable 
that  any  further  questions  of  this  nature  will  occur  the  present 
year ,  and  it  is  too  early  to  look  forward  for  the  ruling  principles 
of  the  next ,  but  it  is  not  too  soon  to  say  that  the  safety  of  our  real 
commerce  with  Russia  may  still  depend  upon  its  discrimination 
from  the  imposture  which  assumes  its  garb.  .  .  .l 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  71.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  ii  October,  18 11. 

Sir: 

I  received  yesterday  from  Paris  an  authentic  and  particu¬ 
lar  account  of  the  discourse  held  by  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
to  the  Russian  ambassador,  at  the  Diplomatic  Circle  on  the 
15th  of  August.  It  comes  from  a  person  who  was  present,2 
and  who  vouched  for  its  authenticity;  and  it  very  naturally 

1  Cypher. 

2  Probably  J.  S.  Smith.  See  Adams,  Memoirs ,  September  26,  1811;  Vandal, 
Napoleon  et  Alexandre  /,  III.  192. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


237 


1811] 

accounts  for  the  opinion  which  it  appears  to  have  excited 
there,  and  which  seems  still  to  be  entertained  there,  that 
hostilities  would  commence  before  the  close  of  the  present 
autumn.  The  same  apprehensions  are  expressed  in  letters 
from  various  parts  of  Germany.  Still  however  the  confidence 
here  remains  unaltered,  that  it  is  too  late  to  begin  a  war  in 
these  northern  regions  the  present  year.  I  saw  the  French 
ambassador  a  few  days  ago ,  and  he  told  me  that  he  had  received 
an  explicit  assurance  from  Keromansoff  that  one  division  of 
the  troops  in  Poland  received  orders  to  march ,  and  had  actually 
marched  to  join  General  Kutuzoff’s  army .  The  Count ,  he  said , 
had  acknowledged  only  one  division ,  but  he ,  the  ambassador , 
knew  there  were  two ,  and  as  this  was  the  first  step  towards  dis¬ 
arming ,  he  considered  it  as  a  favorable  omen  towards  the  further 
preservation  of  the  peace.1  This  was  probably  the  point  upon 
which  the  French  Emperor  manifested  such  a  strong  de¬ 
termination  to  have  explanations  before  November.  The 
Russian  tariff,  the  protest  respecting  the  Duchy  of  Olden¬ 
burg,  and  the  armaments  in  Poland,  were  all  rankling  in 
his  mind  when  he  made  this  speech,  and  his  language  with 
respect  to  the  Russian  general  and  cabinet,  the  ambassador 
to  whom  he  was  speaking,  and  his  own  ambassador  so  re¬ 
cently  returned,  discovers  an  exasperated  and  menacing  spirit. 
This  equivocal  state  of  things  is  yet  continued  by  the  un¬ 
certainty  how  far  his  northern  tour  was  to  extend;  and  by 
the  fact  now  known  here  that  large  detachments  of  the 
cavalry  of  the  imperial  guard  have  arrived  at  Brussels,  pre¬ 
ceding  him  before  his  departure  from  Compiegne;  yet  an 
immediate  attack  is  not  expected  here;  and  in  answer  to 
the  threat  that  the  conscription  of  1812  should  be  called  out, 
the  actual  order  has  been  issued  here  for  a  new  levy  of  four 
men  to  every  five  hundred  taxable  inhabitants,  throughout 

1  Cypher. 


238 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i  8 1 1 

the  empire.  It  will  add  nearly  one  hundred  and  thirty 
thousand  men  to  the  present  numbers  of  the  Russian  army. 
It  is  scarcely  a  year  since  the  last  levy  was  made  of  three 
men  in  five  hundred,  and  the  losses  during  the  year  have 
been  scarcely  anything  beyond  the  ordinary  average  of 
mortality. 

If  the  war  should  not  commence  soon  there  is ,  I  believe,  no¬ 
body  who  thinks  it  possible  it  should  be  postponed  longer  than 
until  the  next  summer .  The  Emperor  Napoleon's  confidence 
of  success,  plainly  avowed  in  his  address,  is  founded  on  the 
consciousness  of  his  strength,  and  upon  his  conviction  that 
Russia  has  no  general  officers  capable  of  commanding  armies 
in  opposition  to  an  enemy  like  France .  In  this  opinion 
he  is  not  singular .  His  present  ambassador  here  told  me  that 
what  he  relied  upon  to  prevent  the  war  was  that  Russia  had  no 
generals,  none  at  least  capable  of  planning  a  campaign,  which , 
he  observed,  was  the  great  talent  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon.  A 
battle  to  him  was  altogether  a  secondary  consideration.  If  he 
lost  one  today  he  would  gain  another  after  a  few  weeks;  the  re¬ 
sult  of  the  whole  campaign  was  his  great  object,  and  of  this  he 
was  always  sure.  I  have  heard  that  the  Emperor  Alexander 
has  not  much  confidence  in  the  capacity  of  his  generals,  and 
there  is  certainly,  since  the  death  of  Count  Kamensky,  no  very 
dazzling  military  reputation  among  them.  In  short,  the  an¬ 
ticipations  of  reflecting  men  here  concerning  the  probable  issue 
of  the  war  are  gloomy  and  desponding,  and  notwithstanding 
its  apparent  inconsistency ,  this  melancholy  foreboding  is  shared 
even  by  those  who  yet  wish  to  accelerate  the  war.  They  are  im¬ 
patient  to  try  the  chance  of  the  die,  although  they  feel  that  the 
odds  are  against  them. 

I  have  so  frequently  written  to  you  upon  this  subject,  because 
the  question  of  this  peace  or  war  must  materially  affect  the  com¬ 
merce,  if  not  the  general  policy ,  of  the  United  States.  The 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


239 


1811] 

effect  of  French  intrusion  upon  the  Baltic  is  already  very  con¬ 
siderable;  the  next  year  it  will  in  all  probability  be  much 
greater A  The  four  American  vessels  which  I  mentioned  to 
you  as  having  been  taken  at  the  beginning  of  this  season  by 
a  French  privateer  and  carried  into  Dantzig  have  all  been 
condemned  at  Paris,  ostensibly  as  English  property,  but 
really  as  I  am  informed,  on  account  of  their  destination, 
and  at  the  express  desire  of  General  Rapp  to  contribute  to 
the  funds  necessary  for  the  new  fortifications  of  that  city. 
The  privateers  at  the  passage  of  the  Sound  still  intercept  all 
the  American  vessels  coming  hither,  and  twenty  vessels 
bound  from  this  port  to  America  were  detained  great  part 
of  the  months  of  August  and  September  in  Elsineur  Roads, 
by  the  fear  of  these  privateers,  which  were  anchored  close 
beside  them  there,  ready  to  sally  out  immediately  after  them 
to  carry  them  back  as  prizes.2  The  British  policy  of  leaving 
the  coast  clear  for  their  privateers  will  serve  their  purpose  better 
than  the  blockade  of  the  port  of  Elsineur.z 

1  Cypher. 

2  “The  [Frenchl  Consul  [Lesseps]  was  very  busy  preparing  dispatches  to  go  by 

the  Ambassador’s  courier.  He  told  me  he  had  dined  a  few  days  since  in  a  company 

where  there  were  a  great  number  of  Americans,  and  said  he  was  convinced  there  were 

a  great  number  of  real  Americans  from  the  United  States  here,  though  there  were 

people  enough  here  ready  to  say  they  were  all  English.  I  entered  into  details  of 

conversation  with  him  to  convince  him  that  almost  all  the  Americans  that  came 

here  loaded  were  bona  fide  from  America,  and  with  cargoes  of  American  property. 

He  said  he  gave  full  credit  to  my  statement,  and  should  report  accordingly  to  his 

♦ 

government.  He  showed  me  his  account  of  the  vessels  arrived  at  Cronstadt,  of 
which  there  were  88  Americans  with  cargoes  and  33  in  ballast.  There  were  only 
II  with  cargoes  under  other  colors,  all  of  which  he  told  me  he  held  unquestionably 
for  English  property.  Every  vessel  loaded  at  Gothenburg  he  considered  as  English 
property.  I  noticed  the  state  of  the  exchange  between  this  country  and  England, 
and  the  fact  that  no  insurance  could  be  obtained  in  England  upon  goods  shipped 
for  this  country,  as  proof  that  very  little  English  property  was  really  imported  here, 
which  he  allowed.  This  last  fact,  he  said,  he  had  not  known  before,  and  that  he 
should  not  fail  to  avail  himself  of  it. >  September  28,  1811.  Ms.  Diary. 

3  Cypher. 


240 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

The  official  accounts  from  the  Moldavian  army  come 
down  to  the  first  of  September.  The  Turks  had  taken  pos¬ 
session  of  an  island  upon  the  Danube  near  Widdin,  from 
which  they  were  dislodged  on  the  25th  of  August  with  the 
loss  of  their  artillery.  This  and  another  small  skirmish  of 
foraging  detachments  a  few  days  before  are  all  that  has 
been  done  in  that  quarter,  where  the  campaign  may  be  con¬ 
sidered  as  at  an  end.  Of  the  peace  which  was  so  confidently 
anticipated,  we  now  hear  nothing.  I  am  with  great  re¬ 
spect,  etc. 

TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  14  October,  1811. 

Dear  Sir: 

•  •••••• 

I  endeavor  as  much  as  possible  to  be  your  disciple  in  the 
opinion  that  a  navy  would  remedy  many  of  our  evils.1  But 
there  are  two  sides  to  that  question,  and  I  have  not  definitely 
settled  in  my  mind  whether  the  evil  or  the  remedy  is  the 
worst.  If  a  navy,  a  respectable  navy,  could  be  formed,  and 
at  the  same  time  a  steady  peace  with  England  could  be  pre¬ 
served,  it  would  certainly  tend  to  raise  our  national  character 
in  the  estimation  of  the  rest  of  the  world.  But  if,  even  in 
our  present  state  of  impotence  upon  the  ocean,  the  com¬ 
mercial  rivalry,  jealousy  and  fears  of  England  are  pushing 
her  into  a  war  with  us  for  the  sole  purpose  on  her  part  of 
arresting  and  reducing  our  prosperity,  how  much  more  in¬ 
evitable  would  it  be  if  her  rancorous  feelings  were  envenomed 

1  “Our  country  has  tried  and  will  try  every  measure  but  the  right  one.  The 
navy,  the  navy,  a  navy  is  the  grand  desideratum,  and  the  unum  necessarium.  In 
private  it  is  acknowledged,  but  nobody  dares  avow  it  in  public.”  John  Adams 
to  John  Quincy  Adams,  February  22,  18 11.  Ms. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


241 


1811] 

by  the  sight  of  an  American  navy,  which  she  could  take  or 
destroy.  It  would  be  a  perpetual  stimulus  to  England  for 
making  war  against  us,  stronger  than  all  those  by  which 
she  is  now  instigated  put  together.  Nor  would  it  be  possible, 
for  us,  even  with  the  most  liberal  appropriations  for  a  navy, 
to  create  one  in  half  a  century  of  uninterrupted  and  unre¬ 
mitting  effort,  capable  of  coping  with  hers.  If  she  could  not 
endure  the  thought  of  our  commercial  profits,  all  of  which 
ultimately  flow  into  her  own  lap,  how  much  more  eagerly 
would  she  seize  every  occasion  to  annihilate  any  naval  force 
which  should  be  rising  to  an  aspect  which  could  give  her  a 
moment  of  alarm.  The  only  possible  chance  we  could  have 
for  growing  into  strength  at  sea  would  be  a  time  when  we 
should  be  upon  good  terms  with  her,  and  when  we  might 
seem  to  be  building  for  a  contest  against  her  enemies.  The 
affair  of  the  Chesapeake  and  that  of  the  Little  Belt  have  shown 
us  samples  of  the  questions  that  are  apt  to  arise  between 
armed  ships,  and  of  a  very  compendious  manner  of  settling 
such  questions  to  which,  in  certain  tempers  of  mind,  they 
are  no  less  prone.  Multiply  tenfold  or  fifty  the  number  of 
our  frigates  and  send  them  out  to  meet  British  men  of  war 
on  the  high  seas,  and  you  will  have  ten  or  fifty  such  ques¬ 
tions  to  one  that  occurs  now.  Convoy  questions,  salute 
questions,  first  hailing  and  first  answering  questions,  with 
a  burning  match  at  the  touch  hole  of  every  gun  in  both  ships, 
and  then  solemn  official  reports  on  each  side  charging  the 
other  with  having  fired  the  first  gun.  I  cannot  disguise  to 
myself  the  tendency  of  a  navy  to  embroil  us  with  Great 
Britain,  arising  from  the  very  nature  of  the  thing.  Nor 
can  I  contemplate  without  anxious  concern  any  instrument 
so  powerful,  the  character  of  which  must  be  to  produce  and 
multiply  such  collisions. 

As  to  our  internal  policy,  the  argument  for  a  navy  is  liable 


242 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1 8 1 1 

to  much  controversy  too.  Its  expense  must  be  an  important 
object.  The  annual  cost  of  the  British  navy  now  exceeds 
twenty  millions  sterling.  A  tenth  part  of  that  sum  equals 
the  whole  expenditure  of  our  national  government.  Ten 
millions  of  dollars  a  year  would  give  us  just  such  a  navy  as 
I  think  the  English  would  for  its  own  sake  choose  to  destroy. 
With  ten  millions  of  dollars  a  year  we  should  have  about 
half  the  force  which  the  same  sum  pays  for  in  England. 
There  is  no  department  of  the  English  government  in  which 
the  nation  is  so  outrageously  plundered  as  in  the  navy.  Our 
nation  would  be  plundered  about  twice  as  much  as  the  Eng¬ 
lish,  for  in  the  first  place  we  must  double  pay  both  officers 
and  men.  The  officers,  because  we  must  take  them  from 
occupations  of  which  profit  is  the  soul,  and  must  indemnify 
them  for  the  advantages  they  give  up  for  the  service.  The 
men,  because  we  have  no  power  of  impressment,  because 
their  engagements  must  be  voluntary,  and  because  the  public 
to  obtain  them  must  outbid  the  wages  of  the  merchant  serv¬ 
ice.  Then  the  navy  contracts,  and  the  navy  agents  and  the 
pursers,  the  multitude  of  electioneering  canvassers  to  be 
provided  for  in  the  seaports,  the  riggers  and  caulkers,  and 
ship  carpenters  and  mastmakers,  and  victuallers  and  poul¬ 
terers,  and  all  the  little  world  who  have  something  to  do  in 
fitting  out  a  ship,  and  who  have  also  something  to  do  upon 
all  our  election  days,  will  too  easily  discover  the  art  of  swell¬ 
ing  their  bills  for  work  done  or  articles  furnished,  with  an 
invisible  item  for  their  services  in  the  political  department. 
And  when  money  comes  to  be  wanted  by  the  public  to  pay 
for  all  these  expenses,  the  bank  directors  and  stockholders 
who  can  alone  command  it  will  find  out  and  prove  that  eight 
per  cent,  or  perhaps  ten,  is  the  most  moderate  interest  for 
which  it  can  possibly  be  obtained.  Something  too  much  of 
this  we  have  seen  in  our  small  experience.  If  my  friend 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


243 


1811] 

Quincy  had  an  oration  to  make  upon  the  subject,  it  would 
afford  an  ample  field  for  his  eloquence  and  his  wit. 

But  all  this  is  political  heresy.  That  without  a  navy  we 
shall  never  have  any  security  for  our  commerce,  and  shall 
be  contiuually  injured  and  insulted  by  foreign  nations,  is 
beyond  all  question.  Now  comes  a  new  point  to  be  mooted. 
Is  our  commerce  worth  the  cost  and  sacrifices  which  must 
be  made  to  protect  it?  To  commerce,  considered  as  trade , 
as  an  honest  calling  affording  employment,  subsistence,  and 
fortune  to  a  portion  of  the  community,  favor  and  even  pro¬ 
tection  are  due  to  a  certain  extent.  To  commerce  considered 
as  the  broker  and  carrier  of  agriculture  (for  Mr.  Jefferson’s 
epithet  of  handmaid  I  do  not  approve)  still  higher  importance 
and  more  extensive  protection  is  due.  To  commerce  as  the 
purveyor  of  most  of  the  comforts  and  enjoyments  of  our 
physical  existence,  as  holding  the  great  link  of  human  asso¬ 
ciation  between  the  remotest  regions  of  the  earth,  as  furnish¬ 
ing  the  great  vehicle  of  civilization  and  science,  the  most 
distinguished  favor  and  most  liberal  protection  ought  to  be 
given.  But  from  all  that  I  have  seen  and  all  that  I  have 
heard  and  read  of  commerce,  in  this  or  in  former  ages,  in 
our  own  or  in  any  other  quarter  of  the  globe,  commerce  is 
the  very  last  constituent  interest  in  the  nation  upon  which 
I  would  bestow  power.  Mercury  made  a  very  good  messen¬ 
ger,  but  he  would  have  been  a  detestable  master.  It  is  very 
obvious  however  that  a  large  navy  would  not  only  increase 
the  relative  weight  and  influence  of  the  commercial  interest 
in  our  country,  but  would  arm  it  with  a  power  which  would 
be  extremely  formidable  to  the  whole.  I  will  not,  however, 
turn  my  letter  into  a  dissertation.  I  will  only  add  the  hope 
that  we  shall  not  suffer  ourselves  to  be  entrapped  into  a  war 
while  we  have  no  navy.  Congress  I  learn  are  soon  to  meet. 
They  must  take  care  to  steer  clear  of  war.  Your  friend 


244 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ix 

Timothy  has  been  sweating  to  prove  that  the  war  is  already 
begun.  How  Commodore  Rodger’s  story  will  turn  out  upon 
his  Court  of  Inquiry  remains  to  be  seen.1  But  the  British 
government  is  not  so  ready  for  a  war  with  the  United  States 
as  Timothy  calculated. 

Mr.  Barlow  2  has  arrived  in  France,  but  brought  us  no 
letters.  I  have  seen  however  Boston  newspapers  to  the 
tenth  of  August.  Mr.  R.  Smith’s  vindication  of  his  resigna¬ 
tion  looks  as  if  it  would  turn  out  not  much  better  than  that 
of  a  predecessor  in  his  office.3  If  he  made  his  explosion  with 
the  view  to  take  a  higher  station  in  the  third  party,  which 
we  hear  is  putting  in  a  claim  to  the  next  Presidency,  he  was 
not  well  advised.  I  fancy  by  this  time  he  wishes  he  had 
taken  the  Siberian  exile .  For  my  own  part  I  am  not  dis¬ 
pleased  that  he  chose  to  stay  at  home,  for  I  should  have  been 
in  rather  a  ridiculous  situation  spending  the  winter  here  as  a 
private  gentleman  which  I  must  have  done,  and  with  a 
successor  seated  in  my  place.  But  I  would  rather  have  sub¬ 
mitted  to  that  than  that  he  should  expose  himself  and  his 
country  as  he  has  done  by  his  pamphlet. 

All  the  accounts  which  we  get  from  America  lead  me  to  be 
more  and  more  contented  with  that  dispensation  of  Provi¬ 
dence  which  prevented  our  return  to  the  United  States  the 
present  year.  I  should  probably  have  mingled,  whether 
willingly  or  not,  in  some  electioneering  projects  from  which 
it  is  my  wish  to  be  entirely  disconnected.  They  will  have 
blown  over  by  the  next  summer,  and  on  my  return  I  shall 
have  the  prospect  of  at  least  some  little  quiet. 

We  have  resided  during  the  summer  months  in  the  coun¬ 
try.  Last  week  we  returned  to  the  city  where  we  are  settled 

1  He  commanded  the  President  in  the  action  with  the  Little  Belt. 

2  He  had  arrived  at  Cherbourg,  September  6. 

*  Edmund  Randolph. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


245 


1811] 

until  next  June.  What  is  then  to  be  our  destination  still 
depends  upon  the  pleasure  of  the  President  of  the  United 
States. 

The  political  state  of  affairs  on  the  European  continent 
is  equivocal  and  threatening.  But  on  this  head  I  can  say 
little.  I  mentioned  to  my  brother  not  long  since  a  proof  of 
curiosity  in  the  French  police  department  to  read  my  letters. 
I  have  just  had  another.  Mr.  J.  S.  Smith  wrote  me  a  few 
lines  from  London  in  disgust,  and  addressed  to  me  a  small 
packet  of  English  newspapers.  The  person  who  had  charge 
of  them  happened  to  land  in  France.  These  letters  for  me 
were  taken  from  him  by  the  police  at  Havre  and  sent  to 
Paris.  Mr.  Russell  on  hearing  of  it  wrote  to  the  Duke  de 
Bassano,  claiming  my  letters.  The  Duke  de  Bassano  sent 
him  two,  assuring  him  that  the  Duke  de  Rovigo  (Minister 
of  the  Police)  had  found  no  more  for  me .  Mr.  Russell  has 
sent  them  to  me.  They  were  sealed  but  had  apparently 
been  opened.  What  became  of  the  third  letter  or  what  it 
contained  I  am  not  informed.  I  suppose  it  is  in  the  paradise 
of  fools.  Perhaps  the  foolish  forgery  just  at  that  time  pub¬ 
lished  in  the  English  papers,  and  in  which  my  name  was 
used,  sharpened  the  Duke  of  Rovigo’s  optics.  At  any  rate 
I  have  mementos  enough  for  discretion,  and  so  I  bid  you 
adieu. 


TO  GEORGE  WILLIAM  ERVING 


St.  Petersburg,  15  October,  1811. 

Dear  Sir: 

Mr.  S.  A.  Wells  1  arrived  here  and  delivered  to  me  last 
Saturday  your  favor  of  17  September.  That  of  the  6th  of 
the  same  month,  which  you  mention  as  having  sent  by  the 


1  Samuel  Adams  Wells. 


246 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

way  of  Sweden,  is  not  yet  here.  “Dear”  as  it  may  be  to  me, 
I  should  be  very  sorry  that  any  good  natured  friend  on  its 
way  should  have  conceived  the  idea  of  sparing  me  the  ex¬ 
pense  of  its  postage.  Your  passport  and  dispatch  made  it 
necessary  for  Mr.  Wells  to  come  in  person  to  St.  Peters¬ 
burg,  which  perhaps  was  not  his  intention.  And  now  he  is 
here  he  could  not  get  away  again  in  less  than  five  or  six 
weeks,  unless  I  procured  for  him  a  courier’s  passport  to  re¬ 
turn.  By  the  police  laws  here  no  foreigner  can  either  come 
into  the  country  or  go  out  of  it  without  a  passport  issued  by 
the  Russian  government,  which  can  seldom  be  obtained 
without  a  lapse  of  several  weeks.  There  is  an  exception  for 
mariners  and  persons  named  in  ship’s  papers,  and  also  for 
couriers;  but  the  latter  to  go  away  must  have  a  passport 
from  the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs.  So  I  have  asked 
for  a  courier’s  passport  for  Mr.  Wells,  as  charged  with 
dispatches  for  you,  and  I  must  ask  you  to  take  this  for  the 
dispatches. 

Mr.  Wells  brought  me  also  the  Boston  newspapers  to  10 
August.  I  had  seen  Mr.  R.  Smith’s  pamphlet  copied  into  the 
Aurora .  The  first  part  of  the  Review  attributed  to  Mr. 
Barlow  an  extract  from  Colvin’s  conflicting  agitation  for  the 
credit  of  two  brouillon  letters,  and  a  part  of  Mr.  Smith’s 
reply,  complaining  of  the  illiberality  of  contesting  a  gentle¬ 
man’s  abilities. 

The  pamphlet  had  excited  in  my  mind  questions  con¬ 
cerning  Mr.  Smith’s  character  of  more  importance  in  my 
own  estimation  than  any  question  of  capacity.  It  is  always 
rather  an  awkward  thing  for  a  man  to  have  the  affirmative 
of  a  controversy  to  maintain,  when  the  point  at  issue  is  his 
own  talents,  and  I  did  not  think  much  of  Mr.  Smith’s  logic , 
when  he  urged  the  offer  of  the  Russian  mission  as  a  circum¬ 
stance  for  closing  all  argument  as  to  the  President’s  opinion 


i8ii] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


247 


respecting  his  intellectual  powers.1  But  my  logic  did  not  see 
how  Mr.  Smith’s  pamphlet  could  be  reconciled  with  his 
official  duty  and  his  official  oath,  which  I  supposed  him  to 
have  taken.  The  review,  however,  seems  to  admit  that  he 
was  not  under  an  oath  of  office.  If  so,  the  offense  may  lose  a 
little  of  its  aggravation,  but  nothing  of  its  essential  character. 
If  it  was  not  perjury,  it  was  not  the  less  breach  of  trust. 

It  did  not  seem  to  me  very  wise  for  Mr.  Smith  to  insist  so 
much  upon  the  long  and  unintermitted  confidence  which 
Mr.  Madison  had  shown  him  during  the  whole  period  of 
Mr.  Jefferson’s  administration,  in  the  very  act  of  showing 
to  the  world  how  little  that  confidence  was  deserved.  Nor 
did  I  think  that  either  sense  or  spirit  was  very  conspicuous 
in  the  cause  assigned  for  the  sudden  and  violent  transition 
from  only  not  accepting  the  Russian  mission,  to  extreme  in¬ 
dignation  at  the  discovery  of  the  supposed  motive  for 
the  offer.  All  this  had  some  tendency  to  advertise  unfurn¬ 
ished  apartments  in  the  ex-Secretary’s  brain;  but  the  ob¬ 
vious  preparation  which  had  so  long  been  making  for  this 
rupture,  the  painful  and  laborious  hoarding  of  topics  for 
future  crimination  which  seems  to  have  occupied  all  Mr. 
Smith’s  time  and  talents  in  the  Department  of  State,  opened 
to  view  certain  apartments  of  his  heart  not  unfurnished, 
but  which  I  thought  a  sense  of  decency,  if  not  of  delicacy, 
should  have  induced  him  to  keep  closed,  both  from  the  eye 
and  the  nostril  of  his  country.  There  was  an  acuteness  and 
energy  in  the  two  drafted  letters,  for  which  I  could  not  easily 

1  “It  had  occurred  to  me  that  he  might  not  be  disinclined  to  serve  his  country  in 
a  foreign  mission,  and  that  St.  Petersburg,  where  there  was  a  vacancy,  might  be  an 
eligible,  as  it  certainly  was  an  important  situation.  London  more  so,  he  remarked 
quickly.  For  London,  I  replied,  another  arrangement  was  thought  of;  adding, 
witn  a  view  to  repress  miscalculations,  that  it  was  a  place  of  discussions  and  nego¬ 
tiations,  calling  for  appropriate  talents  and  habits  of  business.”  Madison,  in 
Writings  of  Madison  (Rives),  II.  501. 


248 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


account;  but  the  most  distant  suspicion  never  entered  my 
head  that  what  was  in  them  belonged  to  Colvin.  I  knew 
something  indeed  of  this  man’s  talents,  but  I  did  not  even 
know  that  he  was  a  clerk  in  the  Department  of  State. 

If  you  should  come  as  soon  as  you  think  to  the  single  point 
of  past  condemnations ,  I  cannot  say  that  I  should  recommend 
very  long  waiting  for  an  answer;  a  reasonable  time,  however, 
must  be  allowed,  and  the  discussion  may  take  more  time  than 
you  anticipate  before  it  can  be  either  fairly  closed  or  found 
bottomless.  The  principle  you  have  assumed,  and  upon  which 
you  have  written  home  that  you  should  proceed,  appears  to 
me  perfectly  correct,  but  in  its  application  will  require  a 
deliberate  and  judicious  selection  of  the  moment  between 
precipitation  and  unprofitable  lingering.  In  the  choice  of 
that  moment  a  variety  of  occasional  as  well  as  permanent 
considerations  may  be  combined,  and  which  cannot  at  this 
distance  be  foreseen.  I  do  not  expect,  however,  that  the 
pending  cases  will  be  cleared  away  so  soon,  and  I  have  some 
apprehensions  that  the  new  ones  which  have  accrued  or 
will  accrue  may  require  our  attention  longer  than  you  were 
aware.  I  presume  that  they  will  come  within  the  object  of 
your  commission  and  instructions. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bentzon  now  intend  to  pass  part  of  the 
winter  and  perhaps  the  whole  of  it  here.  He  told  me  some 
time  since  that  he  should  communicate  to  me  the  object  of 
his  visit  here,  but  he  has  not  yet  done  it.  His  purpose  is 
now  to  go  from  hence  to  Copenhagen. 

The  Emperor  Napoleon’s  northern  tour  has  occasioned 
some  misgivings  and  tremulation  here  as  well  as  with  you. 
But  the  government  is  not  alarmed.  You  doubtless  knew 
before  this  all  about  the  speech  of  the  15th  of  August.  An 
ukaze  has  issued  here  for  a  new  levy  of  troops,  four  men  out 
of  every  five  hundred.  It  will  raise  nearly  130,000  men. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


249 


1811] 

The  new  obstruction  at  the  passage  of  the  Sound  is  not 
seen  with  pleasure  here,  and  I  understand  the  Russian  min¬ 
ister  at  Copenhagen  has  already  been  instructed  about  it. 
But  the  annoyance  that  it  gives  here,  and  even  to  Denmark 
may  be  a  motive  rather  for  its  aggravation  than  for  its  dis¬ 
continuance.  I  believe  with  you  that  we  must  prohibit  con¬ 
voy  or  allow  to  arm.  But  then,  at  least  in  the  two  last  of 
these  cases,  we  must  not  break  with  Great  Britain,  and  how 
can  we  help  that?  I  think  the  next  year  will  present  an 
entire  new  scene  upon  the  Baltic.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  72.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  16  October,  1811. 

Sir: 

All  the  American  vessels  which  have  arrived  at  Cronstadt 
this  season  are  gone.  Since  the  beginning  of  September 
none  have  arrived.  Several  which  were  bound  here  have  been 
arrested  by  the  French  and  Danish  privateers  at  the  passage 
of  the  Sound,  some  have  been  taken  into  Copenhagen,  and 
some  have  turned  back  to  Gothenburg.  A  convoy  bound  up 
the  Baltic  is  said  to  have  left  that  port  on  the  21st  of  last 
month,  among  which  there  were  several  Americans;  the 
arrival  of  many  of  them  is  expected  here  from  day  to  day. 
But  if  they  arrive  there  is  every  prospect  that  they  will  be 
detained  here  over  winter,  as  within  one  month  from  this 
day  it  is  probable  the  river  and  the  gulf  of  Cronstadt  will  be 
solid  as  marble. 

You  will  receive  Information  from  Mr.  Erving,  which  I  pre¬ 
sume  will  prove  to  you  beyond  a  question,  that  the  appearance 


250 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


fi8il 


of  these  French  privateers  at  the  Sound  is  not  an  accidental 
thing.  It  has  become  a  part  of  the  French  political  system, 
to  consider  all  colonial  produce  (under  which  many  natural 
productions  of  the  United  States  are  included)  as  coming 
from  England  or  being  English  property.  And  there  is  now 
another  motive  for  encouraging  these  privateers;  namely, 
that  of  annoying  the  commerce  of  Russia.  Mr.  Harris 
lately  mentioned  their  appearance  and  the  obstructions  they 
occasion  to  the  intercourse  between  the  United  States  and 
Russia,  in  a  letter  to  the  Minister  of  Finances,  Mr.  Gourieff. 
The  subject  was  laid  before  the  Emperor ,  who  directed  Count 
Romanzoff  to  complain  of  it  to  the  Danish  minister  here . 

I  saw  the  Count  yesterday  and  spoke  to  him  of  it  again .  He 
told  me  that  he  had  written  to  Baron  Blome  ( The  Danish  min¬ 
ister)  by  the  Emperor's  command  concerning  it ,  but  he  did  not 
expect  that  it  would  be  with  much  effect.  For ,  said  he ,  what  can 
be  done?  How  can  Denmark  herself  interfere  to  put  a  stop  to 
these  proceedings?  If  France  had  no  possessions  bordering  on 
the  Baltic  the  antient  ground  might  be  taken ,  that  it  was  a  mare 
clausum,  and  that  privateers  should  not  be  admitted  upon  it; 
but  now  France  herself  has  ports  in  it,  and  the  sea  cannot  be 
closed  against  her.  I  told  him  that  a  similar  course  of  reasoning 
had  induced  me  to  spare  him  the  trouble  of  a  formal  application 
from  me  in  this  case.  I  believed  that  little  would  be  effected  by 
any  remonstrance  against  it  long;  the  only  practical  remedy 
that  I  foresaw  as  likely  to  be  resorted  to  by  my  countrymen  for 
the  future  would  be,  to  avoid  the  passage  of  the  Sound  altogether 
and  look  for  another  which  they  might  find,  with  little  danger  of 
being  stopped.  He  said  he  hoped  many  of  them  would  take  their 
destination  to  Archangel,  as  there  would  be  no  cause  for  ap¬ 
prehension  of  French  in  those  seas. 

He  asked  me  if  I  had  any  late  accounts  from  America,  and 
particularly  with  regard  to  the  prospect  of  a  war  between  the 


18 1 1] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


251 


United  States  and  England.  I  answered ,  that  from  the  United 
States  I  had  no  news  later  than  of  the  10th  of  August  and  those 
merely  of  the  public  prints.  It  was  from  England ,  however , 
rather  than  from  America ,  that  the  prospects  of  peace  or  war 
between  those  two  countries  were  to  be  expected  in  the  first  in¬ 
stance  here;  and  that  as  far  as  the  information  I  had  from  thence 
could  lead  me  to  form  a  judgment ,  if  I  could  venture  to  give  him 
my  private  opinion ,  it  was ,  that  it  would  not  come  to  a  war , 
that  France  was  taking  too  much  pains  on  her  part  to  reconcile 
us  by  such  measures  as  those  we  had  been  speaking  of ,  and  I 
thought  they  would  not  be  entirely  without  effect. 

These  enquiries  still  indicate  the  wish  in  the  Russian  govern¬ 
ment  that  the  war  between  the  United  States  and  England  may 
be  avoided.  It  is  not  improbable  that  they  may  consider  their 
own  peace  with  France  as  depending  much  upon  it.  The  system 
of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  is  yet  incomplete ,  as  long  as  any  inlet 
to  colonial  goods  remains  open,  and  he  is  now  again  renewing 
the  attempt  to  prevent  all  commercial  communication  between 
England  and  Russia.  The  Russian  commerce  of  exportation 
is  an  object  of  such  importance  not  only  to  the  nation  but  to  the 
crown  and  to  the  nobility  who  compose  the  imperial  councils  and 
command  in  the  armies  that  they  can  never  consent  to  sacrifice 
it,  nor  would  the  sovereign  himself,  perhaps,  be  secure  upon 
his  throne,  should  he  arrest  entirely  the  circulation  which  feeds 
the  source  of  his  own  revenues  and  of  the  private  fortunes  of  all 
the  principal  nobility.  But  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States 
are  the  only  markets  for  this  exportation  still  open,  and  so  long 
as  the  peace  between  them  continues,  the  ships  and  vessels  of  the 
United  States  provide  the  means  of  carriage  to  England  as  well  as 
to  America.  Should,  however,  the  war  break  out ,  the  exportation 
to  both  would  become  much  more  difficult.  The  English  being 
masters  of  the  Baltic  would  probably  not  permit  the  American 
flag  to  appear  upon  it,  no  neutral  vehicle  of  commerce  would  be 


25? 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8ii 

left ,  and  Russia  would  be  reduced  to  the  alternative  of  sacrificing 
all  her  export  trade ,  or  of  permitting  it  to  be  carried  by  English 
vessels .  The  first  is  obviously  the  present  purpose  of  France; 
but  I  have  suggested  the  causes  ivhich  render  compliance  with 
it  here  impracticable.  The  second  cannot  be  done  without  an 
avowed  and  formal  peace  with  England ,  or  at  least  without  pre¬ 
cipitating  a  war  with  France ,  which  Russia  is  equally  desirous 
of  avoiding.  It  is  this  view  of  things  which  makes  Russia  take 
so  much  interest  in  our  peace  with  England;  nor  is  it  one  of  the 
motives  upon  which  France  is  so  anxious  to  procure  the  war. 
The  same  view  appears  to  me  not  less  important  to  the  United 
States  themselves ,  whose  policy ,  if  I  may  be  permitted  to  express 
an  opinion ,  coincides  entirely  with  that  of  Russia.1 

To  show  you  the  principle  assumed  by  France,  I  beg  leave 
to  refer  you  to  an  official  notification  from  the  director  of  the 
French  customs  to  the  burgomaster  of  Dantzig,  dated  16 
August: 

I  hasten  to  inform  you  that  the  importation  of  colonial  mer¬ 
chandizes,  even  by  paying  the  duties  fixed  by  the  tariff  of  2  Octo¬ 
ber,  is  contrary  to  the  views  of  the  Emperor,  and  that  his  Majesty 
has  formally  declared  that  every  species  of  colonial  merchandizes 
which  may  be  attempted  to  be  introduced,  from  what  place  so¬ 
ever  they  may  come,  and  to  what  country  soever  they  may  belong, 
must  be  considered  as  coming  from  England  and  confiscated. 

With  this  principle  thus  avowed  I  trust  our  merchants  will 
need  no  additional  warning  to  withhold  their  vessels  from  at¬ 
tempting  to  pass  next  Spring  through  the  Sound.  They  can 
expect  nothing  but  seizure  and  confiscation ,  if  they  fall  into  the 
hands  of  Frenchmen.  I  hope  also  that  in  deliberating  upon  the 
course  of  policy  to  be  pursued  with  regard  to  England ,  this  state 
of  things  will  be  clearly  and  explicitly  understood.  If  we  do  not 

1  Cypher. 


1 8 1 1] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


253 


break  with  England ,  our  trade  to  the  Baltic  will  have  little  to 
apprehend  from  France .  Congress  will  judge  whether  all  our 
national  interests  are  not  equally  secure  from  any  possible  harm 
she  can  do  us.  On  the  same  contingency  they  will  judge  also 
whether  with  such  principles  avowed ,  and  the  practice  out¬ 
stripping  even  the  principles ,  the  shadow  of  an  obligation  upon 
the  United  States  can  remain  to  discriminate  in  their  measures 
of  defense ,  self -protection  or  resentment  between  her  and  her 
enemy.1  I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  73.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  26  October,  1811. 

Sir: 

The  angry  and  threatening  state  of  the  political  relations 
between  Russia  and  France  has  naturally  excited  great  dis¬ 
quietude  in  the  Prussian  government.  The  rumor  mentioned 
in  my  letters  No.  62  and  63,  that  the  king  of  Prussia  had  been 
admitted  as  a  member  of  the  Rhenish  confederation,  appears 
not  to  have  been  well  founded.  On  the  contrary,  under 
the  apprehension  that  the  attack  upon  Russia  would  proba¬ 
bly  be  preceded  by  an  invasion  of  the  Prussian  territory, 
Prussia  had  thought  it  necessary  to  strengthen  some  of  her 
remaining  fortifications  on  the  side  of  France,  which  France 
very  soon  noticed.  An  explanation  of  the  motives  for  these 
works  was  desired,  and  an  intimation  of  the  real  cause  was 
given  in  answer.  The  French  minister  at  Berlin  was  then 
instructed  to  make  an  explicit  declaration  in  person  to  the 
King,  that  this  alarm  was  altogether  without  foundation. 

1  Cypher. 


254 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

That  the  Emperor  Napoleon  harbored  no  intention  whatso¬ 
ever  unfriendly  to  Prussia,  or  of  hostility  against  Russia . 
And  particularly  that  he  had  no  design  of  restoring  the 
kingdom  of  Poland,  but  that  the  object  of  all  his  efforts  would 
be  the  pursuit  of  the  war  against  England,  and  the  subjuga¬ 
tion  of  the  Peninsula.  And  the  inference  that  Prussia  was 
requested  to  draw  from  all  this  was,  that  any  further  ex¬ 
penditures  of  her  resources  upon  the  projected  fortifications 
were  unnecessary  and  inexpedient.  This  declaration  in  its 
precise  terms  was  transmitted  to  Baron  Schladen,  the  Prus¬ 
sian  minister  here,  and  a  few  days  since  was  by  him  communi- 
nicated  in  extenso  to  the  Chancellor,  Count  Romanzoff.  It 
was  accompanied  by  an  offer  of  the  mediation  of  Prussia,  to 
effect  an  accommodation  of  the  differences  between  France 
and  Russia.  The  answer  to  which,  in  substance  has  been, 
that  the  nature  of  the  objects  upon  which  a  variance  between 
Russia  and  France  subsists  is  so  inconsiderable,  that  it  will 
not  require  the  intervention  of  a  third  party  to  effect  its 
conciliation. 

Such  is  the  official  style  of  communication  of  the  two  em¬ 
pires,  respecting  their  situation  and  purposes  in  regard  to 
each  other,  several  weeks  after  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s 
discourse  to  the  Russian  ambassador  on  the  15th  of  August. 
The  substance  of  it  is  no  more  than  an  intimation  of  France 
to  Prussia  to  discontinue  her  fortification,  and  a  refusal  of 
Russia  to  accept  the  tender  of  a  Prussian  mediation.  Neither 
of  these  events  is  calculated  to  diminish  the  probabilities 
of  an  approaching  war. 

The  tone,  the  language,  and  the  substance  of  the  birthday 
speech,  all  appear  to  disclose  an  intention  to  intimidate; 
and  the  circumstances  of  it  having  been  spoken  in  the  hear¬ 
ing  of  the  Austrian  ambassador,  as  well  as  of  two  others  was 
doubtless  not  unintended.  The  official  circular  account  of 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


I3ii] 


255 


this  conversation,  drawn  up  the  next  day  and  transmitted 
to  the  French  ministers  abroad  by  the  Duke  of  Bassano, 
differs  from  the  speech  itself  only  as  it  omits  all  the  threats 
and  offensive  personalities  with  which  it  abounded.  These 
would  have  been  useless  and  improper  in  the  dispatch.  But 
it  can  hardly  be  supposed  they  were  without  their  purpose 
in  the  real  speech.  It  may  be  observed  that  there  was  a 
repeated  complaint  that  Russia  had  evaded  giving  explana¬ 
tions,  but  without  saying  of  what.  If  it  referred  merely  to 
the  detachment  of  the  five  divisions,  from  the  Moldavian 
army,  to  reenforce  the  Russian  line  in  Poland,  that  cause  of 
dissatisfaction  has  been  removed;  but  I  have  reason  for  be¬ 
lieving  that  something  more  than  explanations  has  been  and  still 
is  demanded  of  Russia .  The  English  newspapers  have  con¬ 
tained  articles  from  St .  Petersburg  asserting  that  this  demand 
was  nothing  less  than  the  admission  of  a  French  garrison  into 
the  Russian  ports  upon  the  Baltic  to  superintend  the  effectual 
execution  of  the  continental  system.  Probably  this  statement 
is  not  entirely  without  foundation.  Of  Riga  in  particular  it 
may  be  true.  But  as  yet  no  symptom  of  a  disposition  to  comply 
with  this  demand  is  discoverable  here.  An  inflexible  resolu¬ 
tion  to  reject  it  is  supposed  to  be  taken  even  if  its  only  alterna¬ 
tive  should  be  war. 1 

A  proposition  has  been  submitted  by  the  Chancellor  to 
the  Imperial  Council,  for  authorizing  by  law,  a  free  commerce 
with  the  Caracas,  in  consequence  of  certain  overtures  to 
that  effect,  said  to  have  been  made  from  thence.2  Although 
it  had  been  previously  presented  to  the  consideration  of  the 
Emperor,  and  favorably  viewed  by  him,  it  met  with  strong 
and  unexpected  opposition  in  the  Council,  where  it  was  if 

1  Cypher. 

2  The  independence  of  Venezuela  was  proclaimed  July  14,  1811,  but  was  not 
recognized  by  Spain  until  1845. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i  8 1 1 


not  ultimately  rejected,  at  least  indefinitely  postponed  last 
Monday.  The  opposition  to  the  measure  arose  from  an  idea 
that  it  would  involve  the  principle  of  acknowledging  the  in¬ 
dependence  of  that  province,  and  so  it  was  no  doubt  intended 
by  Count  Romanzoff.  His  views  upon  this  subject  so  far 
as  he  thought  proper  to  disclose  them  to  me  have  been  here¬ 
tofore  reported  in  several  of  my  letters  to  you.  The  Russian 
policy  as  contemplated  by  him  is  to  favor  the  independence 
of  the  provinces  of  South  America  which  belonged  to  Spain. 
Declarations  of  a  similar  disposition  were  made  nearly  two 
years  ago  by  France.  How  far  they  may  suit  the  present 
purposes  of  the  French  government  is  perhaps  questionable, 
but  the  Count  did  not  expect  any  difficulty  from  that 
quarter.  There  appears  to  be  some  embarrassment  in  the 
conduct  of  the  English  government  relative  to  this  question. 
They  do  not  seem  to  be  very  sanguine  in  the  hope  that  the 
Spanish  colonies  will  ever  be  restored  to  their  former  state 
of  dependence  upon  their  mother  country,  and  they  are  not 
a  little  anxious  to  grasp  at  a  share,  if  they  must  despair  of 
the  monopoly  of  their  trade.  But  nothing  less  than  complete 
restoration  can  satisfy  the  pretensions  of  the  Cortes;  and 
the  bare  intimation  from  England,  that  a  compromise  with 
the  insurgents  would  be  expedient,  and  especially  that  Eng¬ 
land  must  herself  be  allowed  to  trade  with  them,  has  pro¬ 
duced  dissensions  between  these  allies,  which  they  cannot 
conceal  from  the  knowledge  of  the  world.  It  might  he  the 
wish  of  Count  Romanzoff  that  Russia  should  he  the  first  or 
among  the  first  to  recognize  this  new  power ,  and  the  opposition 
in  the  Council ,  produced  it  may  he  presumed  from  views  of 
policy  coinciding  with  those  of  England  more  than  the  Chan¬ 
cellor  has  upon  any  object  of  general  importance  been  wont  to 
do.1 


1  Cypher. 


i8ii] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


257 


The  Turkish  army  under  the  command  of  the  Grand 
Vizier  has  been  defeated  by  General  Kutuzoff.  A  courier 
arrived  the  night  before  last  with  the  account,  but  the  de¬ 
tails  of  the  victory  have  not  yet  been  made  public.  It  is 
supposed  by  some  persons  here  that  the  new  English  mission 
to  Constantinople  will  contribute  to  accelerate  the  peace 
between  Russia  and  the  Porte,  but  I  believe  this  to  be  mere 
political  speculation.  I  am  with  much  respect,  etc. 

TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  21  October,  1811. 

•  •  •  •  •  •  • 

Mr.  Russell  goes  (or  rather  by  this  time  is  gone)  to  take 
charge  of  public  affairs  of  the  United  States  in  England  until 
the  appointment  of  a  minister.  I  have  great  regard  and  es¬ 
teem  for  Mr.  J.  S.  Smith,  who  was  several  months  with  us 
here,  and  whose  amiable  disposition  and  lively  character 
made  him  an  universal  favorite.  When  I  learned  that  he 
was  to  be  our  charge  d’affaires  in  England,  though  I  thought 
him  well  qualified  for  that  office,  I  was  a  little  surprised  that 
a  situation  of  such  importance  and  responsibility  should  have 
been  assigned  to  so  young  a  man,  and  with  so  little  experi¬ 
ence.  At  present  I  am  persuaded  that  the  change  has  not 
been  occasioned  by  any  deficiency  on  his  part  in  the  per¬ 
formance  of  his  duty,  and  I  hope  it  has  not  necessarily  been 
connected  with  the  misconduct  of  his  uncle.  With  Mr.  Rus¬ 
sell  I  have  been  in  correspondence  during  his  residence  at 
Paris,  and  it  has  been  a  source  of  much  valuable  information. 
I  expect  to  renew  this  correspondence  with  him  in  England. 
If,  as  I  now  expect,  we  should  return  home  next  summer,  it 
will  be  too  late  to  ask  you  to  write  to  us  under  cover  to  him. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


But  probably  that  channel  will  be  the  shortest  and  the 
surest  for  the  transmission  of  letters  between  the  United 
States  and  Russia. 

Mr.  Barlow  will  be  obliged  to  wait,  I  presume,  until  the 
Emperor  Napoleon’s  return  to  Paris  before  he  can  enter 
upon  business,  or  even  be  recognized  in  his  diplomatic  char¬ 
acter.  When  acknowledged,  I  am  not  very  sanguine  that 
he  will  be  able  to  accomplish  anything  useful  or  honorable 
to  his  country.  He  will  have  according  to  a  French  proverb¬ 
ial  expression  to  feed  upon  adders .  But  as  I  hope  he  is  au¬ 
thorized  to  assume  with  the  French  government  a  tone  be¬ 
coming  the  dignity  of  the  nation  that  he  represents,  and  if, 
as  I  trust,  he  is  not  to  be  cajoled  by  unmeaning  phrases  and 
hypocritical  compliments,  he  may  do  honor  to  himself  and  re¬ 
fute,  as  Armstrong  refuted,  the  calumnies  of  those  who  have 
so  long  charged  us  with  subserviency  to  France.  The  manner 
in  which  Armstrong’s  letter  of  io  March,  1810,  was  received 
by  all  Europe  as  well  as  all  America,  proves  to  perfect  dem¬ 
onstration  that  the  full  assertion  of  our  rights,  in  a  style 
of  firmness  and  intrepidity,  is  the  most  useful  as  well  as  the 
most  spirited  policy. 

I  hope  that  Congress  will  take  special  care  not  to  break 
into  a  war  with  England.  It  is  probable,  and  I  might  say 
almost  inevitable,  that  the  British  system  of  policy  which 
has  been  so  full  of  outrage  to  our  rights  will  soon  undergo  a 
great  change.  It  is  now  persevered  in  only  from  passion, 
obstinacy,  and  defiance  of  opposition.  It  is  already  recoil¬ 
ing  upon  England  herself  with  such  increasing  pressure 
as  must  ere  long  be  intolerable.  I  have  reasons  which  I 
cannot  fully  explain  to  you  for  writing,  that  a  war  may  still 
be  avoided;  but  one  equivalent  to  all  the  rest  is  that  it  would 
reduce  us  to  a  state  of  great  dependence  upon  France.  It 
would  draw  us  into  the  vortex  of  the  French  political  system, 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


259 


1811] 

from  which  it  might  take  a  century  to  extricate  us  again,  or 
by  a  reaction  equally  pernicious,  it  would  throw  us  back  as 
an  appendage  to  the  British  system,  and  plunge  us  head¬ 
long  into  the  ruin  towards  which  that  is  so  rapidly  tending. 


TO  WILLIAM  EUSTIS 

St.  Petersburg,  26  October,  18 11. 

Dear  Sir: 

Since  I  wrote  and  forwarded  the  letter  of  which  the  in¬ 
closed  is  a  press  copy,  Mr.  R.  Smith’s  pamphlet  as  extracted 
or  copied  into  the  Aurora  has  come  to  knowledge  and  has 
removed  some  part  of  the  obscurity  of  which  I  then  com¬ 
plained.  But  as  some  of  the  topics  discussed  in  the  pamphlet 
are  the  same  with  those  touched  upon  in  my  letter,  and  as 
Mr.  Smith  professes  to  have  avowed  sentiments  respecting 
certain  public  measures  similar  to  those  which  I  have  avowed 
to  you,  I  think  it  now  proper  to  assure  you  that  at  the  time 
when  I  wrote  the  original  of  the  inclosed  I  knew  not  the 
existence  of  his  pamphlet,  and  had  no  suspicion  either  that 
he  intended  to  publish  or  that  those  sentiments  had  been 
entertained  by  him.  I  say  this,  because  considering  as  I  do 
the  publication  of  his  pamphlet  as  a  breach  of  trust,  if  the 
coincidence  of  his  arguments  upon  the  measures  with  my 
opinions  had  not  of  itself  been  enough  to  stagger  my  con¬ 
fidence  in  my  own  mind,  it  would  at  least  have  led  me  to 
hesitate  in  expressing  even  confidentially  ideas  and  views 
which  I  believed  him  to  be  proclaiming  for  the  purposes 
very  different  from  those  of  the  public  welfare.  Of  the  Re¬ 
view  of  the  pamphlet  which  appeared  in  the  National  In¬ 
telligencer  I  have  seen  only  the  introductory  number,  but 


26o 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

Mr.  Smith’s  reply  on  the  subject  of  the  grant  to  Mr.  Erving 
has  been  published  entire  in  the  English  newspapers  where 
I  have  read  it.1  I  am  therefore  still  uninformed  of  the  reason¬ 
ing  upon  which  the  opposite  view  of  policy  relating  to  our 
affairs  with  France  is  supported,  and  know  not  how  far  it 
might  convince  me  of  the  inaccuracy  of  the  opinions  I  had 
held  and  which  in  the  inclosed  letter  I  had  suggested  to  you. 
Having  now  an  opportunity  by  Commodore  Bainbridge, 
upon  the  safety  of  which  I  can  rely,  in  giving  you  freely 
my  present  opinions  I  feel  it  as  a  duty  to  embrace  the  oc¬ 
casion  committing  my  sentiments  to  you  in  the  most  entire 
confidence  and  with  the  assurance  that  if  they  are  incor¬ 
rect  they  will  have  no  improper  influence  and  if  just  that 
they  will  not,  as  in  factious  times  so  often  happens,  be  per¬ 
verted  to  purposes  more  pernicious  than  error  itself. 

Of  the  reception  which  Mr.  Barlow  has  met  from  the 
French  government  and  of  the  instructions  under  which  he 

1  “I  have  seen  in  an  English  newspaper  the  late  Secretary’s  reply  to  the  Review, 
but  the  Review  itself,  excepting  the  first  number,  has  not  reached  me.  Whether 
there  has  been  any  reply  to  Colvin’s  disclosure  I  have  not  learnt.  The  Secretary 
has  been  unlucky  in  calling  for  the  umpirage  of  the  people,  he  speaks  of  it  as  a  duty 
and  after  setting  at  nought  his  real  duties  there  was  some  pretence  for  him  to  assume 
an  imaginary  one.  He  began  by  alleging  self  justification  as  his  motive.  In  the 
reply  he  avows  the  character  of  an  accuser  against  Mr.  Madison  and  of  his  twelve 
charges  returns  only  to  that  concerning  you.  It'  was  the  only  thing  in  his  whole 
budget  which  appeared  to  me  in  the  first  instance  to  need  some  explanation  upon 
the  part  of  Mr.  Madison.  I  suppose  it  has  been  given  in  the  Review.  Taken  all 
together  the  case  made  out  in  the  pamphlet  was  pitiful.  I  thought  it  as  you  did  a 
clumsy  mimicry  of  Hamilton,  conducted  with  more  popular  Pandarism  but  with 
infinitely  inferior  talents.  Some  of  the  last  newspapers  threaten  a  book  too  from 
General  Armstrong.  What  can  be  his  motive  or  pretext?  He  went  off  with  such 
flying  colors  from  France  that  I  had  better  hopes  of  him.  He  will  need  no  Colvin 
to  manage  his  weapons,  but  I  hope  and  trust  that  if  he  follows  the  Secretary’s  track, 
he  will  not  be  more  successful  in  the  chase.”  To  George  William  Erving,  October  29, 
1811.  Ms.  Madison  states  the  facts  as  to  Erving  in  his  letter  to  Jefferson,  July  8, 
1811,  in  Writings  of  Madison  (Rives),  II.  514. 


i8n]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  261 

is  to  act  I  am  yet  equally  ignorant.  The  situation  of  his 
immediate  predecessor  (Mr.  Russell)  has  been  irksome,  and 
I  do  not  think  his  own  will  be  agreeable.  That  good  words 
in  abundance  may  be  given  is  possible;  but  it  is  my  belief 
not  only  that  nothing  like  satisfaction  for  past  injuries  will 
be  obtained  but  that  no  material  modification  will  be  made  of 
a  system  as  hostile  to  the  United  States  in  everything  but 
the  name  as  declared  war.  And  that  in  the  full  and  unyield¬ 
ing  execution  of  this  system  a  tone  of  insolent  dictation  to 
the  United  States  will  be  officially  maintained  with  regard 
to  their  mode  of  resenting  the  outrages  of  England.  The 
object  of  all  this  will  be  to  entangle  us  in  an  English  war, 
and  I  cannot  dissemble  the  wish  that  it  may  have  the  directly 
contrary  effect  of  preserving  us  from  it. 

I  have  read  also  in  the  English  newspapers  some  late 
lucubrations  of  Mr.  Pickering  to  prove  his  old  fable  of  a 
compact  between  Mr.  Jefferson  and  Napoleon  that  the 
United  States  should  go  to  war  with  England.  If  Pickering 
believes  this  himself,  it  is  by  means  of  the  process  with  which 
Shakespeare  says  a  man  works  himself  up  “to  credit  his  own 
lye;”  but  Pickering  is  cunning  enough  to  see  that  a  war  with 
England  may  be  unavoidable,  and  then  he  thinks  to  batter 
down  the  administration  with  this  foolish  tale  of  its  having 
been  concerted  with  France  beforehand.  But  though  none 
but  a  political  idiot  or  a  political  fanatic  could  believe  any 
President  of  the  United  States  to  be  seeking  a  war  with 
England  (unless  by  a  species  of  corruption  which  even  Pick¬ 
ering  dares  not  insinuate),  yet  it  is  unquestionably  true  that 
France  had  been  doing  everything  in  her  power  to  draw  us 
into  that  war,  just  as  England  on  her  side  though  in  a  more 
blundering  manner  has  been  urging  us  to  a  war  with  France. 
Now  France  has  within  the  last  eighteen  months  been  play¬ 
ing  her  game  with  so  much  address  that  I  sometimes  fear  it 


262 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

will  ultimately  prove  successful,  and  if  Congress  during  the 
approaching  session  are  not  completely  upon  their  guard  in 
this  respect,  we  may  find  ourselves  involved  in  that  war 
without  an  adequate  attainable  object  in  view  at  its  issue, 
and  in  a  state  of  fivefold  dependence  upon  the  caprices,  the 
insolence  and  the  rapacity  of  France. 

The  general  result  of  my  reflections  as  to  the  principle 
which  I  could  wish  Congress  to  adopt,  and  which  I  flatter 
myself  may  still  preserve  us  from  war,  is  that  of  placing  the 
two  powers  again  upon  precisely  the  same  footing.  That  is, 
if  the  non-importation  is  continued  against  England,  to  ap¬ 
ply  it,  or  a  measure  of  equal  force,  to  France;  or  if  no  measure 
restrictive  of  intercourse  with  France  is  adopted,  to  remove 
that  upon  the  intercourse  with  England.  The  great  question 
about  colonial  trade  is  already  annihilated  by  the  situation 
of  South  America.  The  Orders  in  Council  must  soon  be 
given  up,  for  they  recoil  already  so  much  upon  England  her¬ 
self  that  she  will  not  much  longer  endure  them.  The  practice 
of  impressment  is  the  only  ineradicable  wound  which,  if 
persisted  in,  can  terminate  no  otherwise  than  by  war;  but  it 
seems  clearly  better  to  wait  the  effect  of  our  increasing 
strength  and  of  our  adversary’s  more  mature  decay,  before 
we  undertake  to  abolish  it  by  war.  For  as  I  have  no  hesita¬ 
tion  in  saying  that  at  the  proper  period  I  would  advise  my 
country  to  declare  a  war  explicitly  and  distinctly  upon  that 
single  point,  and  never  afterwards  make  peace  without  a 
specific  article  expressly  renouncing  forever  the  principles 
of  impressing  from  any  American  vessel,  so  I  should  think  it 
best  to  wait  until  the  time  shall  come,  and  I  think  it  not 
far  distant,  when  a  declaration  to  that  effect  would  obtain 
the  article  without  needing  the  war. 

It  would  require  a  longer  letter  than  I  can  flatter  myself 
you  would  have  patience  to  read,  to  develop  all  the  considera- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


263 


1811] 

tions  upon  which  these  opinions  are  founded.  I  submit  them 
to  you  without  reserve,  at  the  same  time  repeating  that  they 
are  all  subordinate  to  the  inclination  and  duty  of  supporting 
whatever  course  of  policy  the  constitutional  authority 
of  our  country  shall  after  due  deliberation  deem  it  most  ad¬ 
visable  to  pursue.  I  am  etc. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 
St.  Petersburg,  31  October,  18 n. 

Dear  Sir: 

In  the  month  of  June  last  Mr.  Myers  Fisher,  Junior,  of 
Philadelphia,  who  is  established  here  as  a  partner  of  a  com¬ 
mercial  house,  called  upon  me  with  a  gentleman  who  had 
just  arrived  with  a  vessel  and  cargo  of  which  he  was  the 
owner,  and  whom  he  introduced  to  me  by  the  name  of  Mr. 
David,  of  Philadelphia.  I  thought  this  gentleman  a  total 
stranger  to  me,  and  was  a  little  surprised  when  he  said  to 
me,  “Sir,  you  and  I  are  very  old  acquaintances  with  each 
other.  Do  you  not  recollect  a  boy  by  the  name  of  David 
who  was  one  of  your  school  fellows  at  Mr.  Le  Cceur’s,  at 
Passy,  in  1778?”  “I  recollect  two  boys  of  that  name  who 
were  brothers,  born  in  London  of  French  parents,  and  who 
had  been  sent  over  to  France  for  their  education.”  “Well, 
sir,  I  am  the  younger  of  those  two  brothers and  then  he 
told  me  several  anecdotes  of  occurrences  at  the  school  which 
had  as  completely  escaped  my  memory  until  he  reminded 
me  of  them  as  his  own  person.  I  excused  myself  as  well  as  I 
could  for  not  having  had  a  memory  so  retentive  as  his,  but 
the  passage  from  twelve  to  forty-five  years  of  age  accomplishes 
a  metamorphosis  in  one’s  looks,  which  it  requires  something 
more  than  memory  to  trace  back.  It  was  remarkable  that 


264 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

this  was  the  second  since  I  have  been  here  in  which  I  have 
been  recognized  by  schoolmates  of  Le  Coeur’s  pension.  The 
other  was  a  Mr.  Rudolphe,  an  engineer,  whom  I  had  more 
irretrievably  forgotten  than  Mr.  David.  For  even  now, 
after  he  brought  circumstances  to  my  mind  which  I  do  re¬ 
member,  I  can  recall  no  trace  either  of  his  person  or  his 
name.  I  have  not  been  well  pleased  with  myself  to  find  that 
my  schoolmates  of  that  period  have  so  much  better  memories 
than  mine,  and  I  have  set  all  the  usual  casuistry  of  self-love 
in  motion  to  account  for  it  in  a  manner  which  may  spare  me 
all  the  mortification  of  the  discovery. 

But  the  occasion  upon  which  I  mention  Mr.  David  to  you 
is,  that  after  having  passed  the  summer  here,  he  is  now  going 
to  Gothenburg,  intending  to  return  hence  either  directly  or 
through  England  to  Philadelphia,  and  it  is  by  him  that  I 
shall  take  the  opportunity  of  forwarding  this  letter.  It  is 
already  the  third  that  has  occurred  since  the  navigation 
directly  from  Cronstadt  has  been  closed,  and  I  hope  to  have 
several  others  in  November  and  perhaps  December.  There 
is,  however,  a  very  troublesome,  and  at  this  season  a  very 
dangerous,  water  passage  over  the  gulf  of  Bothnia  between 
this  place  and  Gothenburg,  and  the  winter  has  already  de¬ 
clared  itself  here  with  such  severity  that  the  River  Neva  is 
completely  frozen  over. 

Since  I  wrote  you  last  we  have  had  no  further  news  from 
America,  and  expect  none  of  any  material  importance  until 
the  session  of  Congress.  We  hear  of  nothing  but  the  violence 
of  political  parties  concentrated  in  the  state  of  Massachusetts 
and  especially  in  the  town  of  Boston.  Old  Hillhouse  used  to 
say  seven  years  ago,  that  there  was  no  remedy  for  our  evils 
but  “  a  little  surgical  operation and  it  was  he,  and  a  number 
of  heads  in  Connecticut  and  Boston  about  as  wise  and  com¬ 
prehensive  as  his,  who  then  seriously  formed  the  project 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


265 


1811] 

for  dividing  the  Union,  of  which  at  the  last  session  of  Con¬ 
gress  Mr.  Quincy  condescended  to  become  the  herald.  It 
was  on  the  very  same  Lilliputian  scale  of  policy  too,  because 
Louisiana  and  the  western  states  would  soon  be  able  to  out¬ 
vote  New  England  in  Congress.  I  had  settled  it  in  my 
mind  long  before  that  time,  that  this  project  would  never 
be  carried  into  execution,  but  by  treason  and  rebellion ,  and 
that  those  were  the  greatest  of  two  evils,  in  comparison 
with  the  chance  of  New  England’s  being  occasionally  out¬ 
voted  in  Congress.  To  my  mind,  therefore,  the  bare  intima¬ 
tion  of  what  Mr.  Quincy  seriously  avowed  in  Congress, 
and  what  Hillhouse  hinted  by  the  jocose  figure  of  an  amputa¬ 
tion,  contained  these  two  crimes,  treason  and  rebellion ,  as 
completely  as  in  the  physical  world  the  grub  obscene  con¬ 
tains  the  wriggling  worm.  I  do  not  imagine  that  either 
Hillhouse  or  Quincy  ever  pursued  their  own  reflections  so  far 
as  to  be  brought  to  this  conclusion,  though  Quincy  by  his 
“  violently  if  they  must”  has  admitted  that  the  division 
may  cost  a  civil  war ,  the  chances  of  which  I  suppose  he  will 
not  deny  might,  if  unsuccessful,  finish  by  giving  it  the  name 
of  rebellion.  Such  however  was  my  conclusion,  that  in¬ 
dividual  treason  and  collective  rebellion  were  necessarily  im¬ 
plied  in  the  execution  of  the  scheme  for  dividing  the  Union; 
and  the  system  of  conduct  uniformly  pursued  by  the  party 
which  first  conceived  that  design  has  uniformly  confirmed 
me  in  the  opinion  which  I  had  formed  upon  a  consideration 
of  it  a  priori  as  a  mere  theoretical  speculation. 

It  seems  to  me  that  there  were  littleness  and  contraction 
stamped  upon  the  very  conception  that  the  American  Union 
must  be  dissolved,  because  the  New  England  interest  might 
be  outvoted  in  Congress.  There  was,  indeed,  no  New  Eng¬ 
land  interest  clear  or  strong  enough  to  unite  its  own  repre¬ 
sentatives  in  their  votes.  But  admitting  that  there  had  been, 


266 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


or  that  in  future  there  might  be,  I  saw  no  indication  that 
it  would  be  without  its  proper  and  reasonable  influence  in 
the  national  councils,  nor  could  I  possibly  discover  any  in¬ 
terest  which  would  not  suffer  more  by  the  natural  and  in¬ 
evitable  collisions  of  independent  and  disconnected  border¬ 
ing  nations,  having  no  common  deliberative  principle  of 
association,  than  it  could  while  they  were  united  under  one 
and  the  same  system  of  legislation. 

As  the  conception  of  dividing  the  Union  appeared  to  me 
little  and  narrow,  I  could  not  avoid  assuming  it  as  a  measure 
of  the  minds  by  which  it  was  entertained;  and  as  I  thought 
the  execution  of  the  project  would  on  the  contrary  require 
minds  of  a  very  enlarged  and  capacious  character,  I  did  not 
think  the  persons  so  ready  to  undertake  this  mighty  work 
exactly  calculated  to  carry  it  through.  I  therefore  believed 
that  it  would  ultimately  prove  unsuccessful,  though  proba¬ 
bly  not  until  after  the  experiment  of  a  civil  war.  What  and 
whom  a  civil  w5r  might  in  its  progress  bring  forth,  I  could 
not  foresee;  but  judging  from  past  and  present  experience 
I  supposed  a  Jeroboam,  a  Julius  Caesar,  a  Cromwell,  or  some 
such  ferocious  animal,  who  might  or  might  not  unite  the 
country  again  under  one  government.  If  he  did,  it  must 
be  military  and  arbitrary.  If  he  did  not,  it  would  be  because 
another  tyrant  like  himself  would  head  another  state  of  a 
similar  description,  to  feed  between  them  a  perpetual  state 
of  future  war  between  the  different  sections  that  now  com¬ 
pose  the  Union.  It  was  possible  that  instead  of  two  such 
wild  beasts,  the  nation  when  once  split  up  might  produce 
an  indefinite  number  of  them,  and  monarchies,  and  oligar¬ 
chies,  and  democracies,  might  arise  as  among  the  states  of 
ancient  Greece,  and  the  more  they  multiplied  the  more 
materials  would  they  furnish  for  future  war.  Now  in  all 
these  prospects  of  future  times,  grounded  on  the  assumed 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


267 


1S11] 

principle  of  dividing  the  Union,  I  did  see  chances  of  splendid 
fortunes  for  individual  avarice  and  ambition,  which  our 
present  simple  republican  and  federative  government  does 
not  and  cannot  hold  out,  but  at  the  expense  of  blood  and 
treasure,  and  freedom  and  happiness  to  the  great  mass  of 
the  nation  in  all  its  parts,  from  which  the  hand  of  a  par¬ 
ricide  would  shrink  with  compunction. 

From  the  frequency  with  which  I  return  to  this  subject 
in  my  letter  to  you  and  to  others  of  my  friends  which  will 
be  seen  by  you,  may  be  judged  how  much  it  occupies  my 
thoughts,  and  how  deeply  it  affects  my  feelings.  It  enters 
into  most  of  my  meditations  upon  history,  upon  govern¬ 
ment,  and  even  upon  the  poetry  that  I  read.  Marmion, 
and  the  Minstrel,  and  the  Lady  of  the  Lake,  have  no  moral 
to  me  but  to  show  the  consequences  of  dividing  states  which 
nature  admits  of  being  united.  The  picture  of  border  wars 
is  a  memento  to  me  of  what  awaits  us,  if  we  ever  yield  to 
that  senseless  and  stupid  call  for  division,  which  I  have  so 
long  heard  muttered  in  my  own  neighborhood,  and  which 
Quincy  has  now  taken  trumpet  to  sound  forth  in  the  very 
sanctuary  of  legislation.  In  that  Union  is  to  me  what  the 
balance  is  to  you,  and  as  without  this  there  can  be  no  good 
government  among  mankind  in  any  state,  so  without  that 
there  can  be  no  good  government  among  the  people  of  North 
America  in  the  state  in  which  God  has  been  pleased  to  place 
them. 

Of  ourselves  we  have  little  else  to  say  than  that  we  are 
all  well.  I  have  got  into  such  a  regular  and  quiet  course  of 
life,  and  have  now  so  little  troublesome  public  business  to 
do,  that  my  time  passes  smoothly  away,  and  it  would  pass 
as  happily  as  the  condition  of  human  nature  admits  but  for 
the  irresistible  calls  which  I  hear  from  my  parents  and  my 
children.  As  respects  myself,  the  interests  of  my  family, 


268 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


and  the  service  of  my  country,  I  know  not  which  would  be 
most  desirable,  for  me  to  remain  here  or  to  return  home;  but 
the  sense  of  duty  prescribing  my  return  is  so  strong  that  I 
shall  feel  myself  uneasy  until  I  comply  with  its  commands. 
Hitherto  I  have  felt  it  altogether  at  the  pleasure  of  the 
President,  after  declining  the  appointment  to  the  bench. 
I  have  had  motives  which  it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  explain 
to  you,  for  avoiding  hitherto  an  explicit  request  to  be  re¬ 
called.  It  still  remains,  therefore,  at  the  President’s  option. 
If  he  recalls  me  without  such  a  request,  I  shall  however  be 
perfectly  satisfied  with  his  determination.  If  he  authorizes 
me  to  remain  here  longer,  I  shall  soon  make  the  request 
which  I  have  hitherto  delayed.  At  all  events  I  do  hope  to 
see  you  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  year,  and  to  take  upon 
me  that  imperious  duty  of  superintending  the  education  of 
my  sons. 

I  pray  you  to  assure  them  of  my  constant  affection,  and 
my  mother  of  my  unalterable  duty,  with  my  kind  remem¬ 
brance  to  all  the  branches  of  the  family,  and  particularly 
to  my  sister. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  74.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  2  November,  1811. 

Sir: 

The  Winter  has  set  in  earlier  this  season  than  has  been 
known  with  one  exception  since  the  foundation  of  this  city. 
The  bridges  were  taken  away  on  the  27th  of  October.  The 
floating  masses  of  ice  became  consolidated  and  fixed  on  the 
29th,  and  the  river  has  been  passable  for  foot  passengers 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


269 


1811] 

from  the  31st.  The  last  American  vessel  which  sailed  from 
Cronstadt  for  the  United  States  was  the  Dolphin ,  Captain 
Latham,  bound  to  New  York.  She  sailed  October  15th  and 
has  despatches  on  board  from  me.  Since  then  I  have  twice 
had  opportunities  of  writing  by  Americans  going  to  embark 
from  Gothenburg,  and  now  avail  myself  of  a  third.  If  the 
severity  of  the  season  should  continue  proportioned  to  that 
of  its  commencement,  that  passage  will  itself  soon  be  no 
longer  practicable. 

Since  the  departure  of  the  Dolphin  seven  other  vessels 
under  American  colours  have  arrived,  one  of  which  the 
Monticello ,  Christopher  Sail,  master,  came  with  forged 
papers,  and  has  been  seized.  The  rest  will  be  obliged  to 
remain  here  over  winter.  The  whole  number  of  those  that 
have  entered  the  port  of  Cronstadt  with  our  flag  this  year 
has  been  139,  four  of  which  have  been  seized  for  coming  with 
false  papers. 

I  have  occasionally  mentioned  to  you  in  the  course  of  the 
summer  how  many  of  the  adventurers  in  these  voyages 
would  suffer,  by  the  glutting  of  the  markets  with  the  articles 
which  constituted  their  cargoes.  But  in  the  latter  part  of 
the  season  an  outlet  of  exportation  of  the  same  articles  was 
found,  by  land,  both  to  the  Austrian  and  Prussian  terri¬ 
tories,  so  that  there  is  already  a  great  and  increasing  de¬ 
mand  here  for  almost  all  those  articles,  which  a  few  weeks 
ago  scarcely  bore  any  price.  Among  the  multitudes  of  Amer¬ 
icans  v/ho  have  crowded  hither  upon  commercial  specula¬ 
tion  many  have  been  unfortunate  merely  from  ignorance 
of  the  course  of  commerce  peculiar  to  this  country,  and  from 
their  impatience  to  effect  their  sales  too  quickly.  The  addi¬ 
tional  duties  of  impost  laid  upon  the  articles,  under  the  tariff 
of  the  present  year,  and  the  necessity  of  paying  them  within 
a  short  term  also  contributed  to  force  the  sales,  and  to  in- 


270 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 


crease  the  profits  of  the  merchants  here  who  purchased  from 
the  importers.  The  only  article  which  has  been  little  af¬ 
fected  in  price  has  been  cotton,  which  being  subject  to  a  light 
duty  has  been  more  easily  preserved  from  a  forced  sale,  and 
remains  in  greater  quantities  in  the  hands  of  the  original 
adventurers. 

How  long  this  is  [three  groups  of  cipher  noted  as  in  error 
and  undeciphered].  Russia  and  Austria  will  he  suffered  to 
remain  open  is  extremely  doubtful .  That  the  English  have 
participated  to  a  considerable  extent  in  this  commerce  is  more 
than  probable .  In  many  cases  they  have  made  a  legitimate  use 
of  our  flag,  by  freighting  vessels  entitled  to  it.  Besides  the  for¬ 
geries  that  have  been  detected  here  there  may  have  been  some  at 
what  are  called  the  out-ports ,  which  have  been  more  successful 
in  escaping  discovery.  The  abolition  of  the  Hamburg,  L'ubeck, 
Bremen,  Pappenburg  and  Oldenburg  flags  has  much  increased 
the  necessity  under  which  the  English  have  found  themselves 
of  resorting  to  that  of  the  United  States  to  carry  their  merchandise, 
and  the  success  of  the  present  year  will  certainly  enlarge 
the  scale  upon  which  the  business  will  be  done  the  next.  The 
land  passages  to  Austria  and  Prussia  remain  open;  but  this 
new  traffic  has  already  excited  the  attention  and  jealousy  of 
France.  French  commissioners  have  already  been  stationed  at 
the  frontier  between  Polangen  and  Memel  who  inspect,  take 
minutes  of  every  package  that  passes  and  report  them  to  the 
French  government  at  Paris.  The  vigilance  of  the  French 
consul  here,  and  even  of  the  ambassador,  has  been  stimulated 
by  new  and  special  orders  to  report  to  all  the  vessels  which  arrive 
and  sail — the  particulars  of  their  cargoes — the  seizures  and 
confiscations,  and,  in  short ,  all  the  minutice  of  the  custom  house . 
Preparations  are  already  making  for  privateering  along  the 
whole  line  of  the  Baltic  coast,  from  Holstein  to  Dantzig,  and  we 
have  already  the  evidence  that  they  will  be  countenanced  in  the 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


271 


1811] 

indiscriminate  capture  of  every  loaded  merchant  vessel ,  coming 
or  going.  All  this  however  will  avail  but  little ,  if  the  peace  be¬ 
tween  the  United  States  and  England  is  preserved ,  and  the  land 
passages  from  Polangen  to  Memel ,  and  from  Radsiwiloff  to 
Brody  remain  open.  It  is  to  be  expected  therefore  that  an  effort 
will  be  made  to  stop  them.  Should  it  succeed ,  the  trade  of  this 
place  will  be  worse  next  year  than  it  has  been  the  present. 
Should  it  fail ,  the  same  trade  will  exceed  everything  that  has 
yet  occurred ,  and  the  water-carriers  will  in  a  great  measure  be 
the  Americans.1 

A  second  courier  has  arrived  from  the  Moldavian  army, 
with  a  further  report  from  the  commander  in  chief,  General 
KutuzofT.  The  Grand  Vizier  and  his  army  had  not  yet  capit¬ 
ulated,  but  it  is  expected  that  they  could  not  hold  out  many 
days;  being  surrounded  and  in  extreme  want  of  provisions. 
There  had  been  no  general  action.  The  Grand  Vizier’s  camp 
on  the  right  bank  of  the  Danube  was  on  the  second  of  Octo¬ 
ber  attacked  and  taken  by  a  Russian  corps  under  Lieuten¬ 
ant  General  Markoff.  But  the  Grand  Vizier  himself  had 
crossed  the  Danube  with  a  force  of  nearly  forty  thousand 
men  and  was  encamped  on  the  left  bank.  General  Markoff 
with  a  corps  of  about  six  thousand  men  crossed  the  Danube 
to  attack  the  Grand  Vizier’s  camp,  and  with  his  batteries  took 
possession  of  the  heights  under  the  protection  of  which  the 
Turks  had  crossed  the  river  to  this  side.  Their  communica¬ 
tion  with  the  opposite  bank  is  cut  off,  and  all  the  boats  in 
which  they  had  effected  the  passage  are  taken  by  the  Rus¬ 
sians.  In  the  surprize  of  the  Grand  Vizier’s  camp  it  is  stated 
that  the  Turks  left  more  than  fifteen  hundred  dead  upon  the 
field,  and  about  three  hundred  prisoners.  Eight  pieces  of 
cannon,  twenty-two  standards,  a  truncheon  of  the  Aga  of 
the  Janisaries,  and  a  quantity  of  powder  and  ammunition 

1  Cypher. 


272 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

fell  into  the  hands  of  the  victors.  Many  persons  of  distinc¬ 
tion  are  among  the  prisoners.  The  loss  on  the  side  of  the 
Russians  consisted  of  nine  men  killed  and  forty  wounded. 
Such  is  the  official  report.  .  .  . 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  6  November,  1811. 

•  •••••• 

Congress  are  already  in  session  and  probably  before  you 
receive  this  letter  will  have  taken  some  decisive  step  to  fix 
the  state  of  our  relations  with  Europe.  But  I  trust  that  step 
will  not  have  been  taken  without  a  knowledge  of  the  manner 
in  which  France  is  treating  us,  nor  without  a  cool  and  de¬ 
liberate  consideration  of  the  effect  which  this  treatment 
ought  to  have  upon  our  course  of  policy.  You  know  my  sen¬ 
timents  with  respect  to  the  non-importation  act  of  the  last 
session.  It  passed  upon  the  conviction  that  the  Berlin  and 
Milan  decrees  had  been  effectually  and  bona  fide  repealed. 
In  all  the  proceedings  of  France  on  that  subject  I  had  seen 
a  character  which  was  far  from  deserving  the  discrimina¬ 
tion  which  was  then  made  on  our  part  between  her  and  her 
enemy,  but  I  did  and  do  still  respect  most  highly  the  motive 
upon  which  the  act  was  adopted — the  sacred  fulfillment  of 
an  honorable  promise.  At  this  time  I  think  little  doubt 
can  remain  upon  any  mind  concerning  the  real  intentions 
of  France.  The  dispute  whether  the  Berlin  and  Milan  de¬ 
crees  have  or  have  not  been  repealed  is  degenerating  into  a 
cavil  upon  words.  Yes!  as  to  us  they  have  been  repealed. 
At  least  I  know  not  of  any  official  act  of  the  French  govern¬ 
ment  contrary  to  their  declarations  to  that  effect.  But  as 
prohibitory  duties  are  in  common  sense  and  common  reason 


i8n]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  273 

always  equivalent  to  prohibition,  the  tariff  issued  cotem- 
poraneously  with  the  declaration  that  the  two  decrees  were 
revoked  was  substantially  a  non-importation  act,  pointed 
directly  against  us.  In  form  it  certainly  did  not  violate 
our  neutral  rights  but  in  substance  was  the  same  thing.  By 
internal  regulation  it  made  the  exercise  of  our  neutral  rights 
impracticable  with  regard  to  the  most  profitable  part  of 
our  commerce.  It  satisfied  the  letter  but  not  the  spirit  of 
our  prior  law.  If  however  all  this  be  admitted  it  is  clear  that 
our  pledge  has  been  completely  redeemed.  If  we  promised 
to  our  loss  we  have  made  our  promise  good.  We  have  now 
a  new  score  of  injury  and  outrages  to  take  up.  The  depreda¬ 
tions  of  the  present  year  are  not  committed  by  virtue  of 
the  decrees  of  Berlin  and  Milan,  but  upon  simple  orders  of 
the  Emperor  Napoleon  that  all  colonial  merchandises  com¬ 
ing  from  whence  and  belonging  to  whom  they  may  are  to 
be  considered  as  English,  and  coming  from  England,  there¬ 
fore  to  be  confiscated.  Surely  after  this  it  is  perfectly  useless 
to  inquire  whether  the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees  are  or  are 
not  repealed.  At  the  same  time  it  becomes  constantly  more 
and  more  evident  that  Napoleon  is  ardently  desirous  of  a 
war  between  the  United  States  and  England,  a  war  which 
would  be  highly  propitious  to  his  purposes  which  would 
hasten  undoubtedly  the  ruin  of  England  but  which  would 
either  rivet  upon  us  the  fetters  of  France,  or  make  them  so 
intolerably  galling  that  the  feeling  of  our  country  would 
cast  them  off  for  the  still  more  cruel  and  insufferable  manacles 
of  England.  Now  if  there  were  not  other  reasons  in 
abundance  to  deter  us  from  a  war  with  England,  one  reason 
equivalent  to  ten  thousand  is  that  he  desires  we  should  have 
it.  For  the  very  reason  that  our  neutrality  is  the  state  the 
most  unfavorable  to  his  views  I  hope  we  shall  adhere  in¬ 
flexibly  to  it.  At  present  we  may  with  great  safety  set  in 


274 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

substance  his  enmity  defiance.  And  the  most  effectual  way 
of  doing  it  will  be  by  placing  him  and  his  adversary  again 
precisely  upon  the  same  footing. 

Our  non-importation  act  is  of  all  the  measures  hitherto 
taken  most  seriously  and  severely  felt  by  England.  The 
course  of  exchange  is  a  proof,  and  an  unanswerable  proof, 
of  its  great  efficacy.  It  occasions  no  doubt  many  partial 
inconveniences  in  our  own  country,  but  as  a  defensive 
weapon  it  works  so  well  that  I  should  incline  strongly  to 
continuance.  But  I  would  apply  it  as  an  equivalent  measure 
without  hesitation  and  without  delay  to  France.  And  I 
would  assume  a  tone  in  negotiation  with  her  which  should 
leave  no  room  for  anybody  to  talk  of  our  partiality  in  her 
favor.  Armstrong’s  letter  of  the  io  of  March  and  its  effects 
sufficiently  showed  the  true  tone  that  ought  to  be  taken  with 
her.  When  I  say  incline  to  the  continuance  of  the  non¬ 
importation,  I  speak  of  course  without  a  full  knowledge  of 
its  operation  at  home.  If  that  should  make  a  repeal  ex¬ 
pedient,  I  think  it  will  be  difficult  to  substitute  any  measure 
of  equal  power  in  its  stead.  England  besides  her  pauperism 
and  her  paper  money  is  getting  upon  very  bad  terms  with  her 
allies  in  Sicily,  in  Spain  and  even  in  Portugal.  She  is  in  a 
great  dilemma  between  the  Cortes  of  Cadiz  and  the  South 
American  patriots  of  independence.  This  claim  becomes 
as  from  day  to  day  more  entangled  and  she  will  never  be 
able  to  control  it.  It  will  I  flatter  myself  be  our  policy  to 
keep  ourselves  cool  and  calm  and  to  do  nothing  to  involve 
us  in  the  catastrophe  which  cannot  be  very  remote. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


275 


1811] 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  75.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  9  November,  18 11. 

Sir: 

I  received  last  week  a  letter  from  Mr.  David  Wood,  dated, 
at  Memel,  stating  that  he  was  first  mate  of  the  American 
ship  Hercules ,  taken  on  the  2nd  of  May  last,  on  a  voyage 
from  Charleston  to  St.  Petersburg,  by  a  French  privateer 
and  carried  into  Dantzig.  That  after  receiving  information 
from  Captain  Snow,  that  the  ship  was  condemned,  and  an 
order  to  send  the  crew  away,  he  had  sent  them  to  Pillau, 
where  they  could  find  no  opportunity  for  a  passage  home, 
and  had  proceeded  on  to  Memel,  where  he  had  found  them 
in  a  distressed  situation,  and  still  unable  to  procure  a  pas¬ 
sage  to  the  United  States.  That  there  are  five  men  besides 
himself  (he  having  found  means  to  get  a  passage)  who  are 
altogether  destitute,  and  for  whom  he  solicits  relief.  That 
he  had  applied  to  the  English  consul  there,  who  promised 
them  all  the  assistance  in  his  power,  but  who  of  course  could 
not  support  them  unless  authorized  by  me. 

Mr.  Harris  to  whom  I  communicated  this  letter,  has  writ¬ 
ten  to  Memel,  giving  directions  that  these  men  should  be 
supplied  according  to  his  authority  by  law,  and  it  is  possible 
that  passages  may  yet  be  obtained  for  them  this  winter, 
though  not  very  probable. 

The  two  American  vessels  which  were  taken,  almost  in 
the  port  of  Copenhagen  by  a  French  privateer,  early  in 
August,  have  also  been  condemned  at  Paris,  and  with  their 
cargoes  have  been  sold  at  Copenhagen. 

A  Te  Deum  is  to  be  celebrated  tomorrow  at  the  im- 


276 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

perial  chapel  for  the  recent  successes  of  the  Russian  arms. 
The  Grand  Vizier  himself  has  repassed  the  Danube,  leaving 
the  part  of  his  army  which  had  crossed  to  the  left  bank, 
surrounded  by  the  Russian  forces,  and  without  means  of 
escape.  In  this  state  of  things  a  messenger  has  been  dis¬ 
patched  to  Constantinople  with  renewed  propositions  of 
peace  from  the  Russian  commander  in  chief,  and  until  his 
return  the  Turkish  troops  are  supplied  with  provisions  only 
by  permission  of  General  Kutuzoff.  In  the  meantime  an 
additional  detachment  from  the  Russian  army  has  crossed 
the  Danube,  compelled  a  corps  of  Turks  on  that  side  to 
capitulate,  and  taken  once  more  Silistria,  with  two  thousand 
prisoners.  It  is  still  doubtful  whether  all  this  will  produce  a 
peace.  But  at  least  it  will  effectually  secure  to  the  Russians 
the  possession  of  the  left  bank  of  the  Danube.  There  will 
henceforth  be  no  danger  of  a  Turkish  invasion  upon  the 
provinces  of  Moldavia  and  Wallachia.  The  parties  are  just 
where  they  were  two  years  ago. 

The  negotiations  with  France  appear  to  he  at  a  stand .  There 
is  no  appearance  of  a  better  understanding  between  the  two 
governments ,  and  it  is  probable  that  a  personal  interview  has 
been  proposed  between  the  two  Emperors  on  the  part  of  France 
and  rejected  on  the  part  of  Russia .  It  is  not  to  be  apprehended 
that  they  will  resort  to  the  last  appeal  at  this  season ,  and  not 
much  to  be  hoped  that  they  will  postpone  it  another  summer ,l 
I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


2  77 


1811] 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  76.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  10  December,  1911. 

Sir: 

A  full  month  has  elapsed  since  I  had  the  honor  of  writing 
your  last;  during  which  had  any  opportunity  occurred  of 
forwarding  dispatches  to  you,  nothing  has  happened  here 
either  in  relation  to  our  own  public  concerns,  or  to  the  politi¬ 
cal  state  of  this  country  which  could  have  formed  the  subject 
of  a  communication  sufficiently  interesting  to  justify  the  occu¬ 
pation  of  your  time.  With  respect  to  our  commerce,  there 
has  been  nothing  to  require  any  interposition  of  mine  with 
this  government.  It  is  not  from  this  country  that  any  ob¬ 
stacles  to  our  intercourse  with  it  are  henceforth  to  be  ap¬ 
prehended.  But  in  France,  I  learn  that  the  principle  has 
been  assumed  that  all  vessels  sailing  to  or  from. the  Baltic, 
are  with  their  cargoes  to  be  confiscated,  as  having  navigated 
under  the  permission  or  protection  of  the  British. 

The  application  of  this  principle  to  the  Swedish  commerce 
has  led  to  altercations  between  the  Swedish  and  French 
governments  by  no  means  propitious  to  their  mutual  har¬ 
mony.  Swedish  armed  vessels  have  recaptured  several  vessels 
of  that  nation  which  had  been  taken  by  the  French  privateers 
stationed  at  the  passage  of  the  Sound.  The  French  minister, 
Alquier,  renewed  his  complaints  so  often,  and  in  terms  so 
strong  against  what  he  represented  as  the  connivance  of 
Sweden  to  a  commercial  intercourse  with  England,  that 
some  personal  irritation  appears  to  have  arisen  in  the  cor¬ 
respondence  between  him  and  the  Swedish  Minister  of  For¬ 
eign  Affairs,  Baron  d’Engestrom.  It  proceeded  to  such 


278 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

lengths,  that  Baron  Alquier  finally  addressed  a  memorial 
to  the  Prince  Royal  himself,  declaring  that  he  would  hold  no 
further  communication  with  Mr.  Engestrom.  The  prince 
Royal  sent  back  the  memorial  with  an  intimation  that  all 
official  papers  from  foreign  ministers  must  pass  through 
the  regular  channel  of  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 
Shortly  afterwards  Alquier  was  recalled  by  his  own  govern¬ 
ment,  and  took  leave  by  a  written  note  to  Baron  Engestrom 
leaving  a  charge  d’affaires  at  Stockholm  in  his  place.  All 
this  happened  about  two  months  since.  Mr.  Thornton  has 
at  a  later  date  been  dispatched  from  England  upon  a  mission 
to  the  Baltic .  Some  of  the  London  prints  say  that  his  destina¬ 
tion  is  here,  but  the  state  of  things  at  this  court  is  not  yet 
mature  for  his  admission  into  Russia.  Here  the  rumor  is 
that  his  business  was  to  negotiate  with  Sweden.  Judging 
from  the  present  symptoms  exhibited  by  the  Emperor 
Napoleon’s  continental  system ,  England  will  very  soon  have 
no  difficulty  to  negotiate  either  with  Sweden  or  with  Russia. 

Prince  Lubomirski,  whom  I  have  mentioned  in  a  former 
letter  as  having  been  in  England,  has  lately  returned  here. 
There  remains  no  doubt  that  his  visit  to  that  country  was 
warranted  by  the  sanction  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  and  of 
the  British  government.  That  he  had  any  mission  avowedly 
of  a  political  nature  is  strenuously  denied.  The  Prince  has 
very  large  landed  estates  in  Poland,  the  produce  of  which, 
consisting  chiefly  of  grain,  is  rendered  in  a  great  measure 
worthless  by  the  want  of  an  issue  for  exportation.  Almost 
all  Poland  is  in  the  same  situation.  Dantzig  at  the  mouth 
of  the  Vistula,  the  outlet  for  Poland  upon  the  Baltic,  is  in 
the  possession  of  France.  Nothing  can  therefore  go  by  that 
course.  The  other  outlet,  by  the  Black  Sea,  is  equally  choked 
up  by  the  existing  war  between  Russia  and  the  Turks. 
Under  this  double  restraint  upon  all  commercial  circulation 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


279 


1811] 

the  great  Polish  landholders  are  severely  suffering,  and  it 
aggravates  the  disaffection  which  may  be  supposed  to  exist 
among  them.  The  Duke  de  Richelieu  came  here  last  Spring 
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  free  permission  for  the  ex¬ 
portation  of  grain  by  the  Black  Sea,  notwithstanding  the 
Turkish  war,  and  he  succeeded  in  this  object.  But  the  Turks 
now  prohibited  in  their  turn,  and  without  their  consent  the 
exportation  could  not  be  effected.  Under  these  circum¬ 
stances  Prince  Lubomirski  was  permitted  to  go  to  England 
upon  his  private  business ,  which  was  to  propose  to  supply  the 
British  (perhaps  at  Cadiz  and  Lisbon)  with  grain  or  flour 
from  his  estates  in  Poland,  by  exportation  from  Odessa, 
in  return  or  payment  for  which  he  was  content  to  take  colo¬ 
nial  merchandises.  It  was  understood  that  the  British  were 
to  undertake  to  obtain  from  the  Turks  the  passage  of  the 
vessels  upon  the  Black  Sea  and  through  the  Dardanelles, 
to  and  from  Odessa.  It  is  also  probable  that  the  prince  was 
authorized  to  obtain  by  the  consent  of  the  British  govern¬ 
ment,  a  certain  quantity  of  military  stores,  which  were 
wanted  for  the  use  of  the  Russian  army.  But  all  this  too 
was  upon  private  commercial  speculation.  The  British 
government  were  ready  enough  to  grant  all  that  was  wished. 
But  they  were  inclined  to  give  to  the  whole  transaction  a 
publicity,  which  did  not  suit  the  views  of  the  RussianGovern- 
ment,  and  to  take  Prince  Lubomirski’s  commercial  specula¬ 
tions  for  overtures  of  political  negotiation.  Mr.  Liston  was 
dispatched  as  ambassador  to  Constantinople,  and  Sir  Robert 
Wilson  1  who  had  just  published  a  book  in  honor  of  Russia 
was  sent  out  with  him.  The  gazettes  announced  that  Eng¬ 
land  was  to  mediate  the  peace  between  Russia  and  the  Porte, 
and  were  not  backward  in  anticipating  an  union  of  their 

1  Sir  Robert  Thomas  Wilson,  who  wrote  Brief  Remarks  on  the  character  of  the 
Russian  Army;  Campaigns  in  Poland,  1806-1807. 


28o 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i  8 1 1 

arms  against  France.  The  store  ships  were  sent,  not  only 
with  an  affectation  of  notoriety,  but  under  convoy  of  a 
sloop  of  war.  I  have  informed  you  of  the  manner  in  which 
they  arrived  at  Reval,  and  how  they  were  ordered  away. 
After  lingering  for  some  time  they  went,  and  are  said  to  have 
carried  off  their  lading  as  they  brought  it.  And  Russia, 
without  waiting  for  the  efficacy  of  a  British  mediation  at 
Constantinople,  has  taken  more  effectual  means  to  make 
peace,  by  defeating  the  Turkish  armies,  and  by  offering 
terms  too  advantageous  to  be  refused. 

There  is  no  doubt  but  the  negotiation  for  peace  is  very 
assiduously  going  forward  at  Bucharest.  I  am  told  that  the 
Emperor  Alexander  now  considers  its  conclusion  as  certain. 
About  three  weeks  ago  a  courier  was  dispatched  with  his 
ultimatum ,  which  he  has  no  doubt  will  be  accepted,  and  the 
general  expectation  is  that  the  intelligence  of  the  prelimina¬ 
ries  being  signed  cannot  be  delayed  beyond  another  week  or 
fortnight.  It  is  supposed  nothing  can  disappoint  this  ex¬ 
pectation,  for  although  whatever  of  French  influence  may 
exist  at  Constantinople  will  be  exerted  to  prevent  the  peace, 
it  is  believed  that  this  influence  itself  is  too  much  impaired 
to  produce  an  unfavorable  effect. 

Immediately  after  the  news  of  the  peace  shall  be  received 
Count  Nesselrode  is  to  be  sent  upon  a  special  mission  to 
Paris,  with  powers  and  instructions  to  settle  all  the  differ¬ 
ences  with  France,  and  particularly  to  adjust  the  indemnity 
for  the  Duchy  of  Oldenburg.  But  the  prevailing  opinion  here 
in  the  diplomatic  circle  still  is  that  the  war  will  break  out  the 
next  spring.  At  all  events  the  commerce  with  England  will 
be  more  freely  allowed  even  than  it  has  been  this  year.  A 
few  remaining  cases  of  the  Teneriffe  ships  of  last  year  were 
decided  last  week  in  the  Imperial  Council.  The  sentence 
of  confiscation  was  passed  upon  them,  but  it  is  represented 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


281 


1811] 


as  little  more  than  a  formality  to  amuse  the  French  ambassa 
dor.  I  have  the  honour  to  be,  etc. 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  22  December,  1811. 


This  commercial  phenomenon  of  colonial  merchandises 
exported  from  St.  Petersburg  and  Archangel  into  Germany, 
Italy  and  even  France,  is  one  of  those  singular  symptoms  in 
the  disordered  state  of  the  civilized  world  (if  it  deserves  to  be 
called  so)  which  strike  superficial  observers  with  amaze¬ 
ment.  The  Emperor  Napoleon  has  been  preaching  ab¬ 
stinence  of  sugar  and  coffee  to  the  people  of  Europe,  with  as 
much  zeal  as  the  hermit  Peter  once  preached  the  recovery  of 
the  Holy  Sepulchre  from  infidels.  Finding  his  eloquence  less 
persuasive  than  that  of  Peter,  he  has  invaded,  conquered, 
incorporated,  and  good  citied,  half  a  dozen  sovereignties  of 
the  old  school,  merely  to  teach  the  people  abstinence  of 
sugar  and  coffee.  He  has  offered  them  grape  sugar,  turnip 
sugar,  maple  sugar,  and  I  know  not  how  many  more  sugars 
and  coffees  in  proportion,  as  substitutes  for  the  true  sugar 
and  coffee.  He  has  taxed  these  delicious  dainties  beyond 
all  endurance,  and  he  has  threatened  fire  and  sword  against 
whoever  would  not  proscribe  them  like  himself.  Notwith¬ 
standing  all  which  sugar  and  coffee  still  make  their  way  even 
into  France.  First  they  went  in  from  Holland,  then  from 
Heligoland,  then  from  Holstein,  then  from  Prussia,  and  after 
having  been  driven  from  all  these  stages  they  have  now  found 
a  vent  through  the  very  northern  extremity  of  Europe.  This 
channel  of  colonial  trade  has  been  barely  opened  during  the 
present  year;  but  it  has  proved  so  advantageous,  not  only 


232 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1811 

to  the  individual  merchants,  but  to  the  revenues,  the  finances, 
and  the  credit  of  this  empire,  that  it  will  probably  be  con¬ 
tinued  on  a  much  more  extensive  scale  the  next  summer, 
unless  a  new  war  should  come  and  break  it  up  altogether. 
Napoleon  has  attempted  partly  to  defeat  it  by  authorizing 
the  seizure  and  confiscation  of  all  vessels  coming  into  or  going 
out  of  the  Baltic;  but  his  privateers  will  be  able  to  catch 
only  a  very  small  number  of  the  vessels  which  sail  under  the 
protection  of  English  convoys,  and  no  others  will  dare  to 
make  their  appearance.  The  exportation  from  hence  by 
land  i»  to  a  place  called  Brody ,  the  frontier  of  Austria  in 
what  was  once  Poland.  The  Emperor  of  Austria  has  pro¬ 
hibited  the  use  of  coffee  in  his  dominions,  and  promises  to 
prohibit  sugar  too  as  soon  as  the  maple  trees  shall  be  suffi¬ 
ciently  grown.  But  this  deposit  at  Brody  is  not  yet  made  ille¬ 
gal,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  even  the  influence  of  France 
at  Vienna  will  be  strong  enough  to  get  it  prohibited.  The 
prospect  then  is  that  the  whole  continent  of  Europe  will  the 
ensuing  year  be  well  supplied  with  sugar  and  coffee  from 
Russia,  but  it  must  be  understood  that  this  prospect  is  sub¬ 
ject  to  a  contingency  which  may  totally  change  its  appear¬ 
ance,  that  of  a  new  war  in  the  north  of  Europe.  A  war  be¬ 
tween  the  United  States  and  England,  or  the  entire  accession 
of  the  English  Regent  to  the  throne,  would  also  have  a  mate¬ 
rial  influence  on  the  aspect  of  affairs. 

In  this  new  state  of  European  commerce  our  countrymen 
have  hitherto  been  almost  exclusively  the  carriers  on  the 
ocean.  The  business  has  yet  been  unprofitable  to  many  of 
them,  and  taken  altogether  a  source  of  loss  rather  than  of 
profit.  The  fruit  of  their  labors  and  dangers  has  been  gath¬ 
ered  entirely  by  the  Russian  depositaries,  who  got  the  articles 
for  nothing  when  the  market  was  glutted,  and  who  are  now 
selling  them  at  enormous  prices.  But  there  are  now  here  a 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


283 


1811] 

number  of  Americans  ready  to  adventure  in  the  same  specu¬ 
lations  which  have  proved  so  unsuccessful  this  year,  and  who 
rely  upon  the  continuance  of  the  land  conveyance  to  Brody. 

The  demand  for  cotton,  the  third  great  colonial  article, 
bears  no  proportion  to  that  of  the  two  others.  The  causes 
of  which  are  that  a  great  supply  of  it  from  the  Levant  has 
been  opened  into  Italy,  France  and  Germany,  through  the 
Illyrian  provinces,  and  the  French  tariff  has  laid  duties  so 
much  heavier  upon  the  American  cotton,  that  it  cannot 
stand  in  the  market  a  competition  with  that  of  the  East. 
Another  reason  is  that  the  prohibitions  and  the  grinding 
duties  upon  cotton  have  not  been  so  widely  extended  nor  of 
so  long  continuance  as  upon  the  other  articles.  It  has  cir¬ 
culated  more  freely.  The  scarcity  and  demand  of  it  are  con¬ 
sequently  not  so  great.  There  are  probably  other  reasons 
still,  of  some  of  which  I  may  not  be  aware. 

One  effect  of  this  incidental  result  of  the  continental 
system  has  been  that  the  exchange  here  upon  Hamburg, 
Amsterdam,  and  Paris,  which  nine  months  ago  was  from  ten 
to  fifteen  per  cent  below  par,  is  now  as  much  above  it.  The 
balance  of  trade  which  was  so  heavily  against  Russia,  is  now 
as  much  to  her  advantage.  It  is  hardly  possible  however 
that  France,  perceiving  this  tax  which  she  is  paying  to  Russia, 
should  submit  to  it,  and  if  she  can  prevent  it,  she  will  prob¬ 
ably  not  scruple  at  the  means,  though  war  should  be  among 
them. 

A  question  remains  whether  war  itself  would  prove  a 
remedy  to  her  complaints.  That  might  depend  upon  its 
success.  The  scene  of  the  first  conflicts  would  doubtless  be 
in  Prussia  and  in  Poland,  where  the  approaches  to  hostility 
have  been  manifested  by  preparations  and  armaments  and 
accumulations  of  forces  on  both  sides  for  more  than  a  year. 
The  event  of  a  single  battle  might  put  the  very  road  by  which 


284 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

the  merchandise  is  transported  in  the  possession  of  the 
French  army.  But  from  the  force  that  Russia  has  concen¬ 
trated  there  she  may  perhaps  maintain  her  ground  more  than 
one  campaign,  and  even  carry  the  war  beyond  her  own  fron¬ 
tiers.  In  that  case  the  passage  to  Brody  will  remain  free,  but 
a  peace  with  England  which  would  naturally  precede  or 
immediately  follow  the  rupture  with  her  enemy  would  bring 
the  English  in  again  as  competitors  with  the  Americans  in 
the  market  and  at  the  same  time  an  influence  eager  enough, 
if  possible,  to  exclude  them  from  it. 

Such  is  the  view  of  things  political  and  commercial  at  the 
present  juncture.  The  course  of  policy  that  it  dictates  to 
our  country  is  perseverance  in  her  system  of  neutrality.  The 
session  of  Congress  will  doubtless  be  closed  before  you  re¬ 
ceive  this  letter.  Nothing  will  I  trust  have  been  done  in  it 
to  precipitate  a  rupture  with  either  France  or  England,  and 
I  hope  nothing  will  produce  it.  Both  of  them  are  still  doing, 
as  they  have  done,  their  worst  against  us  short  of  involving 
us  with  them  in  their  quarrel.  But  all  the  evil  they  have 
done  us  is  but  the  dross  of  which  that  would  be  the  ocean. 
They  are  both  warring  for  impracticable  pursuits.  Let  us 
seek  only  peace. 

•  •••••« 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  i  January,  1812. 

•  •••••• 

I  hope  and  trust  that  Congress  will  have  the  wisdom  still 
to  preserve  our  country  from  war  in  which  we  could  gain 
nothing  and  could  not  fail  to  lose  something  of  what  is  worth 
more  than  all  other  possessions  to  a  nation,  our  independence. 


1 8 1 2]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  285 

If  between  the  two  belligerent  powers,  France  and  England, 
it  were  possible  to  discern  a  just  or  honorable  cause;  if  in 
their  treatment  of  us  it  were  possible  to  discern  anything 
but  jealousy,  hatred,  and  eagerness  to  despoil  us  of  all  the 
advantages  which  they  saw  us  enjoy,  we  have  ample  cause 
to  appeal  to  the  last  resort  of  nations  against  either.  Were 
it  possible  by  any  rational  calculation  to  foresee  that  by 
joining  either  of  them  against  the  other  we  should  be  able 
to  obtain  justice  for  ourselves,  and  look  back  at  the  close 
of  the  war  with  satisfaction  as  having  contended  success¬ 
fully  for  a  suitable  object,  I  should  wish  for  war.  If  a  pro¬ 
found  and  indignant  feeling  of  the  wrongs  which  both  are 
committing  against  us,  and  the  most  cordial  wish  to  see  them 
redressed,  were  it  at  the  sacrifice  of  more  than  my  life,  would 
avail  instead  of  line  of  battleships  and  battalions,  my  voice 
should  be  for  war,  and  I  would  strike  as  soon  as  preparation 
could  make  it  prudent  at  the  party  which  is  most  vulnerable 
to  us,  a  point  by  no  means  difficult  to  ascertain.  But  “what 
king,”  says  our  Saviour,  “going  to  make  war  against  another 
king,  sitteth  not  down  first  and  consulteth  whether  he  be 
able  with  ten  thousand  to  meet  him  that  cometh  against 
him  with  twenty  thousand.  ”  The  proportion  of  the  numbers 
about  which  we  are  to  consult  are  much  more  unfavorable 
to  us  than  those  of  ten  and  twenty  thousand.  They  are  in 
point  of  naval  force  scarcely  ten  to  five  hundred,  and  our 
principal  object  to  contend  for  is  unfortunately  on  the  sea. 
Our  consultation  need  not  therefore  be  long.  The  position 
which  is  not  pleasing  to  acknowledge,  but  which  it  behoves 
us  well  to  know  and  to  consider,  is  that  we  have  not  the 
means  to  protect  our  commerce  upon  the  ocean  against  the 
violent  injustice  of  England.  Still  less  have  we  the  means 
of  forcing  our  commerce  upon  the  continent  of  Europe, 
which  with  some  inconsiderable  exception  excludes  it  by 


286 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

prohibitions  or  prohibitory  duties.  In  the  present  condi¬ 
tion  of  the  world,  and  it  is  much  to  be  doubted  whether  it 
will  ever  be  otherwise,  that  right  is  not  worth  a  straw  which 
a  nation  has  without  force  to  defend  it.  We  have  not  force 
to  defend  our  rights  upon  the  sea,  or  exercise  our  rights 
upon  it  at  the  pleasure  of  others.  So  it  would  still  be  if  we 
were  at  war.  There  is,  however,  a  consideration  in  our  favor 
which  ought  not  to  escape  us.  Both  England  and  France 
have  mounted  their  policy  upon  systems  as  impracticable 
for  them  to  carry  through  as  would  be  an  attempt  by  us  to 
maintain  our  maritime  rights  by  force.  England  abuses  her 
naval  dominion  by  attempting  to  engross  to  herself  exclu¬ 
sively  the  commerce  of  the  world.  This  she  never  can  ac¬ 
complish.  France  heaps  conquest  upon  conquest  until  she 
is  unable  to  govern  what  she  has  conquered,  and  loses  from 
one  hand  while  she  is  grasping  with  another.  France  and 
England  are  now  obviously  fighting  for  objects  which  neither 
will  ultimately  obtain.  Both  in  spite  of  themselves  are  com¬ 
pelled  to  admit  our  participation  in  commerce  to  a  certain 
extent.  Both,  if  we  have  patience  and  preserve  ourselves 
from  war,  will  be  compelled  to  admit  us  still  further.  Their 
necessities  will  do  more  for  the  restoration  of  our  rights  than 
we  could  do  by  any  exertion  of  our  own  forces. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


287 


1812] 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  77.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  12  January,  1812. 

Sir: 

The  peace  with  Turkey  has  not  yet  been  proclaimed, 
though  it  is  still  said  to  be  as  confidently  expected  as  it  was 
at  the  date  of  my  last  letter.  Circumstances  have  indeed 
occurred,  in  themselves  calculated  to  renew  the  doubts 
which  had  almost  disappeared,  whether  this  peace  was  so 
near  being  concluded  as  had  been  announced.  The  pre¬ 
liminaries  were  actually  signed.  But  as  the  Grand  Vizier, 
who  was  the  Turkish  plenipotentiary,  had  probably  exceeded 
his  powers,  it  was  thought  expedient,  previous  to  the  pub¬ 
lication  of  the  convention,  to  wait  for  its  ratification  from 
Constantinople.  It  was  agreed  that  if  this  ratification  did 
not  arrive  within  a  certain  day,  the  body  of  Turkish  troops, 
which  had  crossed  the  Danube,  were  surrounded  by  the 
Russian  army,  and  supplied  with  provisions  by  the  Russian 
general,  should  surrender  themselves  as  prisoners  of  war. 
The  limited  day  arrived  without  bringing  the  confirmation 
of  the  convention;  and  the  Turks  surrendered  themselves 
according  to  the  agreement.  The  desire  for  the  conclusion 
of  the  peace  was  nevertheless  here  so  strong,  and  the  hope  so 
sanguine,  that  notwithstanding  this  incident,  it  is  still  given 
out  as  certain.  There  are  now  accounts  from  Constanti¬ 
nople  through  Vienna  and  Paris,  which  assert  that  the  pro¬ 
ceedings  of  the  Grand  Vizier  have  been  disapproved,  and  that 
the  Sultan  inflexibly  rejects  every  idea  of  a  peace  founded 
upon  the  principle  of  ceding  any  of  his  provinces.  It  does 
not  appear,  however,  that  the  Emperor  Alexander’s  ulti- 


288 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 


matum,  which  was  dispatched  at  a  later  date  than  the  first 
arrangements  between  General  Kutuzoff  and  the  Grand 
Vizier  has  been  rejected,  and  perhaps  it  may  have  met  a 
more  favorable  reception  from  the  Porte.  The  government 
here  still  rely  upon  the  peace,  but  it  is  not  quite  so  strong 
in  the  general  belief  of  the  public  as  it  was  when  the  negotia¬ 
tions  commenced. 

The  accounts  from  France  have  a  complexion  still  less 
pacific  than  those  from  Turkey.  On  the  20th  of  December 
the  Emperor  Napoleon  issued  a  decree,  conformably  to  an 
ordinance  of  the  Senate  of  the  same  day,  for  a  levy  of  120,000 
men  upon  the  conscription  of  1812,  a  measure  which  he  had 
threatened  in  his  conversation  with  the  Russian  ambassador, 
in  August,  and  which  adds  greatly  to  the  probability  of  a 
war  the  ensuing  summer.  By  another  incident  which  has 
lately  occurred  at  Paris,  it  appears  that  France  has  taken 
offense  at  the  relations  still  subsisting  between  Russia  and 
the  Prince  Regent  of  Portugal.  Mr.  Labensky,  who  had 
been  several  years  the  Russian  consul  general  in  France, 
some  months  since  received  the  appointment  as  Consul  to 
Brazil.  He  was  then  here,  but  went  to  Paris  with  the  in¬ 
tention  of  proceeding  from  thence  to  America.  I  have  heard 
that  a  passage  to  the  United  States  was  offered  him  in  the 
frigate  Constitution;  but  that  on  his  asking  for  passports 
from  the  French  government  they  were  refused  upon  the 
alleged  principle,  that  the  appointment  of  a  Russian  consul 
to  Brazil  was  a  breach  of  the  treaty  of  Tilsit.  It  is  at  least 
certain  that  the  passport  was  refused,  and  Mr.  Labensky 
purposes  returning  to  St.  Petersburg. 

An  article  in  an  English  ministerial  gazette  asserts  that 
an  order  had  been  issued  from  the  British  Privy  Council, 
for  the  restoration  of  all  Swedish  property  which  had  been 
detained  in  England.  This  has  occasioned  the  report  that 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


289 


1812] 

the  peace  between  Sweden  and  England  was  concluded. 
In  the  present  condition  of  affairs  between  this  country  and 
France,  the  disposition  of  Sweden  is  not  unimportant;  and 
the  misunderstanding  which  the  unsatiable  demands  of 
France  upon  Sweden,  with  the  depredations  of  her  pirating 
privateers,  have  excited,  is  at  the  present  juncture  highly 
satisfactory  here.  Sweden  has  added  one  more  to  the  evi¬ 
dences  already  numerous,  that  not  even  a  French  general 
seated  on  a  foreign  throne  can  be  made  to  sacrifice  the  in¬ 
terests  of  the  nation  to  a  degree  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  un¬ 
appeasable  rapacity  of  France. 

I  have  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Wells,  an  American 
citizen  at  Copenhagen,  recommending  Mr.  Hugh  Wilson  of 
New  York  for  the  appointment  of  consul  for  the  provinces 
of  Livonia  and  Esthonia,  to  reside  at  Riga.  Mr.  Wells  is  a 
grandson  of  the  late  Governor  Adams  of  Massachusetts, 
and  a  person  of  respectable  character.  I  have  no  knowledge 
of  Mr.  Wilson,  but  from  his  recommendation.  I  have  heard 
that  a  consul  for  the  port  of  Riga  had  already  been  appointed, 
but  have  received  no  such  advice  from  your  Department. 
Hitherto  the  consul  agency  of  that  port  and  of  Reval  has 
been  executed  by  respectable  merchants  of  those  places 
under  appointments  from  Mr.  Harris.  I  have  repeatedly 
had  the  honor  of  suggesting  to  you  the  importance  of  the 
consular  office  in  the  ports  of  the  Baltic  at  this  time.  That 
the  duties  of  an  American  consul  should  be  correctly  dis¬ 
charged  by  merchants  of  the  country  is,  if  not  utterly  im¬ 
possible,  at  least  not  to  be  expected.  Not  only  a  real  Amer¬ 
ican,  but  a  person  inaccessible  to  very  alluring  temptations, 
is  indispensable  to  detect  the  frauds  upon  our  flag,  which 
licenses  and  false  papers  carry  with  them.  Those  frauds  may 
be  hereafter  neither  necessary  nor  profitable.  But  to  guard 
against  them  is  yet  the  most  important,  the  most  difficult 


290 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

and  the  most  unwelcome  part  of  an  American  consul’s 
duty. 

I  have  also  received  a  letter  from  Mr.  Bourne,  the  consul 
at  Amsterdam,  mentioning  that  he  had  written  home  to 
solicit  the  appointment  of  consul  at  London,  and  requesting 
a  testimonial  from  me  in  his  favor.  During  the  time  that 
I  resided  in  Holland  Mr.  Bourne  appeared  to  me  always  an 
active  intelligent  and  zealous  public  officer,  but  as  he  has 
been  ever  since  then  in  relation  with  the  government,  in  the 
same  capacity,  I  trust  his  merits  must  be  still  better  known 
at  the  Treasury  Department  than  I  could  testify  for  them. 
That  he  is  in  great  and  urgent  want  of  an  appointment,  which 
would  be  more  profitable  than  his  office  at  Amsterdam,  he 
has  stated  to  me  so  repeatedly,  and  in  terms  of  such  strong 
feeling  that  I  cannot  question  their  sincerity. 

On  the  other  hand  Mr.  Anderson,  the  consul  lately  ap¬ 
pointed  to  Gothenburg,  writes  me  that  he  is  dissatisfied  with 
the  place  and  intends  to  leave  it  as  soon  as  possible.  .  .  . 

I  am  very  respectfully  etc. 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  24  January,  1812. 

•  •••••• 

Others  are,  however,  more  fortunate  than  I  am.  Several 
of  the  Americans  here  have  letters  dated  in  November  from 
Boston,  New  York  and  Philadelphia,  and  Mr.  Harris  the 
Consul  brought  me  the  day  before  yesterday  a  slip  from  the 
New  York  gazette  of  16  November,  containing  the  corre¬ 
spondence  between  the  Secretary  of  State  and  Mr.  Foster, 
respecting  the  affair  of  the  Chesapeake,  settlement  number 
two,  of  which  I  have  to  observe  two  things.  First,  to  see 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


291 


1812] 

whether  the  British  government  will  not  again  disavow  their 
own  minister;  and  secondly,  if  they  confirm  his  engagements, 
to  see  how  they  perform  his  promises?  I  shall  consider  as 
one  of  the  most  pleasing  days  in  my  life  that  in  which  the 
account  shall  be  closed  satisfactorily  to  our  country  of  that 
transaction.  When  I  recollect  the  doctrines  publicly  as¬ 
serted  on  that  occasion  by  our  writers  in  Boston,  both  in 
conversation  and  in  print,  and  when  I  reflect  upon  the  in¬ 
fluence  which  my  open,  immediate  and  determined  opposi¬ 
tion  to  those  doctrines  has  had  on  my  subsequent  life,  I 
cannot  but  consider  it  as  fortunate  that  the  ground  which 
I  then  took  should  be  now  justified  by  such  authority,  that 
they  who  then  contested  it  would  gladly  deny  that  they  ever 
made  a  question  of  it.  That  was  the  occasion  upon  which 
I  discovered  to  what  $n  extent  that  party  was  prepared  to 
sacrifice  the  independence  of  our  country  to  British  preten¬ 
sions,  and  I  shall  never  cease  to  rejoice  that  it  was  the 
occasion  upon  which  I  took  care  not  to  suffer  myself  to  be 
involved  in  the  disgrace  of  participation  in  their  willing  ser¬ 
vility. 

I  join  very  cordially  in  the  wish  of  Mr.  Monroe  that  all 
the  difference  between  us  and  England  could  be  accommo¬ 
dated  in  like  manner.  But  I  fear  that  day  is  yet  remote. 
The  same  spirit  which  has  made  them  delay  for  upwards  of 
four  years  a  reparation  which  from  the  first  knowledge  of 
the  offense  they  acknowledged  to  be  due,  the  same  shuffling 
spirit  which  made  them  to  the  last  moment  hold  out  a  pre¬ 
tended  punishment  of  the  offender  which  they  had  in  reality 
always  refused,  will  still  lead  them  astray  from  the  path  of 
their  own  interest  as  well  as  of  justice  to  us.  Such  are  my 
apprehensions.  The  Prince  Regent,  however,  having  com¬ 
menced  his  political  relations  with  the  United  States  by  an 
act  of  reparation,  may  listen  to  better  counsels  than  his 


292 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

predecessor.  His  hands  are  scarcely  yet  untied.  When 
he  is  at  liberty  to  pursue  the  course  of  his  own  inclinations, 
let  us  hope  he  will  delight  in  wiping  away  the  stains  upon 
the  honor  of  his  country  which  her  undisguised  outrages 
upon  the  rights  of  others,  her  connivances  at  forgery,  and 
her  licenses  for  perjury,  have  brought  upon  her. 

Her  neighbor  upon  the  continent  is  no  better  than  herself, 
but  he  manages  his  card  with  more  dexterity.  Since  the 
arrival  of  Mr.  Barlow  in  France  I  have  had  scarcely  any 
communications  from  Paris.  I  had  previously  there  an  ex¬ 
cellent  correspondent  in  Mr.  Russell.  I  only  learn  that  the 
poet  has  exercised  his  diplomatic  skill  in  an  official  note,  and 
has  been  promised  a  satisfactory  answer.  In  the  meantime 
all  the  American  vessels  taken  by  French  privateers  in  the 
Baltic  have  been  condemned.  Most  of  them  without  a 
hearing. 

You  see  I  cannot  help  forgetting  that  almost  every  letter 
I  write  is  opened  and  read  either  by  French  or  English  offi¬ 
cers.  Listeners  they  say  seldom  hear  anything  good  of  them¬ 
selves.  Seal  breakers  ought  not  to  be  more  gratified. 

•  •••••• 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  78.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  25  January,  1812. 

Sir: 

•  ••••• 

Nothing  of  a  political  nature  has  occurred  here  since  I  had 
the  honor  of  last  writing  you  that  materially  affected  the 
aspect  of  affairs.  It  is  still  given  out  by  the  persons  in 
the  confidence  of  this  government  that  the  negotiations  at 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


293 


1812] 

Bucharest  will  certainly  terminate  in  the  conclusion  of  a 
peace.  This  confidence  is  expressed  in  terms  so  unqualified, 
that  it  may  be  unsafe  to  express  any  distrust  of  its  accuracy. 
There  are  however  now  many  who  doubt  whether  this  peace 
has  been  or  will  be  accomplished. 

Uncertainty  is  still  the  predominating  character  of  the 
relations  with  France.  The  refusal  of  a  passport  to  Mr. 
Labensky,  and  the  decrees  to  raise  the  conscription  of  1812, 
have  been  succeeded  by  diplomatic  communications  in  a 
style  of  so  much  gentleness,  moderation,  and  even  com¬ 
placency,  that  great  hopes  begin  to  be  entertained,  or  at 
least  to  be  circulated  here,  that  the  next  summer  will  pass 
over  like  the  last,  without  bringing  the  parties  to  a  hostile 
issue.  The  ambassador  declares  that  all  the  differences 
between  the  two  governments  are  a  mere  spider’s  web;  all 
the  ministers  of  the  princes  of  the  Rhenish  confederation 
speak  of  the  preservation  of  peace  as  a  thing  to  be  expected 
as  much  as  it  is  to  be  desired,  but  they  all  hold  themselves 
in  readiness  to  depart  at  the  shortest  warning.  The  news¬ 
dealers  from  the  Russian  cabinet  echo  back  every  sound  of 
peace,  with  double  and  treble  repetition,  while  at  least  five 
hundred  thousand  men  are  already  arrayed  in  mutual  op¬ 
position,  and  needing  nothing  but  a  dispatch  from  Paris  or 
from  St.  Petersburg,  to  meet  each  other  upon  the  field  of 
blood  in  less  time  than  it  would  take  to  send  the  dispatch. 

Such  is  at  this  moment  the  singular  posture  of  affairs. 
No  specific  negotiation  has  yet  commenced.  The  report 
that  Count  Nesselrode  is  to  go  to  Paris  on  a  special  mission, 
with  powers  and  instructions  for  a  settlement  of  all  the  differ¬ 
ences,  is  yet  prevalent,  and  it  is  still  alleged  that  his  depar¬ 
ture  is  delayed  only  till  the  arrival  of  the  Turkish  peace. 
The  general  characteristic  of  the  juncture  is,  that  both  with 
regard  to  France  and  Turkey,  the  whispers  from  confidential 


294 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

quarters  are  in  direct  opposition  with  the  public  and  noto¬ 
rious  facts. 

I  have  heard  intimations  that  both  the  parties  are  indus¬ 
triously  negotiating  for  the  favor  of  Austria.  If  this  be  true 
there  can  be  little  doubt  which  will  negotiate  with  the  great¬ 
est  efficacy.  The  Illyrian  provinces,  held  by  France  as 
a  conquest  from  Austria,  may  be  offered  on  one  part  as  the 
price  of  her  alliance  and  cooperation.  On  the  other  part 
there  is  nothing  to  fear.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  to  be  con¬ 
ciliated  with  the  feelings  of  Austria,  what  she  certainly 
considers  as  not  very  propitious  to  her  interests — the 
Russian  conquest  and  incorporation  of  the  provinces  of 
Moldavia  and  Wallachia.  The  primary  policy  of  Austria 
will  doubtless  be,  as  she  has  already  announced,  a  strict 
neutrality.  The  state  of  her  finances,  and  of  her  govern¬ 
ment  in  general  make  tranquillity  an  object  essential  to  her. 
But  it  is  not  clear  that  a  large  offer  for  little  exertion  and  less 
danger,  would  find  her  altogether  deaf  to  the  calls  of  ambi¬ 
tion,  and  the  instigations  of  resentment. 

The  most  difficult  and  dangerous  of  all  situations  under 
these  circumstances  is  that  of  Prussia,  whose  endeavors  to 
obtain  admission  as  a  member  of  the  Rhenish  confederation 
are  said  to  have  been  unsuccessful,  whose  offer  of  mediation 
between  the  parties  has  been  declined,  and  who  is  not  even 
allowed  to  make  those  preparations  for  her  own  defence 
which  her  position  would  on  the  event  of  a  war  render  so 
indispensably  necessary.  Within  the  last  month  official 
notice  has  been  published  at  Berlin,  that  an  officer  of  the 
army,  who  had  conceived  the  idea  of  raising  a  Legion  of 
Volunteers,  to  offer  their  services  in  case  of  war,  and  had 
engaged  a  number  of  persons  out  of  service  to  apply  to  him 
in  that  event,  has  been  by  order  of  the  government  arrested 
and  sent  as  a  prisoner  to  Glatz,  and  that  another  person  has 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


295 


1812] 

been  exiled,  for  being  privy  to  the  design,  without  having 
taken  a  part  in  it.  These  secret  struggles  and  public  dis¬ 
avowals  equally  denote  the  anxious  and  perilous  condition 
of  a  state,  which  can  scarcely  fail  to  be  the  victim  of  that 
conflict  which  she  can  neither  avert  nor  delay. 

It  is  doubtful  whether  I  shall  have  another  opportunity 
of  transmitting  despatches  to  you,  before  the  return  of  sum¬ 
mer,  and  the  opening  of  the  navigation  from  this  country. 
If  the  President’s  instructions  which  I  am  still  expecting 
then  allows  me  the  permission,  I  shall  myself  embark  upon 
my  return  to  the  United  States.  I  am  very  respectfully  etc.1 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  80.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  29  February,  1812. 

Sir: 

I  had  the  honor  of  in  forming  you  in  my  last  letter  that  in  the 
conference  which  I  had  the  day  before  it  was  written  with  the 
Chancellor ,  he  had  spoken  without  reserve  of  a  war  with  France 
as  being  expected  by  him .  As  his  remarks  upon  this  subject 
were  connected  with  other  observations  respecting  the  state  of 
our  own  relations  with  France ,  I  think  it  best  to  repeat  them  as 
nearly  according  to  his  own  expressions  as  my  memory  will 
permit ,  premising  on  this ,  as  on  former  occasions ,  that  the 

1  “It  gives  me  pleasure  to  add  that  the  manner  in  which  you  have  conducted 
the  business  of  your  mission  at  St.  Petersburg  meets  the  entire  approbation  of  the 
President,  and  that  your  remaining  there  accords  with  his  wishes,  more  particu¬ 
larly  as  it  did  not  suit  your  convenience  to  accept  of  a  seat  on  the  bench  of  the 
Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States.”  Secretary  of  State  to  John  Quincy  Adams , 
November  23,  1811.  Ms.  See  also  Madison  to  John  Quincy  Adamsy  November  15, 
1 8 1 1,  in  Writings  of  Madison  (Rives),  II.  515. 


296 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

Count  always  gives  me  to  understand  that  in  conversing  freely 
upon  topics  of  so  delicate  a  nature  he  speaks  altogether  in  con¬ 
fidence.  I  do  not  consider  this  as  requiring  me  to  withhold  from 
you  the  correct  report  of  the  sentiments ,  and  even  of  the  expres¬ 
sions  which  he  uses ,  but  as  meaning  only  that  they  shall  not 
be  made  public.  Thus  far  he  undoubtedly  intends  to  be  confi¬ 
dential ,  and  in  communicating  to  you  his  observations  I  write 
in  the  same  confidence.1 

He  began  by  mentioning  that  he  had  just  received  from 
Stockholm,  the  English  papers,  containing  the  Regent’s 
speech  or  message  to  Parliament  at  the  opening  of  the  ses¬ 
sion.2  He  observed  that  it  made  no  mention  whatsoever  of 
the  north  of  Europe;  and  that  its  tone  with  regard  to  the 
United  States  was  of  a  conciliatory  nature;  that  it  spoke  of 
the  affair  of  the  Chesapeake  as  having  been  amicably  ar¬ 
ranged,  and  expressed  the  hope  that  other  subjects  in  dis¬ 
cussion  would  be  likewise  adjusted.  I  intimated  to  him 
that  professions  of  a  conciliatory  disposition  had  always  been 
sufficiently  made  by  the  British  government;  but  they  had 
been  so  long  the  only  things  we  had  experienced  from  Eng¬ 
land  that  were  conciliatory  that  now  something  more  would 
be  necessary  to  produce  the  effect,  and  of  this  I  was  sorry 
to  say  I  could  scarcely  discern  any  prospect.  He  said  there 
were  some  rumors  of  a  new  offer  of  negotiation  from  France 
to  England.  At  least  that  a  French  messenger  had  landed 
in  England;  but  that  might  be  for  the  sake  of  exciting  the 
apprehension  here  of  a  separate  negotiation  for  peace,  which 
in  the  great  and  extraordinary  armaments  said  to  be  now 
making  in  France  and  destined  against  Russia,  might  be 
thought  calculated  to  produce  a  certain  effect  here.  I  told 
him  that  as  to  negotiations  between  France  and  England  I 
did  not  much  believe  in  them  or  in  their  success,  if  really 

1  Cypher.  2  January  7.  See  Annual  Register ,  1812,  326. 


1812]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  297 

attempted;  but  that  I  had  heard  there  were  prospects  of 
war  between  France  and  Russia,  which  I  lamented.  He 
had  mentioned  the  Emperor  Napoleon.  How  happy  would 
it  be  for  the  tranquillity  of  mankind,  if  it  were  possible  that 
the  will  for  peace  could  be  inspired  into  his  heart!  The 
Count  replied  that  by  his  advices  from  Paris  it  was  con¬ 
sidered  there  that  a  better  understanding  with  the  United 
States  was  intended  and  even  explicitly  avowed.  That  the 
entire  revocation  of  the  Berlin  and  Milan  decrees,  so  far  as 
concerned  the  United  States  was  confirmed,  and  that  with 
regard  to  American  vessels  which  should  arrive  in  France, 
there  would  be  little  or  no  difficulty  made  as  to  whence  they 
came,  or  as  to  the  nature  of  their  cargoes.  I  said  that  my 
own  information  without  being  so  particular  was,  that  the 
aspect  of  the  disposition  of  the  French  government  towards 
the  United  States  was  more  amicable,  and  more  just  than 
it  had  been  for  a  long  period.  There  was  an  obvious  political 
interest  to  account  for  the  change.  As  the  Emperor  saw 
the  situation  in  which  the  English  had  chosen  to  place  them¬ 
selves  with  respect  to  America,  he  was  taking  advantage  of 
it  by  assuming  a  course  of  an  opposite  character.  I  believed 
the  British  government  alone,  by  a  like  change  of  their 
policy  could  prevent  his  succeeding  in  it  completely.  The 
Count  said  that  in  the  general  view  of  the  Russian  policy 
this  new  turn  was  highly  agreeable  to  him,  both  from  the 
interest  which  this  government  took  in  whatever  was  ad¬ 
vantageous  to  the  United  States,  and  because  it  showed 
something  like  a  relaxation  in  favor  of  commerce;  but  he  re¬ 
ferred  me  to  our  former  conversations  for  his  opinion  upon  the 
character  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon .  He  did  not  think  that  the 
permanency  of  anything  to  which  he  should  assent  concerning 
commerce  could  be  relied  upon.  Every  resolution ,  every  act 
was  the  result  of  an  impulse  of  the  moment — the  effect  of  an 


298  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1812 

occasional  impression .  Today  the  impression  was  of  one  sort 
and  the  measure  corresponded  with  it;  tomorrow  the  impression 
would  he  of  an  opposite  nature  and  the  measure  would  follow 
that  too .  To  make  them  consistent  was  not  in  the  nature  of 
the  man .  He  never  looked  at  commerce  with  commercial  eyes. 
He  never  considered  commerce  as  an  interest  in  which  all  man¬ 
kind  was  concerned .  He  saw  in  it  nothing  hut  the  trade  of  a 
certain  class  of  individuals .  But  in  truth ,  added  the  Count , 
commerce  is  the  concern  of  us  all.  The  merchants  are  indeed 
only  a  class  of  individuals  hearing  a  small  proportion  to  the 
mass  of  a  people;  hut  commerce  as  the  exchange  of  mutual  su¬ 
perfluities  for  mutual  wants  is  the  mutual  chain  of  human  as¬ 
sociation,  It  is  the  foundation  of  all  the  useful  and  pacific 
intercourse  between  nations.  It  is  a  primary  necessity  to  all 
classes  of  people.  The  Emperor  Napoleon  will  never  see  it  in 
this  light  and  so  his  commercial  regidations  and  promises  will 
never  he  systematic  or  consistent.  You  will  find  that  you  can 
place  little  dependence  upon  them.  “As  to  his  will  for  peace 
and  tranquility — no!”  continued  the  Count ,  “ that  is  impossible. 
I  can  say  to  you  in  confidence  that  he  once  told  me  so  himself. 
I  was  speaking  to  him  about  Spain  and  Portugal  and  he  said 
to  me ,  ‘  I  must  always  he  going  after  the  peace  of  those ,  so  where 
could  I  go  hut  to  Spain?  I  went  to  Spain  because  I  could  not 
go  elsewhere T  And  this  was  all  he  had  to  say  in  justification 
of  his  having  gone  into  Spain  and  Portugal ;  and  now ,  as  per¬ 
haps  there ,  he  is  not  quite  satisfied  with  his  going ,  he  may  in¬ 
tend  to  turn  against  us  from  the  same  want  of  any  other  place 
where  to  go.”  I  said  that  one  would  think  Spain  and  Portugal 
still  furnished  and  were  likely  long  to  furnish  him  quite  room 
enough  to  go  in  without  making  it  necessary  to  gratify  his  pas¬ 
sion  in  another  quarter.  The  Count  replied  that  there  was  no 
political  consideration  whatsoever  upon  which  he  founded  a 
hope  that  peace  might  yet  he  preserved.  But  there  was  a  con - 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


299 


1812] 

sideration  of  a  different  nature  which  might  have  its  weight  and 
upon  the  effect  of  which  he  still  rested  some  expectation .  It  was 
the  scarcity  of  grain.  He  understood  it  was  considerable  at 
Paris.  I  said  I  had  heard  the  same  and  that  the  price  of  wheat 
and  of  flour  had  much  advanced ,  thoy  not  that  of  bread ,  as  it  was 
kept  down  by  payments  of  the  bakers  received  from  the  govern¬ 
ment.  He  said  that  the  scarcity  was  so  great  that  there  had 
been  recently  several  riots  at  the  doors  of  the  bakers  both  at  Paris 
and  at  Lyons,  and  as  large  armies  could  not  be  put  in  motion 
without  very  large  supplies  of  such  provisions,  he  still  hoped 
that  as  the  months  of  April  and  May  would  come  on,  the  incon¬ 
venience  and  difficulty  of  procuring  such  supplies  for  those 
armies  would  ultimately  arrest  their  march.  “For  which  how¬ 
ever,”  added  he,  “the  circumstances  have  rendered  it  proper 
for  us  to  place  ourselves  in  a  state  of  preparation  as  we  have 
accordingly  done.  ”  1 

I  then  passed  to  another  subject 2  the  removal  of  Count 
Pahlen  from  the  Russian  mission  to  the  United  States  to 
that  of  Brazil.  I  said  that  my  instructions  made  it  my  duty 
to  express  to  the  Emperor,  the  sentiments  entertained  by 
my  government,  and  their  strong  sense  of  the  friendly  policy 
constantly  pursued  by  his  Majesty  towards  them,  and  that 
it  gave  me  peculiar  pleasure  to  communicate  to  him  the 
assurance  that  Count  Pahlen’s  deportment  during  his  resi¬ 
dence  in  the  United  States  had  been  highly  agreeable  to  the 
President,  and  had  conciliated  universal  regard  and  esteem. 
He  said  that  he  was  sure  that  the  Emperor  would  receive  this 
information  with  pleasure,  and  that  such  a  testimonial  would 
contribute  further  to  raise  his  good  opinion  of  Count  Pahlen. 
That  the  letters  from  that  officer  had  constantly  spoken  in 
the  highest  terms  of  the  treatment  that  he  had  received  from 

1  This  last  sentence  was  also  in  cypher,  but  underlined. 

2  Cypher. 


300 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

all  classes  of  people  in  America,  and  that  he  would  quit  the 
country  with  the  warmest  regard  for  it.  I  observed  that  his 
mission  to  Brazil  would  place  him  in  an  advantageous  position 
for  observation  not  only  in  regard  to  that  country  itself ,  but  to 
the  scenes  which  were  passing  in  the  other  parts  of  South  America, 
particularly  the  Spanish  provinces .  He  asked  me  whether  the 
government  of  the  United  States  took  any  measure  respecting 
them ,  in  what  light  they  considered  them?  I  said  there  were  dep¬ 
uties  at  the  seat  of  our  government  at  the  province  of  V enezuela . 
That  our  government  considered  with  favorable  sentiments  the 
change  that  was  taking  place  in  those  provinces  believing  it 
would  be  generally  advantageous  to  the  interests  of  mankind , 
and  that  I  readily  confided  to  him  these  views  of  my  govern¬ 
ment  because  from  former  conversations  that  I  had  held  with 
him ,  and  from  other  circumstances  of  which  I  had  heard ,  I 
thought  there  was  the  most  perfect  coincidence  between  his  views 
on  this  subject  and  theirs .  He  said  they  were  the  same .  There 
was  only  one  doubt  on  his  mind  which  gave  him  some  concern. 
The  people  of  those  provinces  had  been  kept  in  such  a  state  of 
grievous  oppression  that  he  was  afraid  they  would  in  accom- 
lishing  their  emancipation  exhibit  examples  of  that  sort  of 
violence  and  those  scenes  of  cruelty  which  experience  had 
proved  to  be  too  common  in  such  revolutions.  He  hoped ,  how¬ 
ever ,  it  might  be  otherwise.  He  had  been  in  favor  of  a  free  com¬ 
merce  between  them  and  this  country  which  would  have  implied 
a  recognition  of  their  new  state ,  and  he  had  made  a  proposition 
to  that  effect  (in  the  Imperial  Council).  “Mais  en  cela  j’ai 
echoue.  The  apprehension  of  those  discords  to  which  I  have 
alluded  prevented  my  success.  On  pourra  cependant  revenir 
par  cet  objet.” 

In  my  letter  of  26  October  last ,  No.  73,  reporting  to  you  this 
proposition  of  the  Chancellor  and  its  failure  in  the  Council  the 
real  cause  of  its  failure  was  suggested.  There  was  a  lurking 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


301 


1812] 

English  influence  working  at  bottom ,  and  the  terror  of  disorders 
and  cruelties  was  a  motive  suitable  to  be  avowed. 

Since  the  day  upon  which  I  had  this  conference  with  the  Count 
the  symptoms  of  approaching  war  between  France  and  this 
country  have  been  constantly  increasing  in  number  and  in 
gravity.  The  Turkish  peace  so  long  and  so  confidently  spoken 
of  as  certain  is  cast  up  a  forlorn  hope.  It  is  believed  that  the 
Emperor  imputes  the  disappointment  entirely  to  the  inter¬ 
ference  of  a  French  agency ,  and  that  the  irritation  which  it 
excited  in  his  mind  determined  him  not  to  send  Count  Nessel¬ 
rode  to  Paris  as  he  had  intended ,  and  of  which  he  had  even 
communicated  his  intention  to  the  French  ambassador.1  The 
occupation  of  Swedish  Pomerania  by  French  troops  is  sup¬ 
posed  to  be  a  mere  preliminary  to  the  Russian  war.  Since 
this  event  a  Colonel  Knesebeck,  an  aide  de  camp  to  the 
king  of  Prussia,  and  Count  Lowenhielm,  an  aide  de  camp  to 
the  king  of  Sweden,  have  arrived  here  on  special  missions. 
The  first  to  urge  again  the  Emperor  Alexander  to  negotiate 
with  France,  and  the  second  probably  to  concert  resistance 
against  France.  Austria  assembles  a  body  of  troops  in 
Gallicia,  of  which  an  official  communication  has  been  made 
here  by  Count  St.  Julien.  Austria  professes  at  the  same 
time  amicable  intentions  towards  Russia — the  resolution  to 
remain  strictly  neutral  if  war  should  ensue — but  with  friendly 
advice  to  the  Emperor,  to  negotiate  with  France.  In  the 
meantime  France,  and  all  the  princes  of  the  Rhenish  confedera¬ 
tion  are  arming  with  all  possible  expedition,  and  the  note  of 
preparation  here  is  as  strong  as  ever.  Three  regiments  of 
the  garrison  of  this  city  march  this  week  for  the  frontiers. 
I  am  with  the  greatest  respect,  etc. 

1  Cypher. 


302 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  30  March,  1812. 


The  spirit  which  has  manifested  itself  in  Congress  since 
the  commencement  of  their  session,  if  its  ultimate  result 
should  be  real  and  substantial  preparation  for  war,  will  be 
the  happiest  turn  for  our  public  affairs  that  has  occurred 
since  the  treaty  with  France  in  1800.  It  is  apparently  not 
just  now  the  wish  of  the  British  government  to  have  a  war 
with  America  added  to  the  work  they  already  have  upon 
their  hands.  But  they  will  yield  nothing  in  negotiation, 
because  they  have  formed  a  settled  opinion  that  America 
will  not,  perhaps  that  she  cannot,  undertake  a  war  against 
England.  In  the  condition  of  our  public  force  (if  force  it 
can  be  seriously  called)  this  opinion  is  one  of  the  best  founded 
and  wisest  that  has  found  its  way  to  the  head  of  a  British 
ministry  for  many  years.  The  rights  against  which  England 
is  pursuing  a  course  of  systematic  outrage  are  of  a  nature 
which  we  might  and  ought  to  maintain  by  force.  But  before 
we  resort  to  force  for  maintaining  them,  we  must  be  in 
possession  of  the  force  itself,  and  really  with  our  army  of 
five  or  six  thousand  men,  and  our  navy  of  ten  or  twelve 
frigates,  to  talk  of  maintaining  by  force  any  right  whatso¬ 
ever  against  such  a  power  as  Great  Britain  is  too  ridiculous. 
We  have  had  many  prevailing  opinions  among  ourselves 
which  must  be  fairly  and  completely  disgorged  before  we 
can  soberly  think  of  maintaining  our  rights  by  force.  The 
opinion  that  Britain,  or  indeed  any  European  nation,  will 
square  her  political  conduct  by  the  rule  of  her  own  interest 
is  one  of  them.  No  less  a  statesman  than  John  de  Witt 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


303 


1812] 

has  been  said  to  have  stumbled  more  than  once  over  this 
fundamental  position,  that  the  policy  of  nations  would 
always  be  governed  by  their  interests.  John  had  not  been, 
like  Chancellor  Oxenstiern’s  son,  to  see  how  the  world  was 
governed.  Many  of  our  politicians  need  a  tour  of  travel  to 
make  the  same  observation.  Another  opinion  among  us 
which  our  stomachs  stood  very  stoutly  for  a  great  length 
of  time  was,  that  a  British  ministry  was  to  be  intimidated 
by  a  prospect  of  famine  in  the  West  India  islands,  or  by  riots 
among  the  journeyman  weavers,  spinsters  and  pinmakers 
of  their  manufacturing  towns.  Experience  has  pretty  well 
disburthened  us  of  this  error  and  I  hope  it  will  never  en¬ 
cumber  us  again.  Perhaps  we  have  yet  to  learn  that  looking 
and  talking  big  will  be  as  ineffectual  to  maintain  our  rights 
as  the  interests  of  our  adversaries  or  the  hunger  of  West 
India  negroes  or  Nottingham  frame  breakers.  To  main¬ 
tain  our  rights  we  must  first  raise  and  organize  force.  Con¬ 
sidering  the  measures  proposed  in  Congress  as  resulting  from 
this  conviction  and  destined  to  this  end  I  do  most  heartily 
approve  of  and  rejoice  in  them.  But  there  must  be  con¬ 
nected  with  them  measures  of  raising  revenue,  which  I  do 
not  yet  see  so  clearly  disclosed,  and  the  effect  of  which  upon 
the  popular  sentiment  it  may  not  be  so  easy  to  foretell. 
Mr.  Gallatin’s  last  annual  report  observes  ingeniously  that 
our  revenue  from  impost  in  peace  is  almost  sufficient  for  the 
expenses  of  war,  and  in  war  would  scarcely  suffice  for  the 
wants  of  peace.  The  last  part  of  this  remark  is  unquestion¬ 
ably  true,  but  we  must  not  calculate  that  the  utmost  produce 
of  our  national  revenue  which  we  have  yet  had  would 
almost  meet  the  expenses  of  a  war.  It  has  been  in  my  opinion 
one  of  our  misfortunes,  as  well  as  one  of  our  errors,  to  rely 
too  much  upon  impost  for  revenues,  and  not  only  to  sacrifice 
but  to  decry  all  the  others.  I  believe,  though  I  am  afraid 


304 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

this  will  yet  pass  for  political  heresy,  that  all  the  taxes 
which  were  abandoned  must  be  restored,  and  that  many 
others  much  more  burdensome  must  be  imposed,  before  we 
can  entertain  a  rational  expectation  of  maintaining  by  force 
against  Great  Britain  any  right  of  which  she  may  choose  to 
deprive  us.  Now  until  a  real  and  respectable  force  shall  be 
raised,  organized,  systematically  provided  for  by  substantial 
revenue,  and  prepared  for  vigorous  action,  I  should  hold  it 
impossible  to  commence  a  war  with  England,  and  I  hope 
that  no  such  measure  will  be  taken. 

At  the  same  time  it  would  be  worse  than  folly  for  us  to 
imagine  that  we  shall  be  allowed  henceforth  to  enjoy  upon 
the  ocean  any  rights  which  we  are  not  able  to  maintain  by 
force.  The  base  and  servile  doctrine  of  holding  our  naviga¬ 
tion  and  commercial  rights  upon  the  tenure  of  England’s 
friendship  and  protection,  the  beetle-blind  idiotism  of  pre¬ 
tending  to  hold  them  upon  her  sense  of  justice,  appear  to  be 
losing  their  influence  in  America  and  may  they  never  be 
harbored  by  us  again.  It  is  quite  time  for  us  to  show,  what 
for  my  part  I  never  doubted,  that  there  is  among  us  a  latent 
energy  capable  of  being  roused  into  action  with  a  vigor  and 
effect  of  which  neither  England,  nor  any  other  European 
nation,  nor  a  large  portion  of  our  own  people,  have  any  sus¬ 
picion.  I  wish  to  see  in  the  course  now  pursued  by  Congress 
an  approximation  to  that  result,  and  with  this  hope  welcome 
the  spirit  which  has  united  parties  otherwise  discordant  in 
the  determination  to  raise  and  prepare  a  public  force.  I 
hope  also  to  see  them  followed  up  with  corresponding  meas¬ 
ures  for  raising  an  adequate  revenue.  Without  them  all 
the  rest  would  be  mere  political  bubbles. 

We  have  here  the  prospect  of  a  new  war  which  announces 
itself  as  the  probable  shock  of  two  immense  powers.  It  is 
said  with  confidence  that  Russia  has  now  under  arms  and 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


305 


1812] 

disciplined  for  war  not  less  than  nine  hundred  thousand 
men.  There  are  upon  her  frontiers  from  the  Baltic  to  the 
Black  Sea  undoubtedly  more  than  three  hundred  thousand, 
and  a  number  at  least  equal  to  them  of  French,  Prussians, 
Poles  and  Germans,  are  arrayed  for  conflict  against  them. 
Ten  or  fifteen  regiments  of  the  choicest  troops  of  the  empire 
have  within  the  last  month  marched  from  this  city  to  join 
the  forces  on  the  Polish  border.  The  commencement  of 
the  campaign  will  according  to  all  present  appearances 
not  be  delayed  beyond  the  months  of  May  and  June.  The 
attack,  however,  it  is  not  supposed  will  begin  from  this 
quarter.  The  first  events  of  the  war  which  will  if  it  com¬ 
mences  be  of  great  and  striking  character,  will  reach  you  by 
shorter  conveyances  than  from  hence. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  81.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  31  March,  1812. 

Sir: 

A  full  month  has  elapsed  since  I  had  the  honor  of  writing 
you  last,  and  that  letter  still  remains  sealed  in  my  desk 
ready  to  be  dispatched  by  the  first  practicable  opportunity. 
Since  it  was  written  the  three  regiments  mentioned  in  it 
have  actually  marched  for  the  Polish  border  and  have  been 
followed  by  eight  or  ten  others;  principally  the  Imperial 
Guards.  The  departure  of  the  Emperor  himself  is  expected 
in  the  course  of  a  few  weeks  or  perhaps  days.  He  himselj 
told  me  last  week  that  notwithstanding  all  the  pains  he  had  taken 
to  avoid  this  conflict  ( cette  lutte)  it  must  come.  That  he  would 
not  commence  the  war ,  but  that  he  expected  to  be  attacked  and 


306 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

that  every  indication  was  of  war.1  The  Prussian  officer, 
Colonel  Knesebeck,  returned  without  succeeding  in  his  mis¬ 
sion.  The  advice  of  Austria  to  negotiate ,  or  rather  perhaps 
to  yield  has  been  equally  unsuccessful.  Count  Nesselrode 
has  not  been  sent  and  probably  will  not  be  sent  to  Paris. 
Prussia  has  concluded  a  treaty  of  alliance  with  France,  and 
the  Prussian  ports  upon  the  Baltic  as  well  as  those  of  Swedish 
Pomerania  are  already  occupied  by  French  troops.  Orders 
have  already  been  issued  for  arming  and  equipping  for  sea, 
the  Russian  fleets  on  the  Black  Sea,  the  White  Sea  and  the 
Baltic,  and  the  principal  command  of  all  is  to  be  held  by  Eng¬ 
lish  officers  in  the  Russian  service. 

From  all  these  circumstances,  and  many  others,  it  can 
scarcely  be  doubted  that  the  war  will  commence  as  soon  as 
the  season  will  admit  of  active  military  operations.  At 
present  there  is  a  bare  possibility  that  it  may  yet  be  deferred, 
on  which  the  hopes  of  some  and  the  fears  of  others  hinge. 
The  intimation  is  circulating  but  upon  doubtful  authority, 
that  a  personal  interview  between  the  Emperor  Alexander 
and  the  French  Emperor  will  take  place;  and  it  is  supposed 
that  they  may  meet  in  some  expedient  to  reconcile  what 
their  ministers  and  ambassadors  have  not  been  able  to 
settle.  On  this  event  however  little  reliance  is  placed  by  any 
person.  The  war  may  be  considered  as  inevitable. 

It  is  remarkable  that  in  this  state  of  things,  the  tone  of 
negotiations  so  far  as  it  is  known  to  the  public  is  still  not 
merely  moderate  but  courteous.  Count  Chernicheff  arrived 
here  about  a  fortnight  since,  with  a  letter  to  the  Emperor 
Alexander  full  of  amicable  professions.  But  if,  as  there  is 
resaon  to  suppose,  the  demand  that  a  French  garrison  shall 
be  admitted  at  Riga,  has  been  extended  to  all  the  Russian 
ports  upon  the  Baltic,  not  excepting  St.  Petersburg  itself, 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


307 


1812] 

it  is  impossible  that  it  should  be  complied  with.  It  is  also 
suggested  that  Russia  has  been  required  to  force  the  ful¬ 
fillment  of  the  engagements  of  Sweden,  to  adopt  the  conti¬ 
nental  system  of  exclusion  to  the  English  commerce.  In¬ 
stead  of  which  the  crisis  will  to  all  appearance  result  in  a 
defensive  alliance  and  a  common  cause  between  Sweden 
and  Russia. 

It  is  very  certain  that  since  the  reunion  of  Holland  and  the 
Hanseatic  Cities  to  France,  Sweden  and  Russia  have  been 
the  countries  through  which  the  English  commerce  (chiefly 
of  colonial  articles)  has  partially  found  its  way  to  Germany, 
France  and  Italy.  So  alluring  have  been  the  profits  of  this 
commerce  to  the  merchants  in  these  ports,  and  so  valuable 
has  it  proved  to  the  revenues  of  the  governments,  that  the 
supreme  authorities  of  the  two  countries  have  not  felt  the 
inclination,  if  they  have  possessed  the  power  effectually  to 
interdict  it.  They  have  been  enriching  themselves  by  it, 
at  the  expense  of  France  and  of  her  dependencies,  which  the 
British  Orders  in  Council  have  at  the  same  time  deprived 
of  all  or  nearly  all  their  own  commerce,  excepting  such  as 
they  could  suffer  to  be  carried  on  by  mutual  licenses.  In 
1809  this  trade  had  been  forced  through  the  channel  of  Hol¬ 
land;  in  1810  through  Heligoland,  Holstein  and  the  Hanse¬ 
atic  Cities.  It  furnished  the  pretext  for  their  reunion  to 
France.  Its  attempts  to  pass  through  the  Prussian  ports 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  summer  of  1810  failed,  because 
those  ports  were  placed  under  the  custody  of  French  guard¬ 
ians.  France  it  is  evident  cannot  long  tolerate  the  ransom 
under  which  she  is  laid  by  this  combination  of  affairs.  She 
finds  herself  under  the  same  necessity  of  war  against  Sweden 
and  Russia,  that  she  did  for  the  reunion  of  Holland.  The 
immediate  cause  of  this  war  therefore  is  the  British  Orders 
in  Council;  and  probably  the  knowledge  that  they  are  pro- 


308 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

ducing  that  effect  is  the  preponderating  argument  to  the 
British  ministry  for  adhering  to  them,  when  their  perni¬ 
cious  consequences  to  Britain  herself  have  become  univer¬ 
sally  notorious.  The  policy  of  their  adhesion  is  as  shallow 
now,  as  it  was,  when  their  refusal  to  repeal  them  sanctioned 
the  incorporation  of  Holland  with  France.  A  war  between 
France  and  Russia  will  doubtless  for  the  moment  promote  the 
interests  of  England  but  like  all  their  former  speculations  will 
terminate  in  disappointment,1 

The  course  of  policy  lately  pursued  by  Sweden  has  dis¬ 
concerted  the  anticipations  of  most  men,  much  more  than 
that  of  Russia.  That  Sweden,  under  the  adoption  of  a 
French  general  for  her  future  sovereign,  and  with  the  bitter 
experience  of  her  losses  and  misfortunes  still  so  recent, 
should  again  become  the  ally  of  Russia  in  a  war  against 
France,  is  a  result  so  different  from  that  which  was  expected, 
that  even  those  who  witnessed  the  fact  find  themselves  at 
loss  to  account  for  it.  The  predominating  interest  of  the 
moment  is  indeed  the  same  for  both  Russia  and  Sweden. 
The  Swedish  ports  of  Pomerania  are  even  more  advantage¬ 
ously  situated  for  affording  a  vent  to  the  English  commerce 
than  those  of  Russia.  Of  this  advantage  her  merchants 
had  availed  themselves,  and  her  government,  though  it  had 
submitted  to  the  necessity  of  declaring  war  against  England, 
had  avowed  its  inability  to  prohibit  effectually  the  trade. 
They  had  also  refused  to  furnish  sailors,  at  the  requisition 
of  France,  to  man  the  fleets  which  France  is  preparing  for 
sea.  France  took  possession  of  the  ports  of  Swedish  Pome¬ 
rania,  and  incorporated  the  garrison  of  Stralsund,  three 
thousand  men,  into  her  own  army.  The  Swedish  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs  gave  notice  to  Mr.  de  Cabre,  the  charge 
d’affaires  of  France,  that  unless  the  French  troops  should 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


309 


1812] 

be  withdrawn  Sweden  would  open  her  ports  to  the  English, 
accept  the  advantageous  terms  of  peace  offered  by  England, 
and  consider  the  debt  due  by  the  government  of  Sweden  in 
Holland ,  as  liquidated A 

Count  Lowenhielm  was  immediately  sent  here  and  has 
been  received  with  great  distinction  by  the  Emperor.  Gen¬ 
eral  Von  Suchtelen  who  had  resided  at  Stockholm  as  an 
informal  ambassador,  while  Count  Stedingk  had  been  in 
the  same  capacity  here,  from  Sweden,  and  who  had  very 
recently  returned,  leaving  only  a  charge  d’affaires,  has 
been  dispatched  again  to  resume  his  post,  and  all  the  out¬ 
ward  indications  are  of  a  perfect  mutual  concert  between 
Russia  and  Sweden  in  opposition  to  the  present  measures 
of  France.  Whispers  of  distrust  are  yet  circulated  by  some 
who  are  perhaps  unwilling  to  find  their  political  foresight 
in  default.  They  suspect  or  insinuate  duplicity  in  the  actual 
measures  of  Sweden,  and  that  her  opposition  to  the  French 
possession  of  her  ports  in  Pomerania,  is  merely  for  the  sake 
of  saving  appearances.  These  surmises  have  probably  no 
foundation,  and  the  Russian  government  gives  no  credit  to 
them. 

The  Secretary  General  of  the  Empire  and  the  Secretary 
of  the  Imperial  Council  for  the  department  of  Legislation, 
were  last  evening  arrested  and  sent  into  banishment.  They 
were  persons  of  distinguished  talents  and  very  recently  in 
high  favor.  The  cause  of  thier  sudden  disgrace  is  attributed 
to  improper  communications  with  France,  but  neither  is  nor 
probably  will  be  known  with  certainty.  I  am  with  great 
respect,  etc. 

1  Not  in  cypher. 


3io 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

TO  ALEXANDER  HILL  EVERETT 

St.  Petersburg,  10  April,  1812. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  have  received  your  favor  of  3  January  from  London, 
forwarded  by  Mr.  Navarro,  and  although  uncertain  whether 
this  letter  will  find  you  still  in  England,  I  will  not  pass  by 
the  opportunity  of  thanking  you  for  it. 

Your  representation  of  the  state  of  things  in  England, 
though  far  from  being  drawn  in  dazzling  or  even  in  gay 
colors,  has  I  am  convinced  the  more  substantial  merit  of 
truth.  Almost  all  the  English  travellers  who  have  for  some 
years  past  favored  the  public  with  their  observations  made 
in  America  have  thought  proper  to  represent  our  national 
character  as  vicious,  upon  no  better  foundation  than  that 
they  had  witnessed  in  A.merica  individual  instances  of  vice. 
The  Edinburgh  reviewers,  with  an  eye  of  philosophical 
penetration  worthy  of  Peter  Pindar’s  magpie  peeping  into 
a  marrow  bone,  prophesy  that  the  American  character, 
which  they  pronounce  positively  bad  now,  will  be  greatly 
improved  when  wealth  comes  to  be  more  generally  inherited 
than  acquired.1  If  for  all  the  moral  and  political  pollution 
that  the  whole  manufactory  of  English  dragnets  has  been 
able  to  gather  from  all  the  foul  bottoms  of  the  American 
continent  owe  improvement  from  the  prevalence  of  heredi¬ 
tary  wealth,  is  to  consist  in  a  substitution  of  innumerable 
nightly  assassinations ,  burglaries  and  larcenies,  Lud’s  men 
to  break  stocking  weaver’s  frames,  and  Irishmen  to  knock 
down  for  sport  people  as  they  are  coming  out  of  church, 
Catholics  driven  to  rebellion  by  religious  persecution,  and 
a  master  sacrificing  his  friends,  his  friendships,  and  his 

1  Edinburgh  Review ,  XV.  442. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1812] 


principles  for  uPanem  et  Circenses ,”  I  would  put  it  as  a 
problem  to  the  arithmetical  acuteness  of  the  Edinburgh  re¬ 
viewers  how  much  we  shall  be  gainers  by  the  exchange? 

I  have  seen  in  some  of  the  newspapers  that  the  Attorney 
General,  Sir  Samuel  Romilly,  in  speaking  officially  of  some  of 
those  dreadful  enormities  mentioned  in  your  letter,  lamented 
them  as  indications  of  a  character  peculiarly  vicious  in 
the  English  nation.  The  remark  might  be  proper  in 
a  public  officer  whose  duties  are  in  some  sort  those  of  a 
censor  morum,  but  it  would  not  be  liberal  in  a  foreigner  to 
consider  transactions  of  such  a  nature  as  evidences  of  national 
character.  I  do  not  so  consider  them.  But  they  may  fairly 
be  taken  as  presumptive  proofs  that  the  representations  of 
unparalleled  virtue  and  superhuman  felicity,  which  American 
painters  have  drawn  as  characteristic  attributes  of  the 
English  nation,  are  as  wide  from  the  real  truth,  as  the 
Smelfungus  coloring  of  the  British  traveller  in  America. 
This  contrast  of  falsehood  between  the  English  pictures 
of  America  and  the  American  pictures  of  England  has  struck 
me  as  peculiarly  remarkable,  and  has  in  no  small  degree 
mortified  my  patriotic  feelings  as  an  American.  Its  effect 
in  our  own  country  has  been  doubly  mischievous,  by  exciting 
among  many  of  our  young  minds  a  disgust  and  contempt  of 
their  countrymen,  and  an  extravagant  and  foolish  admira¬ 
tion  of  another  nation.  I  am  very  glad  that  you  have  had  an 
opportunity  of  observing  for  yourself  the  real  condition  of 
nature,  of  men,  and  of  society  in  England.  I  will  not  say 
that  its  tendencies  will  be  to  produce  a  salutary  review  of 
some  of  your  own  prejudications;  but  I  hope  and  believe  it 
will  tend  to  correct  some  of  the  prejudices  of  others.  You 
have  doubtless  seen  much  to  admire  and  you  have  too  much 
justice  and  good  sense  to  depreciate  that  which  is  estimable 
for  the  place  where  it  is  found.  But  there  is  withal  in  Eng- 


312 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

land  a  spirit  of  arrogant  pretension,  and  a  gloss  of  splendor, 
which  may  be  seen  through  without  any  great  depth  of 
penetration.  I  am  well  assured,  and  the  persuasion  gives 
me  pleasure,  that  on  your  return  to  our  native  shores  you 
will  be  able  from  the  heart  to  say  with  Voltaire’s  Tancrede, 
“Plus  je  vis  d’etrangers,  plus  j’aimai  ma  patrie.” 

As  it  appears  that  the  British  government  still  deem  an 
adhesion  to  their  Orders  in  Council  expedient,  I  see  no  pros¬ 
pect  of  an  amicable,  or  indeed  of  any  other,  arrangement  of 
their  disputes  with  America.  Their  present  professions  of 
amity  and  conciliation  appear  to  be  borrowed  from  the 
practice  of  their  own  gentlemen  of  the  road,  who  take  a 
traveller’s  purse  with  all  possible  amity  and  decorum.  I 
think,  however,  their  present  partiality  to  the  Orders  in 
Council  proceeds  from  the  belief,  not  without  reason,  that 
they  will  produce  a  rupture  between  France  and  Russia. 
A  very  few  months  will  discover  to  the  world,  though  prob¬ 
ably  not  to  them,  on  what  foundations  this  reliance  stands. 

You  know  the  only  glimpses  we  can  catch  of  English 
literature  are  an  occasional  pamphlet  or  review  brought  by  a 
traveller  to  amuse  him  on  the  road.  Mr.  Patterson  last 
summer  brought  some  of  the  latest  numbers  of  the  Edin¬ 
burgh  Review ,  in  one  of  which  I  met  that  oracular  sentence 
upon  the  national  character  of  the  Americans,  which  I  have 
just  alluded  to.  There  too  I  found  a  long,  and  much  more 
amusing  account  of  the  Curse  of  Kehama;  it  excited  the 
wish  to  see  the  book  itself.  The  mode  of  reviewing  prac¬ 
tised  by  the  Edinburgh  critics  is  new,  and  they  have  made  it 
fashionable.  They  give  the  title  of  a  book,  and  then  publish 
a  dissertation  of  their  own  upon  the  subject  of  which  it 
treats.  Their  essays  are  tinctured  with  strong  prejudices, 
mingled  up  with  a  curious  compound  of  scholastic  dogmatism 
and  fine  gentlemantility.  I  remember  reading  an  account 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1812] 


313 


in  one  of  their  former  numbers  of  a  voluminous  edition  or 
translation  of  Sallust,  in  which  they  said  they  had  been  ac¬ 
customed  to  read  Sallust  in  books  about  the  size  of  a  hand 
at  whist .  I  read,  however,  almost  all  their  treatises,  and 
many  of  them  with  entertainment  and  instruction.  In  the 
review  of  the  Lady  of  the  Lake  there  is  a  disquisition  upon 
the  source  of  Walter  Scott’s  popularity  as  a  poet,  with 
which  I  was  very  much  pleased.  Some  of  its  ideas  are  re¬ 
peated  in  the  review  of  Southey’s  Curse ,  and  while  they  tell 
us  here  how  Mr.  Southey  does  not  do  so  and  so,  like  Mr. 
Scott,  they  inform  us  on  the  other  hand  how  Mr.  Scott  does 
not  use  the  machinery  of  Mr.  Southey.  Don  Roderick  I 
have  not  yet  seen,  but  among  the  readers  of  poetry  here 
there  are  some  who  have  and  who  say  it  is  the  author’s 
masterpiece.  That,  I  suppose,  is  because,  as  was  said  to 
account  for  the  vogue  of  another  book,  it  is  poetical,  political 
and  personal.  If  Don  Roderick  is  a  great  admirer  of  Lord 
Wellington,  he  ought  to  give  at  the  same  time  his  candid 
opinion  of  the  Duke  of  Albufera.1 

I  condole  with  you  upon  the  extinction  of  that  illustrious 
luminary  of  letters  and  science  the  monthly  Anthology.  If 
the  General  Repository  of  Literature  2  gives  but  once  a  quarter 
to  the  public  as  much  wit  and  as  much  wisdom  as  the 
Anthology  was  wont  to  emit  every  month,  it  will  deserve 
as  long  a  life,  and  enjoy  as  fair  a  prospect  of  immor¬ 
tality.  ...  I  am  etc. 

1  Louis  Gabriel  Suchet,  Duke  of  Albufera  (1770-1826). 

2  The  General  Repository  and  Review ,  established  in  Cambridge,  Mass.,  in  this 
year. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


3H 


[1812 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  83/  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  28  April,  1812. 

Sir: 

The  Emperor  Alexander  left  this  city  on  the  21st  instant ,  the 
day  after  which  I  received  from  the  Chancellor  Count  Romanzojf 
the  official  communication  of  which  I  have  the  honor  to  enclose 
herewith  a  copy ,  together  with  that  of  my  answer. 

Two  days  before  his  Majesty’s  departure ,  Count  Romanzoff 
sent  me  a  note  requesting  me  to  call  upon  him  the  next  morning , 
which  I  accordingly  did.  He  told  me  that  the  Emperor  having 
fixed  upon  the  next  day  for  his  departure ,  he  himself  should  be 
obliged  very  soon  afterwards  to  follow  him ,  and  as  there  might 
perhaps  be  before  his  return  some  discussions  in  which  the  in¬ 
terests  of  the  United  States  as  well  as  those  of  Russia  might  be 
involved ,  from  his  wish  to  defend  and  support  both ,  he  wished 
to  know  as  far  as  I  was  informed  and  might  think  proper  to 
confide  to  him ,  what  was  the  precise  state  of  the  relations  between 
the  United  States  and  France  or  England ,  or  both.  That  some 
time  ago  the  Russian  ambassador  at  Paris ,  Prince  Kurakin , 
had  written  that  there  was  to  be  a  treaty  between  France  and  the 
United  States ,  and  that  arrangements  favorable  to  America  had 
actually  been  settled  in  France;  but  lately  there  seemed  to  be 
some  uncertainty  upon  the  subject ,  and  he  had  seen  in  one  of 
the  latest  Journaux  de  FEmpire,  that  of  2pth  March ,  an  article 
purporting  to  be  dated  from  Baltimore ,  which  seemed  to  hold 
out  an  angry  and  threatening  language  towards  the  United 
States.  I  told  him  that  since  my  last  conversation  with  him  I  had 
no  communication  from  my  own  government  of  a  more  recent 
1  Dispatch  No.  82  is  missing  from  the  State  Department  files. 


1812]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  315 

date  than  I  had  then ,  nor  had  I  any  information  from  which  1 
could  infer  any  change  had  occurred  in  the  state  of  our  relations 
from  that  which  I  had  then  suggested  to  him .  That  with  respect 
to  France  all  that  I  could  say  from  the  letters  I  had  received 
from  Mr.  Barlow  was ,  that  no  definitive  arrangement  had  been 
agreed  upon ,  and  with  respect  to  England  none  had  taken,  nor 
as  I  believed  was  likely  to  take  place.  I  had  heard  that  late  Eng¬ 
lish  newspapers  contained  articles  of  intelligence  from  New  York 
to  the  ipth  February,  and  that  Mr.  Foster  the  British  minister 
was  in  negotiation  with  the  Secretary  of  State,  from  which 
negotiation  it  was  expected  a  treaty  would  be  concluded.  I  could 
say  nothing  from  official  sources  upon  this  subject.  My  own 
opinion  was  that  no  such  treaty  could  be  concluded .  I  was 
perfectly  sure  it  would  not  unless  the  revocation  of  the  British 
Orders  in  Council  should  be  one  of  its  explicit  conditions.  If 
Mr.  Foster  is  authorized  to  stipulate  for  the  revocation  of  the 
orders,  a  treaty  is  possible.  The  Count  asked,  how  I  thought 
France  in  that  case  would  take  it?  I  said  I  did  not  know,  but 
I  believed  the  American  government  would  not  enquire  whether 
France  would  take  it  well  or  ill.  It  was  the  right  of  the  United 
States  as  a  neutral  nation  to  trade  with  France;  that  the  American 
government  was  bound  to  protect.  It  was  denied  them  by  the 
British  Orders  in  Council,  and  unless  restored  by  the  revocation 
of  those  Orders  in  Council  I  had  no  doubt  but  the  United  States 
would  vindicate  it  by  war,  but  I  did  not  anticipate  a  declaration 
of  war  by  the  United  States  at  present.  The  measures  that  had 
been  taken  this  winter  were  measures  of  preparation.  Upon 
the  ocean  we  could  do  nothing.  If  hostilities  were  to  commence 
there  they  must  come  from  the  part  of  England  and  not  from  ours. 
To  attack  the  British  upon  our  continent  we  must  be  prepared. 
A  bill  for  raising  25,000  men  had  been  passed  by  Congress. 
They  must  be  raised  by  voluntary  enlistments,  for  we  had  no 
system  of  conscription.  It  was  a  difficult  and  slow  way  to 


316 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

raise ,  organize ,  discipline  25,000  men.  I  did  not  think  it 

could  he  done  in  less  time ,  nor  should  we  commit  the  folly  of  com - 
mencing  or  declaring  war  before  we  could  do  something  to  main¬ 
tain  it,  but  unless  the  Orders  in  Council  were  revoked  a  war  must 
eventually  be  the  result.  Did  I  think  it  probable  they  would  be 
revoked?  No,  every  present  prospect  was  to  the  contrary.  / 
thought  their  existence  now  depended  solely  on  that  of  Mr. 
Perceval ,  as  prime  minister  of  England.  Did  I  think  Mr. 
Perceval  would  remain  prime  minister?  I  believed  he  would. 
Was  it  not  probable  the  Marquis  of  Wellesley  would  come  in 
again  after  the  Catholic  question  should  be  disposed  of?  I 
thought  not.  But  how  was  it  possible  that  the  English  Regent 
should  be  so  fascinated  {said  the  Count)  by  Mr.  Perceval, 
“un  homme  a  ce  qu'il  parait  assez  mediocre,”  in  preference  to 
Wellesley,  whose  career  has  been  so  much  more  brilliant  and 
who  appeared  to  have  rendered  real  services  to  the  nation — a  man 
especially  so  to  the  affairs  in  Spain?  I  said,  I  had  my  suspi¬ 
cions  that  the  Catholic  question  was  little  more  than  the  ostensible 
cause  of  Lord  Wellesley's  retirement,  and  that  a  more  efficacious 
real  cause  was  the  state  itself  of  affairs  in  Spain.  But  how  so? 
There  was  a  good  deal  of  misunderstanding  between  the  British 
government  and  that  of  the  Spaniards  at  Cadiz.  It  had  already 
proceeded  so  far  that  the  English  had  threatened  to  abandon 
them.  Lord  Wellesley  must  before  this  time  have  strong  mis¬ 
givings  about  the  ultimate  issue  of  their  cause  in  Spain.  He 
may  be  glad  to  retire  from  his  stake  upon  it  while  it  has  yet  the 
shew  of  being  unimpaired.  The  Count  said  he  thought  it  very 
probable  and  that  the  motive  would  be  a  very  rational  one.  I 
then  asked  him  if  he  expected  very  soon  to  leave  the  city.  He 
said  within  two  or  three  days.  The  Emperor  had  finally  re¬ 
solved  to  go  and  review  the  situation  of  his  army  on  the  frontiers. 
He  should  very  shortly  send  me  a  written  notice  that  during  his 
absence  the  business  of  the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs  would 


1812]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  317 

be  entrusted  to  Count  Soltikoff.  His  ozvn  departure  he  said  was 
necessary ,  tho9  he  regretted  it  much ,  and  he  intimated  that  his 
advice  had  been  not  to  go.  But  the  Emperor  had  decided  other¬ 
wise.  The  forces  assembled  on  the  frontiers  he  observed  were 
immense  on  both  sides.  There  was  in  history  scarcely  anything 
like  it.  It  was  like  romance.  What  it  would  come  to  he  knew 
not.  That  perpetual  restlessness  and  agitation  of  the  Emperor 
Napoleon  were  such  that  it  was  impossible  to  say  how  it  would 
terminate ,  and  the  most  extraordinary  thing  of  all  was  that  there 
was  no  cause  of  war.  On  the  part  of  this  country  the  affair 
of  the  Duchy  of  Oldenburg  was  the  only  object.  Russia  had 
made  a  declaration  in  that  case  reserving  her  rights ,  but  in  that 
very  declaration  had  stated  explicitly  that  she  did  not  consider 
it  as  a  cause  for  renouncing  the  alliance ,  or  for  changing  the 
course  of  her  policy.  I  said  that  from  the  late  report  of  the  Duke 
of  Bassano  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon  it  would  seem  that  the 
principle  assumed  by  France  went  to  a  total  exclusion  of  all 
commerce  from  the  country  of  her  friends ,  the  English  Orders 
in  Council  went  to  a  total  exclusion  of  all  commerce  from  itself. 
But,  said  the  Count,  a  total  exclusion  of  all  commerce  is  im¬ 
possible.  You  might  as  well  set  up  a  total  exclusion  of  all 
air  to  breathe,  or  of  all  food  to  subsist  upon  from  a  whole  nation 
as  a  total  exclusion  of  commerce.  You  must  have  commerce  in 
some  shape  either  lawful  and  regular,  or  by  contraband  and 
licenses.  The  system  of  licenses  is  founded  upon  falsehood 
and  immorality.  A  sovereign  who  countenanced  such  vices 
is  no  longer  a  sovereign;  it  is  a  virtual  abdication  of  his  authority. 
He  is  a  sovereign  for  that  very  purpose,  to  maintain  justice  and 
morality,  and  to  give  his  sanction  to  falsehood  and  injustice 
is  in  substance  ceasing  to  reign.  The  system  of  formally  pro¬ 
scribing  commerce  by  law  in  general  terms,  and  then  allowing 
it  by  a  sale  of  special  licenses,  appeared  to  him  of  the  same  nature 
as  the  old  Popish  practice  of  selling  indulgences  for  crimes, 


318 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

and  like  opening  a  shop  to  sell  titles  of  nobility  to  infamous 
characters. 

I  thought  these  opinions ,  if  expressed  in  very  strong  terms , 
substantially  correct ,  but  observed  that  France  would  probably 
allege  that  the  English  had  set  the  first  example  of  this  political 
profligacy.  That  he  said  was  true ,  but  by  which  party  so  prac¬ 
tised  it  was  equally  scandalous  and  unjustifiable. 

The  Count  left  the  city  on  the  twenty-third ,  three  days  after 
the  Emperor ,  for  the  headquarters  ( the  expression  is  compatible 
with  the  official  language  of  the  Chancellor’s  circular  notifica¬ 
tion)  of  the  Emperor  to  be  at  Wilna .  It  is  certain  by  the  Count’s 
expectation  that  before  the  campaign  begins  there  will  be  a  nego¬ 
tiation  to  attempt  a  pacific  arrangement  there.  I  should  only 
add  the  wish  that  with  regard  to  the  commercial  question  the 
Emperor  Alexander  adhere  to  the  principles  recognized  by  the 
Count  in  this  conference.  I  have  the  honor  to  be  very  re¬ 
spectfully,  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  30  April,  1812. 

The  inclosed  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  which  was  written  near 
a  month  before  an  opportunity  occurred  of  sending  it  on  its 
way  to  you.  I  am  afraid  that  the  delay  will  entirely  defeat 
its  object,  and  that  it  will  be  found  impracticable  to  send  out 
my  two  sons  to  me  the  next  summer.  The  river  Neva  is  now 
again  open,  and  I  trust  that  in  about  six  weeks  or  two 
months  opportunities  for  writing  to  you  again  will  present 
themselves.  To  you,  my  dear  Mother  and  to  you  alone,  I 
am  indebted  for  information  concerning  my  family  and 
friends  in  your  quarter  of  the  world.  From  June  last  until 
the  commencement  of  the  present  year  I  have  received  from 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


3i9 


1812] 

you  several  letters  in  the  course  of  the  winter,  and  have 
never  suffered  a  month  to  pass  by  without  writing  to  you. 
Since  I  wrote  you  last  we  have  received  your  letter  to  my 
wife  of  25  November  which  she  has  answered.  I  sent  last 
week  this  answer,  with  another  letter  from  her,  and  my  own 
of  30  March  to  Mr.  Russell  at  London,  with  a  request  to 
him  to  forward  them.  I  suppose  he  will  have  no  difficulty 
to  do  this;  for  although  Mr.  Foster  did  threaten  that  if  our 
non-importation  should  not  be  repealed  his  government 
would  retaliate;  and  although  I  trust  it  has  not  been  re¬ 
pealed,  yet  a  non-importation  from  America  may  not  be 
so  convenient  in  England  just  now,  with  the  quartern  loaf 
at  eighteen  or  nineteen  pence,  and  all  the  importation  of 
grain  and  flour  from  France,  of  which  they  boasted  so  much 
last  year,  prohibited  not  only  by  law  but  by  scarcity. 

The  effects  of  our  non-importation  are  doubtless  felt  and 
pretty  strongly  felt  in  England,  nor  is  there  any  doubt  of  her 
disposition  to  retaliate  whenever  retaliation  shall  not  con¬ 
sist  in  self  starvation.  There  was  no  inconsiderable  pains 
taken  last  summer  to  demonstrate  in  Parliament  and  to  the 
public  that  England  was  quite  independent  of  America  for 
supplies  of  bread ,  and  official  statements  were  published  to 
show  that  in  the  course  of  the  preceding  year  more  than 
double  the  quantity  of  the  staff  of  life  had  been  imported 
from  France  to  that  which  had  come  from  the  United  States. 
The  strength  of  this  argument  rested  on  the  position  that 
France  was  an  infallible  source  of  subsistence  for  England, 
and  that  it  was  better  to  depend  upon  France  for  subsis¬ 
tence  than  upon  America.  Therefore  England  might  boldly 
threaten  America  with  non-importation,  and  even  proceed  to 
war  with  perfect  indifference  as  to  the  consequences.  This 
calculation  has  been  for  the  present  disconcerted  by  a  scanty 
harvest  in  France.  The  Emperor  Napoleon  says  that  nine 


320 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

years  of  abundance  in  France  have  been  succeeded  by  one 
year  of  mediocrity.  That  is  to  say  a  year  when  famine  has 
driven  the  people  to  such  riotous  extremities  that  in  one  city 
he  has  been  shooting  a  number  of  men  and  women  to  pre¬ 
serve  peace.  He  has  also  been  obliged  to  provide  two  mil¬ 
lions  of  Rumford  soups  a  day,  from  April  to  September,  to 
be  distributed  throughout  the  Empire.  A  good  harvest 
in  France  the  present  year  will  doubtless  supply  the  de¬ 
ficiencies  of  the  last,  but  will  not  produce  grain  sufficient  for 
her  own  consumption,  and  although  she  may  this  year  have 
markets  open  to  her  which  for  some  years  past  have  been 
closed,  yet  for  her  own  wants,  as  well  as  for  those  of  her 
armies  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  she  must  depend  upon  im¬ 
portation  from  America.  Her  threats  of  retaliation  upon 
non-importation  are  therefore  not  very  formidable,  and 
whether  she  perseveres  in  her  present  system  of  war  with 
the  language  of  peace,  or  proceeds  to  that  of  open  and  avowed 
war,  I  am  persuaded  the  event  will  prove  to  all  who  have 
eyes  to  see  or  ears  to  hear  that  her  dependence  upon  com¬ 
mercial  intercourse  with  us  is  more  essential  to  her  than  ours 
upon  her  is  to  us.  Her  government,  however,  has  not  yet 
acquired  this  conviction  nor  is  it  probable  they  will  until  the 
evidence  of  it  shall  be  more  clear  and  unequivocal  than  five 
years  of  experience  has  yet  proved  it.  .  .  . 

1  May,  1812. 

In  a  Hamburg  newspaper  which  I  received  last  evening 
there  is  a  paragraph,  dated  London,  28  March,  asserting  by 
letters  that  morning  arrived  from  Liverpool  it  appeared  an 
embargo  was  laid  upon  all  the  American  vessels  there  until 
the  arrival  of  dispatches  expected  from  America;  and  an¬ 
other  article,  dated  31  March,  announced  that  the  41st 
regiment  and  the  4th  battalion  of  the  50th  and  103  d  regi¬ 
ments  had  received  orders  to  embark  for  America,  and  that 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


321 


1812] 

the  Lord  Mayor  of  London  had  again  advanced  the  price 
of  bread  three  pence  sterling  the  quartern  loaf.  If  this  in¬ 
formation  is  correct,  as  I  think  it  now  probable  it  is,  the 
British  government  have  come  to  their  determination,  and 
are  resolved  upon  a  war  with  the  United  States.  They  have 
probably  chosen  their  time  for  this  measure  when  they  sup¬ 
pose  it  cannot  be  known  in  time  to  stop  the  supplies  which  can 
be  shipped  before  the  new  harvest  comes  in.  They  doubtless 
calculate  also  upon  having  a  new  market  opened  to  them  in 
the  Baltic.  They  certainly  have  reason  for  trusting  in  some 
degree  to  this  resource,  but  the  armies  assembled  in  the  north 
of  Europe  must  so  greatly  increase  the  consumption  on  this 
part  of  the  continent  that  the  most  abundant  granaries  will 
have  no  extraordinary  superfluity  to  send  abroad. 

I  have  been  sincerely  and  anxiously  desirous  that  this  war 
might  ultimately  be  avoided.  I  saw  little  prospect  of  any 
ultimate  benefit  to  be  derived  from  it  to  my  own  country, 
and  I  could  not  look  forward  to  its  possible  consequences 
upon  our  internal  organizations  without  some  apprehen¬ 
sion.  But  as  it  must  come,  I  feel  great  consolation  in  the 
spirit  of  unanimity  which  appears  to  have  marked  the  late 
proceedings  in  Congress,  and  hope  it  is  a  solid  pledge  of  that 
which  will  carry  us  through  this  trial  with  honor  and  success. 
The  present  English  ministry  have  assumed  as  a  principle 
that  there  shall  be  no  neutrality  upon  the  ocean.  Between 
submission  to  this  edict  of  expulsion  from  one  of  the  most  im¬ 
portant  common  possessions  of  mankind,  and  a  war  to  main¬ 
tain  our  right  to  it,  the  United  States  have  exhausted  every 
expedient  that  wisdom  could  suggest  and  honor  could  en¬ 
dure.  To  forego  the  right  of  navigating  the  ocean  would 
be  a  pusillanimity  which  of  itself  would  degrade  us  from  the 
rank  and  rights  of  an  independent  nation.  Yet  it  has  been 
too  clearly  demonstrated  that  nothing  but  force  can  now 


322 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

maintain  it.  That  Britain  should  abuse  her  maritime 
power  in  the  consciousness  of  its  superiority  is  so  conform¬ 
able  to  the  ordinary  experience  of  mankind  that  it  is  hardly 
worth  while  to  indulge  our  indignation  upon  seeing  it.  But 
as  it  is  the  nature  of  the  serpent  to  sting,  it  is  the  duty  of  man 
to  bruise  his  head  for  self-protection.  On  the  high  seas  we 
have  no  resource  and  can  have  no  efficacious  defence  against 
her.  But  she  has  vulnerable  parts,  and  I  pray  to  God  that 
those  who  have  the  administration  of  our  public  affairs  may 
have  studied  and  discovered  where  they  are  situated,  and 
prepared  to  touch  them  till  she  shall  feel. 

As  the  embargo  at  Liverpool  must  undoubtedly  be  ex¬ 
tended  to  the  other  ports  of  the  British  islands,  it  will  doubt¬ 
less  have  been  combined  with  orders  to  take  and  carry  in 
vessels  at  sea.  In  that  case  we  shall  have  no  access  to  or 
from  the  Baltic  the  present  year,  and  I  must  at  all  events 
be  disappointed  in  the  wish  of  having  my  sons  come  to  me. 
I  expressly  requested  in  my  former  letters  to  you  and  to 
Mr.  Gray  that  they  might  not  be  sent,  if  we  should  have 
war  with  England.  I  shall  on  many  accounts  regret  the  loss 
of  our  commercial  intercourse  with  Russia,  but  it  has  already 
become  the  last  year  much  less  advantageous,  though  vastly 
more  extensive  than  the  preceding  seasons.  And  the  pros¬ 
pects  of  the  present  year  are  more  unfavorable  than  they 
have  ever  been  before.  A  war  between  France  and  Russia, 
now  more  than  probable,  will  necessarily  open  all  the  ports 
of  this  country  to  the  English  flag  with  advantages  of  com¬ 
merce  with  which  we  could  not  stand  a  competition.  All  the 
articles  of  merchandise  that  our  vessels  bring  here  are  the 
same  of  which  the  English  have  such  floods  to  pour  upon  the 
continent  when  once  open  to  them.  The  only  exception  is 
cotton,  of  which  even  now,  just  at  the  opening  of  a  new  year’s 
navigation,  the  market  is  so  overstocked  that  it  can  scarcely 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


323 


1812] 

be  sold  at  its  first  cost  in  America.  There  has  been  during 
the  last  year  a  great  outlet  to  foreign  merchandise  by  land 
carriage  from  this  country  into  Germany.  But  as  all  Ger¬ 
many  will  be  in  alliance  with  France  against  Russia,  the 
moment  the  war  breaks  out  all  commercial  intercourse  will 
be  stopped,  and  all  the  issues  of  exportation  choked  up. 
The  consumption  of  these  colonial  merchandise  in  this 
country  is  very  small,  and  scarcely  sufficient  to  afford  a 
market  for  fifty  vessels  in  a  year.  When  the  English  will 
have  many  hundreds  flocking  here  the  chance  of  ours  in 
competition  with  them  must  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  be 
equivalent  to  a  total  loss  of  the  voyage  and  cargo.  If  there 
should  between  Russia  and  France  be  no  war,  I  do  not  yet 
believe  that  England  will  venture  upon  one  against  us. 
I  think,  therefore,  that  our  merchants  must  on  every  pos¬ 
sible  contingency  renounce  all  hope  of  a  profitable  trade  with 
Russia  this  year. 

•  •••••• 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  84.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  9  May,  1812. 

Sir: 

Since  the  departure  of  the  Emperor  Alexander,  the  opinion 
has  been  more  generally  prevalent  that  previous  to  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  hostilities,  a  personal  interview  between  him 
and  the  Emperor  Napoleon  will  take  place,  and  the  expecta¬ 
tion  appears  to  be  generally  entertained  that  the  result  of  it 
will  be  a  pacific  arrangement,  which  may  still  avert  the  war 
now  so  imminent.  The  official  notification  of  the  Emperor’s 
journey,  a  copy  of  which  was  enclosed  with  my  last  letter,  as 


324 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

you  will  perceive,  assigns  the  ordinary  review  of  his  troops, 
and  the  inspection  of  some  of  his  provinces  as  the  motives  for 
his  absence  from  the  capital.  Thus  studiously  is  every  expres¬ 
sion  still  avoided  which  might  intimate  a  design  of  war,  and  a 
similar  caution  is  observed  in  every  public  document  of  the 
other  party.  In  the  last  conversation  I  had  with  the  Chan¬ 
cellor  he  explicitly  told  me  there  was  no  cause  of  war  be¬ 
tween  France  and  Russia,  and  the  French  ambassador  has 
very  recently  and  repeatedly  told  me  the  same  thing.  It 
is  now,  however,  ascertained  that  if  the  war  should  com¬ 
mence  both  Austria  and  Prussia  will  take  part  in  it  as  allies 
of  France.  How  far  this  event  was  expected  I  do  not  posi¬ 
tively  know.  I  believe  that  it  was  sufficiently  seen  that 
Prussia  could  do  no  otherwise;  but  until  very  lately  the 
neutrality  of  Austria  was  considered  as  certain,  and  there 
were  even  hopes  entertained  that  she  would  eventually  side 
with  this  country.  Of  her  neutrality  the  most  positive 
assurances  were  given  by  her  minister  here,  who  appears 
to  have  been  as  much  surprised  as  anyone,  at  the  information 
which  was  lately  communicated  from  Sweden  of  an  alliance 
offensive  and  defensive  between  France  and  Austria,  signed 
at  Paris  on  the  14th  of  March.  This  alliance  was  made 
known  to  the  Swedish  government  by  a  communication  from 
the  Austrian  ambassador  who  signed  the  treaty,  Prince 
Schwarzenburg,  accompanied  with  a  proposition  from  Aus¬ 
tria  to  Sweden,  to  accede  to  the  treaty.  The  proposition  is 
said  to  have  been  rejected  immediately  by  Sweden,  although 
it  was  baited  with  an  offer,  extending  not  only  to  the  restora¬ 
tion  of  Finland,  but  to  the  recovery  of  all  the  provinces  on 
the  Baltic  which  belonged  to  Sweden  before  the  conquests 
of  Peter  the  Great. 

The  combination  of  power  which  now  threatens  this  country 
is  so  formidable  that  in  entering  upon  the  war  she  can  scarcely 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


325 


1812] 

calculate  upon  any  rational  foundation  that  she  will  issue  from 
it  without  loss  of  territory  and  of  relation d  But  it  seems  to  be 
the  genius  of  war  to  disappoint  the  calculations  of  human 
foresight.  With  means  far  inferior,  Frederick  the  Second  of 
Prussia  defeated  a  coalition  of  greater  power,  and  the  result 
of  our  own  revolution  was  equally  wide  from  the  prognosti¬ 
cations  of  those  statesmen  who  never  reckon,  because  they 
cannot  foresee,  the  operations  of  time  and  chance.  In  the 
war  of  the  Spanish  succession  the  death  of  one  man,  and  in 
the  seven  years  war  the  death  of  one  woman,  produced  a 
revolution,  not  only  upon  the  military  aspect  of  the  war,  but 
upon  all  the  political  relations  and  views  of  the  parties,  which 
an  hundred  battles,  and  years  and  years  of  alternate  dis¬ 
asters  and  mutual  destruction,  had  not  been  able  to  accom¬ 
plish.  There  is  doubtless  now  existing  one  individual,  upon 
whose  thread  of  life  the  destinies  of  mankind  are  suspended 
much  more  than  they  could  ever  be  supposed  to  be  upon  the 
life  of  Joseph  I  of  Austria,  or  of  the  Empress  Elizabeth. 
It  is  a  life  too ,  in  the  nature  of  things ,  more  exposed  to  sudden 
and  violent  extinction ,  than  that  of  ordinary  men .  Setting  aside , 
however ,  the  accidents  which  may  befall  this  one  person ,  it  now 
appears  that  war  is  certain ,  and  in  general  that  its  event  must 
correspond  with  those  of  the  preceding  wars ,  since  the  ascend¬ 
ancy  of  France ,  in  the  political  situation  of  Europe ,  was  es¬ 
tablished  on  the  basis  of  conscription .l 

Mr.  Speyer  informs  me  by  a  letter  from  Stockholm  of  14 
April  that  the  Prince  Royal  had  desired  him  to  inform  the 
government  of  the  United  States,  that  England  would  ac¬ 
knowledge  the  neutrality  of  Sweden,  and  that  the  ports  of 
Sweden  would  be  open  for  the  admission  of  neutrals  and  of 
all  sorts  of  merchandise.2  A  very  important  question  how¬ 
ever  remains  upon  my  mind,  which  Mr.  Speyer’s  letter  has 

1  Cypher.  2  Due  to  Thornton’s  mission. 


326 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

not  solved,  and  upon  which  I  have  been  equally  unable  to 
obtain  a  satisfactory  elucidation  from  the  Swedish  special 
mission  now  here.  That  is,  what  England  understands  by 
acknowledging  the  neutrality  of  Sweden?  Whether  for  in¬ 
stance  she  intends  to  allow  to  Sweden  the  common  rights 
of  neutral  commercial  intercourse  with  France  and  her 
dependencies?  If  she  does,  she  must  abandon  the  Orders  in 
Council.  If  she  does  not,  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  France 
should  recognize  a  neutrality  of  so  equivocal  a  nature. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  arrived  at  Wilna  the  14/26  April. 
Previous  to  his  departure  from  this  city,  the  forces  on  the 
frontiers  had  been  distributed  into  three  armies.  The  first 
called  the  First  Army  of  the  West,  to  the  command  of  which 
the  General  of  Infantry,  Barclai  de  Tolly  was  appointed, 
holding  at  the  same  time  the  office  of  Minister  at  War. 
The  second  army,  called  the  Army  of  the  Danube,  is  that 
which  had  heretofore  been  called  the  Moldavian  army,  and 
remains  under  the  command  of  the  General  of  Infantry, 
Count  Golenischtscheff  Kutuzoff.  And  the  third  denom¬ 
inated  the  Second  Army  of  the  West,  is  commanded  by  the 
General  of  Infantry,  Prince  Bagration.  There  is  no  com¬ 
mander  in  chief,  other  than  the  Emperor  himself. 

The  number  of  troops  composing  these  three  armies 
amounts  to  upwards  of  four  hundred  thousand  effective  men, 
in  addition  to  which  there  are  directed  to  be  formed  three 
armies  of  reserve,  consisting  of  more  than  one  hundred 
thousand  men  each.  Eighteen  new  divisions  of  infantry 
have  been  added  to  the  former  number  of  twenty-nine  and 
the  divisions  of  cavalry  have  been  increased  from  eight  to 
sixteen.  In  the  month  of  November  last  a  levy  of  four  men 
to  each  500  had  been  raised,  and  in  March  a  further  levy  of 
two  to  500,  upon  the  basis  of  a  new  census,  was  directed. 
The  returns  of  this  census  shew  the  population  of  the  Empire 


327 


1812]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 

to  be  more  than  forty  millions  of  souls.  I  am  with  great 
respect,  etc. 


TO  WILLIAM  PLUMER 


St.  Petersburg,  13  May,  1812. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  had  seen  since  I  left  the  United  States  only  one  number 
of  the  Boston  Anthology ,  but  I  had  known  long  before  that 
there  was  nothing  to  support  it  but  the  spirit  of  faction. 
The  Port  Folio  had  for  several  years  lived  upon  the  plunder 
from  the  English  periodical  journals.  Of  the  Register  1  I  do 
not  recollect  having  ever  known  so  much  as  the  name  until 
you  announced  to  me  the  publication  of  its  sixth  volume  after 
the  death  of  its  editor.  I  had  read  one  or  two  of  his  pam¬ 
phlets  which,  although  manifesting  an  extent  of  knowledge 
seldom  possessed  by  our  political  writers,  had  by  no  means 
tended  to  my  edification.  Mr.  Walsh’s  learned  labors  have 
also  reached  me.  They  had  proved  so  acceptable  in  England 
that  sufficient  care  had  been  taken  to  circulate  them  from 
thence  upon  the  continent. 

Walsh’s  talents  appear  to  have  excited  in  America  a  sort 
of  enthusiasm  of  delusion  which  has  much  abated  since  the 
appearance  of  his  first  work.  His  picture  of  England  was 
utterly  false  and  adapted  only  to  flatter  the  prejudices  of  that 
party  among  us  who,  having  more  money  than  wit,  eagerly 
snatched  at  everything  which  with  an  assurance  of  informa¬ 
tion  and  argument  furnished  a  prop  to  their  darling  delusions. 
He  made  a  very  feeble  attempt  to  extricate  himself  from  the 
net  of  his  own  misrepresentations  by  a  semblance  of  censure 
1  American  Register ,  edited  by  Charles  Brockden  Brown. 


328 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

upon  the  British  administration  then  in  power;  but  even 
that  line  of  discrimination,  faint  as  it  was,  made  it  impossible 
for  him  to  pursue  any  system  of  politics  without  plunging 
himself  into  the  most  absurd  inconsistencies.  The  true  pic¬ 
ture  of  England  would  have  been  as  dark  and  odious  as  he 
had  made  that  of  France.  Had  he  presented  it  to  the  public 
he  would  have  shown  an  independent  spirit  and  a  mind  re¬ 
gardful  of  truth.  But  his  book  would  have  had  fewer  edi¬ 
tions  in  America  and  none  at  all  in  Europe,  and  he  must 
have  renounced  the  project  of  publishing  a  periodical  journal 
by  subscription. 

The  proceedings  in  Congress  having  relation  to  foreign 
affairs  are  generally  noticed  in  the  English  newspapers,  and 
through  them  I  receive  information  of  them  from  time  to 
time,  though  occasionally  distorted  by  comments  which 
have  their  primary  source  in  America.  But  of  the  transac¬ 
tion  in  the  state  legislatures,  and  even  of  their  composition  as 
respects  parties,  I  hear  little  or  nothing  beyond  the  result  of 
elections.  Your  letters  have  contained  the  principal  in¬ 
formation  of  current  politics  that  have  found  their  way  to 
me.  Most  of  my  other  friends  are  deterred  from  writing  by 
an  apprehension  which  our  experience  has  shown  to  be  too 
well  founded,  that  their  letters  if  they  ever  reach  me  will 
have  been  broken  open  and  read  by  others  on  their  way. 
The  same  consideration  has  often  restrained  me  from  writ¬ 
ing  and  will  now  serve  as  my  excuse  to  you  for  saying  only 
what  privateersmen  and  admiralty  judges,  lieutenants  of 
men  of  war,  and  ministers  of  state,  pickpockets  and  high¬ 
waymen  by  land  or  by  sea,  may  read  without  temptation 
to  divert  it  from  its  destination  or  pervert  it  to  their  own 
purposes. 

In  reflecting  upon  your  observations  with  regard  to  the 
policy  of  a  war  with  England  I  am  happy  to  find  your  opin- 


1812]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  329 

ion  perfectly  concurring  with  my  own.  We  want  neither 
provocation  nor  cause  of  war.  But  unfortunately  neither 
the  most  righteous  cause  nor  the  most  atrocious  provocation 
are  the  principal  objects  of  calculation  when  the  question 
is  upon  the  policy  of  war.  They  decide  indeed  the  question 
of  its  justice,  but  have  very  little  weight  upon  that  of  its 
prudence.  The  effect  of  a  war  upon  our  national  character 
and  institutions  would  probably  be  great  and  I  hope  favor¬ 
able.  That  we  should  be  destined  to  enjoy  a  perpetual 
peace,  however  ardently  humanity  may  desire  it,  can  not 
reasonably  be  expected.  If  war  is  not  the  natural  state  of 
human  society  at  all  times,  it  is  that  of  the  age  upon  which 
we  have  fallen.  The  spirit  of  ambition,  of  glory  and  of  con¬ 
quest  burns  in  Europe  with  an  intenseness  beyond  all  former 
example.  France  and  England  are  equally  inflamed  with  it 
and  consuming  under  it.  The  present  prime  minister  of 
England,  who  appears  to  be  firmly  rooted  in  that  station, 
has  openly  avowed  the  purpose  of  endless  war.  France, 
without  making  the  profession,  has  a  government  whose 
temptations  to  war  are  far  more  alluring,  and  whose  success 
by  war  has  been  far  more  fascinating  than  those  which  have 
inspired  the  British  delirium.  The  result,  however,  is  the 
same.  War  is  now  the  permanent  political  system  of  both 
nations  and  conquest  is  the  object  of  both.  Neither  our 
distance  nor  the  intervening  ocean  can  or  will  protect  us 
from  the  consequences  of  this  European  spirit  and  its  applica¬ 
tion  sooner  or  later  to  ourselves.  It  has  indeed  already  been 
applied  partially  to  the  only  part  of  our  lawful  possessions 
which  the  power  of  the  belligerents  could  reach,  that  is  our 
rights  upon  the  ocean  and  our  commerce.  Partially  I  say, 
because  even  yet  neither  Britain  nor  France  has  formally 
and  officially  interdicted  all  neutrality.  But  they  have 
assumed  the  principle  that  neutral  commerce  depends  solely 


330 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

upon  the  toleration  of  the  belligerents,  and  they  tolerate 
only  as  much  as  they  find  necessary  to  their  own  purposes. 
If  we  should  abandon  our  commerce  to  the  plundering  of 
Europe  it  could  not  be  long  before  we  should  be  called  to 
defend  our  territory  against  them.  There  are  many  among 
us  who  think  we  should  wait  for  that  moment  as  the  signal 
for  resistance.  It  may  be  doubtful  whether  our  commerce 
is  perceptible  of  defence  by  war,  or  worth  this  inevitable 
cost  at  which  alone  it  can  be  defended.  But  to  stay  for  the 
moment  of  invasion  to  make  preparation  against  it  would 
greatly  increase  its  dangers  and  its  calamities.  Real  prepa¬ 
ration,  therefore,  rather  than  present  war  appears  to  be  our 
right  policy,  and  in  the  idea  of  preparation  I  include  a  deliber¬ 
ate  consideration  of  all  our  latent  resources  of  our  means 
offensive  and  defensive  and  of  the  spirit  necessary  to  call 
them  forth. 

•  •••••• 

I  am  etc. 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  22  May,  1812. 

•  •••••• 

Although  I  do  not  get  newspapers  often  enough  and  in 
variety  enough  to  find  them  insupportably  tedious,  the  very 
caput  mortuum  of  dulness,  yet  those  that  I  do  get  are  not 
always  of  the  right  kind  to  give  me  the  information  in  which 
I  feel  the  strongest  interest.  I  receive  also  a  regular  file  of 
the  National  Intelligencer ,  and  have  it  now  down  to  the  25th 
of  February  last.  The  debates  in  Congress  are  not  what  you 
understand  as  included  in  my  complaints  of  dulness,  though 
even  among  them  I  find  some  of  my  old  acquaintance  sus- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


33i 


1812] 

pended  occasionally  in  the  midst  of  their  eloquence  by  the 
discovery  that  there  is  not  a  quorum  of  the  House  to  hear 
them.  But  for  the  last  two  years  I  have  never  had  a  steady 
succession  of  Boston  papers,  and  know  very  imperfectly  the 
transactions  of  the  Massachusetts  legislature.  I  have  even 
seen  only  scattered  numbers  of  the  Patriot ,  and  have  read 
only  scattered  fragments  of  the  historical  correspondence 
published  in  it.  Your  appointment  as  Chief  Justice  of  the 
court  of  Common  Pleas  I  learnt  by  letters  from  my  mother 
and  from  Mr.  Plumer  of  New  Hampshire.  Mr.  Everett 
wrote  me  from  London  that  there  has  been  an  entire  new 
organization  of  the  courts  of  Common  Pleas,  and  this  was 
all  that  I  knew  about  it,  until  your  letter  informed  me  that 
the  Common  Pleas  were  metamorphosed  into  a  Circuit 
Court,  and  that  your  colleagues  were  Mr.  N.  Mitchell  and 
Mr.  Ware  of  Wrentham.  Others  write  me  that  they  say 
nothing  of  these  matters  because  I  shall  hear  them  all  from 
you.  And  you  tell  me  that  you  omit  them  because  I  shall 
hear  them  from  others.  I  am  therefore  still  in  a  great 
measure  ignorant  how  big  the  spot  of  work  cut  out  by  the 
legislature  of  last  year  for  somebody  to  do  was,  though  I  am 
very  glad  that  so  much  of  it  was  to  be  done  by  you. 

Your  Massachusetts  election  for  the  ensuing  year  is  at  the 
moment  that  I  write  decided.  I  regret  very  much  that  Mr. 
Gray  determined  to  decline  a  reelection.  I  can  indeed  con¬ 
ceive  that  he  could  not  conveniently  spare  the  time  which  his 
office  necessarily  absorbed,  but  who  could  be  required  to 
sacrifice  his  time  with  more  reason  than  Mr.  Gray?  You 
have  not  informed  me,  neither  have  I  heard  from  any  other 
source,  why  the  federal  candidates  of  the  two  preceding  years 
was  laid  aside,  or  how  the  sage  of  Northampton  was  pre¬ 
vailed  upon  to  be  held  up  again  for  the  prize  of  a  contested 
election.  Mr.  Strong  has  at  least  taken  no  part  in  these 


332 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

violent  and  dangerous  councils  which  produced  the  eleva¬ 
tion  of  Mr.  Gore.  He  was  more  cool,  more  cautious  and 
more  moderate  during  his  former  administrations  than 
Gore.  He  made  no  sacrifices  to  the  frenzy  of  faction,  nor 
to  the  most  inveterate  national  enemies  of  his  country.  I 
hope  he  never  encouraged  any  symptoms  of  a  system  for 
dissolving  the  Union.  Should  the  event  of  the  Massachusetts 
election  show  a  new  change  in  the  politics  of  the  state,  I 
think  it  could  now  have  no  eflFect  upon  the  general  politics 
of  the  nation.  But  the  hands  of  the  federal  government 
would  be  unhappily  weakened  at  a  time  when  the  welfare 
of  the  country  most  imperiously  demands  that  they  should 
be  strengthened,  with  such  a  state  as  Massachusetts  in  op¬ 
position  to  the  government  of  the  Union. 

The  complexion  of  all  the  accounts  that  I  have  received 
from  America  since  the  meeting  of  Congress  has  been  warlike, 
and  if  war  must  come  it  may  be  as  advantageously  waged 
by  us  at  this  time  as  it  probably  ever  can  be.  The  British 
Orders  of  Council,  the  direct  cause  of  war,  appear  to  be 
more  firmly  fixed  in  the  system  of  English  policy  than  ever. 
The  manufacturing  towns  in  the  west  and  the  north  of  Eng¬ 
land  are  suffering  the  natural  consequences  of  this  system, 
and  they  have  begun  to  show  tempers  in  a  shape  hideous 
enough  in  the  eyes  of  most  ministers,  but  which  appears  to 
be  viewed  with  perfect  coolness  and  indifference  by  Mr. 
Perceval,  in  the  shape  of  famine.  Liverpool,  Nottingham, 
Leeds,  Manchester,  Sheffield,  all  the  flourishing  towns  which 
had  grown  and  prospered  entirely  by  the  intercourse  with 
America,  are  precisely  the  places  where  hunger  is  now  break¬ 
ing  down  the  stone  walls.  But  Mr.  Perceval  says  it  is  only 
because  the  last  year’s  harvest  was  a  bad  one,  and  has  no 
connection  whatever  with  the  Orders  in  Council;  and  Mr. 
Stephen  echoed  back  the  word  of  Mr.  Perceval  with  an  elo- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


333 


1812] 

quent  panegyric  upon  that  great  man.  That  there  is,  or 
very  shortly  will  be,  a  famine  in  that  part  of  England  seems 
highly  probable.  But  the  soldiers  are  there  to  shoot  down 
rioters,  men,  women  or  children,  and  with  their  aid  Perceval 
will  get  along  until  the  next  harvest.  In  the  meantime  there 
is  too  much  reason  to  apprehend  a  new  incident  in  the 
tragedy  of  European  affairs  which  will  prolong  the  struggle 
perhaps  for  years.  There  is  now  a  great  scarcity  of  grain  on 
this  continent  as  well  as  in  England.  In  France  it  ap¬ 
proaches  already  to  a  famine,  but  the  prospects  of  the 
present  harvest  are  good  and  that  country  is  so  situated 
that  even  as  early  as  June  the  soil  produces  some  resources 
to  assist  in  feeding  the  people.  This  country  to  the  very 
neighborhood  of  St.  Petersburg  is  a  land  of  grain,  and  in 
ordinary  times  exports  large  quantities  of  it.  But  the 
scarcity  is  felt  even  here  and  the  exportation  is  prohibited 
from  all  the  Russian  ports  in  the  Baltic.  Poland  is  one  of 
the  granaries  of  Europe.  And  Mr.  Perceval  stated  during 
the  last  year  grain  had  been  imported  from  France  to  the 
amount  of  eight  millions.  It  is  from  America,  chiefly  if  not 
altogether,  that  England  must  now  depend  for  relief  from 
famine,  and  notwithstanding  the  promise  of  a  fine  harvest 
in  France  this  year  as  the  consumption  of  the  present 
season  must  encroach  upon  the  production  of  the  next. 
As  not  only  the  armies  in  Spain  but  the  innumerable  myriads 
in  the  north  must  be  fed  while  destroying  the  sources  of  sub¬ 
sistence,  I  think  it  is  to  say  the  least  extremely  probable 
that  for  the  next  year  England  will  obtain  no  more  supply 
from  the  continent  than  she  does  at  present.  England  never 
produces  grain  sufficient  for  her  own  consumption.  I  have 
heard,  but  not  by  information  of  which  I  am  perfectly  sure, 
that  the  prospect  of  harvest  this  year  there  is  bad.  If  the 
scarcity  and  the  dependence  upon  America  should  continue 


334 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

during  the  next  year,  it  will  give  us  a  new  hold  upon  the 
pacific  dispositions  of  England,  of  which  I  hope  we  shall  avail 
ourselves  in  the  most  suitable  manner. 

•  •  •  •  •  •  • 

I  remain  etc. 


TO  WILLIAM  GRAY 

St.  Petersburg,  24  May,  1812. 

Dear  Sir: 

•  •••••• 

The  property  which  you  sent  here  last  year  has  I  believe 
all  been  disposed  of  except  the  cotton,  the  market  for  which 
has  been  during  the  whole  winter  irretrievably  bad.  The 
exchange  upon  England  has  indeed  been  so  favorable  for 
remitting  that  if  the  proceeds  could  safely  have  been  sent 
to  London,  it  might  have  been  advisable  to  sell  even  at  the 
low  prices  which  were  to  be  obtained.  At  the  very  time  of 
the  year  when  the  exchanges  here  were  wont  to  be  the  lowest, 
they  were  this  last  season  upon  England  nearly  one  hundred 
per  cent  above  par.  They  have  now  fallen  again  to  13  and 
14  pence  which  allowing  for  the  depreciation  of  the  English 
paper  is  only  about  ten  per  cent  above  par.  But  as  it  is 
generally  believed  that  an  English  subsidy  will  be  to  be 
remitted  during  the  present  year,  and  as  a  free  trade  from 
England  is  considered  as  certain,  the  exchange  still  continues 
thus  high  with  the  prospect  in  the  course  of  the  summer  of 
rising  yet  much  higher. 

Mr.  Woodward,  after  waiting  as  long  as  any  possibility 
remained  for  an  improvement  of  the  market  here  before 
the  opening  of  this  season,  determined  to  try  the  experi¬ 
ment  of  another,  and  sent  off  by  land  the  largest  part  of  your 
cotton  for  Vienna.  Several  speculations  of  the  same  kind 


1812]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  33$ 

previously  undertaken  by  Americans  here  have  proved 
successful  and  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  this  will  prove 
so,  if  the  goods  can  reach  the  Austrian  borders  before  their 
introduction  is  prohibited  by  the  Austrian  government. 
This  prohibition  is  now  expected  from  day  to  day,  and  your 
cotton  remains  yet  exposed  to  its  chances;  but  if  it  gets  in 
before  the  door  is  shut,  the  advantage  of  its  expedition  will 
be  proportionally  great.  Messrs.  Raimbert  and  Co.  were 
very  reluctant  at  this  undertaking  on  account  of  its  hazards 
which  were  certainly  great.  Mr.  Woodward  undertook 
it  against  their  opinion  and  upon  his  own  responsibility.  But 
I  ought  in  justice  to  him  to  say  that  he  consulted  me  before 
he  came  to  the  final  resolution  and  took  it  with  my  approba¬ 
tion.  There  was  no  possible  market  here.  To  have  kept 
the  cotton  here  until  the  summer  would  have  been  equiva¬ 
lent  to  the  certainty  of  a  total  loss.  The  chances  that  it 
would  arrive  in  Austria  before  the  prohibition  should  be 
issued  were  great  and  fair.  They  have  indeed  become  much 
more  unfavorable  since  it  was  sent  away.  The  Austrian 
alliance  with  France  was  then  not  even  concluded;  here  it 
was  not  so  much  as  expected.  That  event  has  reduced  to  a 
certainty  the  final  prohibition  (if  war  should  ensue)  which 
was  then  only  probable.  The  Prussian  prohibition  had  not 
been  issued;  that  came  out  on  the  16th  of  April.  The  choice 
then  was  between  the  certainty  of  a  very  heavy  loss  here 
and  the  risk  of  an  unsuccessful  adventure  and  the  chance  of  a 
very  profitable  one  to  Vienna.  At  the  very  moment  while  I 
am  writing  I  receive  a  note  from  Mr.  Woodward  (who  is 
confined  by  an  indisposition)  by  which  I  find  that  unfortu¬ 
nate  delays  have  occurred  in  the  expediting  of  the  greatest 
part  of  your  cotton  from  Moscow,  which  greatly  increase 
the  danger  of  their  arriving  too  late.  Where  the  fault  of 
this  want  of  diligence  is  chargeable  I  cannot  undertake  to 


336 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

say.  I  have  constantly  supposed  that  in  the  execution  of 
the  business  all  proper  precautions  would  be  taken.  They 
are  at  last  gone  from  Moscow  and  I  hope,  but  cannot  say 
confidently,  that  they  will  still  be  in  time.  I  shall  continue 
to  pay  all  the  attention  to  your  concerns  here  in  my  power. 
I  have  often  indeed  entered  into  the  detail  of  them  to  the 
full  extent  of  what  I  thought  compatible  with  propriety  and 
delicacy  to  those  who  are  specially  charged  with  them  by  you. 
I  shall  still  do  so  whenever  I  shall  think  your  interest  can 
be  promoted  by  it.  The  caution  which  I  suggested  to  you 
in  my  letter  of  12  June  last  respecting  the  house  of  Raim- 
bert  and  Co.  has  become  doubly  necessary  in  the  present 
state  of  things.  I  still  confide  in  them .  But  political  revo¬ 
lutions  must  affect  their  condition.  I  am  glad  you  suspended 
the  order  to  them  for  making  further  purchases  on  your  ac¬ 
count,  and  repeat  the  recommendation  of  closing  all  your 
concerns  with  them  as  soon  as  possible. 

•  •••••• 

1  am  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  85.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  27  May,  1812. 

Sir: 

On  the  1 6th  instant  I  received  your  favors  of  22nd  and  25 
February  last  with  a  packet  of  public  documents  and  another 
enclosing  the  file  of  the  National  Intelligencer  to  25  February. 
A  few  days  after  I  received  a  letter  from  Captain  Henry,1 
dated  at  Paris  enclosing  a  letter  of  introduction  of  him  from 
1  John  Henry.  See  Henry  Adams,  History ,  VI.  176. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


337 


1812] 

my  brother  to  me,  dated  at  Boston,  29  February.  From 
this  and  from  Mr.  Henry’s  own  letter  I  learned  that  it  had 
been  his  intention  to  visit  this  country,  but  that  his  journey 
hither  is  suspended  for  the  present.  What  the  purpose  of 
his  intention  was  I  am  left  to  conjecture.  The  very  inter¬ 
esting  particulars  relating  to  this  gentleman,  which  form 
the  subject  of  your  dispatch  of  22  February  have  induced  me 
to  mention  these  circumstances  to  you.  But  neither  my 
brother’s  letter  of  introduction,  nor  Mr.  Henry’s  letter  to 
me  contain  the  remotest  intimation  of  his  communications 
to  the  government,  nor  do  they  afford  a  ground  for  deter¬ 
mining  whether  you  were  acquainted  with  his  intention  to 
visit  Russia. 

I  have  in  several  of  my  recent  letters,  expressed  to  you 
the  surprise  which  has  been  excited  throughout  Europe,  at 
the  course  of  policy  pursued  during  the  last  nine  or  twelve 
months  by  Sweden.  After  the  peace  of  Fredericshamn 
(October,  1809)  there  had  been  until  last  summer  diplomatic 
missions  of  the  highest  rank  though  without  formal  character 
from  Russia  at  Stockholm  and  from  Sweden  here.  In  July 
last  they  were  on  both  sides  recalled  and  the  relations  be¬ 
tween  the  two  governments  were  respectively  committed 
to  the  care  of  a  charge  d’affaires.  The  person  appointed 
to  that  office  from  Sweden  to  this  court  was  a  Mr.  Schin- 
born,  who  had  resided  here  many  years  in  a  private  capacity, 
had  been  engaged  in  many  extraordinary  transactions,  and 
had  long  been  personally  known  to  the  Emperor  Alexander. 
He  had  gone  from  this  place  to  Stockholm  a  few  months  be¬ 
fore  the  departure  of  Count  Stedingk,  the  ambassador,  and 
while  there  had  obtained  this  appointment  of  charge  d’af¬ 
faires.  Very  soon  after  his  return  here,  by  a  special  appoint¬ 
ment  of  the  Emperor,  he  had  a  personal  interview  with  his 
Majesty.  At  that  time  there  was  a  new  levy  of  troops  in 


338 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

Sweden,  increasing  the  army  of  that  country  to  the  number 
of  60,000  men,  and  the  effecting  of  which  had  excited  serious 
disturbances  and  even  popular  commotions  in  various  parts 
of  the  Kingdom.  It  is  understood  that  in  this  conversation 
the  Emperor  noticed  the  circumstance  of  this  armament  and 
expressed  his  confidence  that  its  object  was  not  to  act  against 
Russia .  Mr.  Schinborn  who  on  such  a  sudden  occasion  could 
not  speak  with  official  authority  assured  his  Majesty ,  however , 
from  his  general  knowledge  of  the  views  of  his  government  that 
these  harbored  no  hostile  intentions  against  Russia ,  that  they 
considered  Finland  as  irretrievably  gone  not  only  by  the  cession 
formally  made  at  the  last  treaty  of  peace ,  but  by  its  natural  posi¬ 
tion  so  contiguous  to  the  rest  of  the  Russian  dominions. 1 

It  was  very  soon  after  this  that  the  altercations  between 
the  French  minister  at  Stockholm  and  the  Swedish  govern¬ 
ment  became  so  sharp  and  personal  that  Mr.  Alquier  refused 
to  communicate  officially  with  Baron  Engestrom  and  was 
finally  removed  to  Copenhagen.  Mr.  de  Cabre  was  left  as 
charge  d’affaires,  and  his  personal  conduct  has  been  unex¬ 
ceptional  and  conciliatory.  In  January  last  the  Prince 
Royal  made  a  report  to  the  king,  of  the  manner  in  which 
he  had  managed  the  administration  during  his  Majesty’s 
illness.  It  has  doubtless  been  transmitted  to  you,  and  you 
will  have  observed  the  favorable  manner  in  which  it  mentions 
the  relations  between  the  United  States  and  Sweden.  But 
it  took  little  notice  of  France,  and  that  little  was  principally 
of  complaint  against  the  piracies  of  the  French  privateers 
in  the  Baltic.  But  although  the  Prince  very  justly  remarked 
that  they  were  such  as  ought  neither  to  be  avowed  nor  au¬ 
thorized  by  any  government,  France  not  only  countenanced 
and  supported  them  but  by  way  of  reply  to  the  report,  im¬ 
mediately  invaded  and  took  possession  of  Swedish  Pomerania 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


339 


1812] 

and  forcibly  incorporated  the  troops  there  into  her  own  army. 
In  my  letter  No.  81  I  mentioned  to  you  the  substance  of  a 
verbal  communication  from  Baron  Engestrom  to  Mr.  de 
Cabre,  on  this  occasion.  It  was  immediately  afterwards 
put  into  the  form  of  an  official  note,  and  sent  to  the  Swedish 
charge  d’affaires  at  Paris  with  orders  to  present  it  to  the 
French  government.  It  arrived  there  just  after  the  conclu¬ 
sion  of  the  alliance  between  France  and  Austria,  to  which 
it  seems  Austria  had  undertaken  to  invite  Sweden  to  accede. 
The  Duke  of  Bassano  prevailed  upon  the  Swedish  charge 
d’affaires  to  wait  for  new  instructions  from  his  Court  before 
he  presented  the  note;  but  the  Austrian  proposition  was 
immediately  rejected  by  Sweden;  the  forbearance  of  the 
charge  d’affaires  to  present  the  note  has  been  strongly  dis¬ 
approved  and  censured,  and  new  and  peremptory  orders 
have  been  dispatched  to  him  to  present  it  without  further 
delay.  In  the  meantime  Mr.  Thornton,  the  English  nego¬ 
tiator,  has  been  received  informally  at  Stockholm,  and  there 
has  probably  undertaken  to  pledge  the  consent  of  his  govern¬ 
ment  to  the  neutrality  of  Sweden.  I  mentioned  in  my  last 
letter  my  doubts  of  what  England  will  understand  by  this 
neutrality.  [Here  two  lines  of  cypher  not  decypher ed\.  If  the 
English  Regent’s  new  proclamation  respecting  the  Orders  in 
Council  is  to  elucidate  the  English  meaning  of  neutrality, 
[here  three  lines  of  cypher  not  decyphered]  the  roots  of  that 
neutrality  are  not  very  profound. 

Monsieur  de  Narbonne,  a  person  of  high  distinction  in  the 
diplomatic  department  of  France,  after  having  been  some 
days  at  Berlin,  has  been  at  Wilna ,  where  he  had  an  interview 
with  the  Emperor  Alexander  on  the  18th  instant  and  left 
that  city  the  next  day.  This  circumstance  has  not  led  to 
any  expectation  that  the  war  will  be  averted.  I  am  with 
great  respect,  etc. 


340 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  28  May,  1812. 

•  •••••• 

Letter  writing  may  be  called  the  trade ,  or  in  old  English 
law  and  poetical  language  the  mistery  of  persons  in  my  con¬ 
dition.  To  us  therefore  it  becomes  habitually  an  object  of 
importance  to  know  whether  and  when  the  letters  we  write 
to  our  correspondents  are  received  by  them,  and  whether 
those  which  are  written  by  them  in  return  are  received  by  us. 
This  may  account  to  you  for  the  formal  stiffness  with  which 
I  number  in  regular  series  all  the  letters  that  I  write  you, 
and  for  that  with  which  I  particularize  the  time  when  I  re¬ 
ceive  every  one  of  yours  that  comes  to  hand.  The  receipt 
of  letters  from  any  of  my  friends  is  always  interesting  to 
my  feelings,  although  their  contents  must  sometimes  be, 
and  of  late  have  been  peculiarly  distressing.  From  you  every 
letter  combines  a  double  and  treble  interest,  and  even  when 
long  delayed  on  their  passage  come  with  a  welcome  almost 
as  dear  as  those  which  have  made  the  greatest  speed. 

Your  letters  continue  to  remind  me  of  my  obligations  to 
superintend  personally  the  education  of  my  eldest  boys,  and 
my  own  heart  as  constantly  reminds  me  of  my  other  motives 
for  wishing  to  return  home.  I  have  written  to  have  the 
children  sent  to  me,  if  they  can  be  sent  this  year.  I  have 
also  written  to  the  President  expressing  my  desire  not  to  be 
left  here  longer  than  another  winter,  which  will  accomplish 
the  period  of  absence  which  he  and  myself  had  contemplated 
when  he  was  pleased  to  make  me  the  offer  of  this  mission. 
I  have  no  expectation  of  enjoying  in  America  the  tranquillity, 
the  leisure,  or  the  comforts  of  various  kinds  which  naturally 
attend  my  situation  here.  My  family,  too,  after  my  return 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


34i 


1812] 

will  require  a  sort  of  provision  for  which  I  shall  be  less  pre¬ 
pared  than  when  I  left  home,  and  for  which  I  must  rely  upon 
a  gracious  Providence.  But  as  far  as  I  can  make  up  my 
mind  I  am  satisfied  that  my  duties  both  to  my  country  and 
to  my  family  beckon  me  homeward,  that  I  cannot  in  the 
nature  of  things  make  myself  so  useful  to  either  of  them  here 
as  there,  and  that  I  must  not  at  their  expense  consult  my 
own  ease  or  convenience.  I  regretted  much  that  the  op¬ 
portunity  afforded  me  for  returning  last  summer  was  neces¬ 
sarily  lost  though  by  circumstances  the  result  of  which  are 
among  my  most  precious  engagements.  But  I  retain  all 
my  sentiments  and  opinions  with  regard  to  the  office  which 
I  declined,  and  which  I  hope  and  trust  is  filled  by  a  gentle¬ 
man  better  fitted  for  it  than  I  should  have  been. 

Dr.  Johnson  indulges  himself  in  merriment  (portly  not  to 
say  coarse  merriment,  such  as  suited  his  character)  with 
Milton,  for  hastening  home  from  Italy  at  a  critical  period 
of  his  country’s  troubles  to  let  his  zeal  and  patriotism  evap¬ 
orate  in  a  private  school.  I  think  that  notwithstanding  the 
Doctor’s  grave  ridicule  I  shall  in  this  respect  follow  the  ex¬ 
ample  of  Milton.  My  design  is  to  be  the  schoolmaster  of 
my  children,  a  task  for  which  I  am  not  entirely  without  ex¬ 
perience.  I  had  taught  George  what  I  am  afraid  he  had  in 
my  absence  forgotten,  but  what  I  still  hope  was  not  entirely 
lost.  John  has  been  too  constantly  absent  from  me  since  he 
was  of  an  age  to  learn  anything,  but  I  do  not  intend  he  shall 
always  be  without  such  instruction  as  I  can  give  him. 
Charles  I  have  taken  from  the  beginning.  He  reads  French 
with  ease,  and  speaks  it  I  believe  nearly  as  well  as  most 
French  boys  of  his  age.  He  speaks  German  too,  but  without 
any  teaching  from  me.  The  English  is  of  the  three  languages 
that  which  he  is  the  most  embarrassed  in  speaking,  but  I 
am  now  teaching  him  to  read  it.  I  flatter  myself  that  with 


342 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

one  year’s  assiduity  more  he  will  read  all  three  as  well  as 
persons  full  grown.  After  having  executed  with  two  of  my 
children  the  office  of  the  schoolmistress  I  shall  not  feel 
ashamed  to  assume  with  them  the  duties  of  the  schoolmaster. 
The  question  does  indeed  sometimes  occur  to  me  whether  I 
do  not  give  them  time  which  might  be  more  usefully  em¬ 
ployed?  Possibly  there  are  meditations  more  sublime  and 
occupations  more  liberal  to  which  my  vacant  hours  might  be 
dedicated.  But  there  is  an  attraction  in  these  more  power¬ 
ful  than  in  the  others,  and  no  positive  and  commanding  sense 
of  duty  has  hitherto  diverted  me  from  them. 

You  will  ere  this  have  ample  reason  to  be  convinced  that 
Mr.  J’s  rule  of  taking  the  exact  counterpart  of  England’s  in¬ 
terest  for  the  anticipation  of  her  practical  policy  is  not 
likely  to  fail  at  this  time.1  The  Regent  since  the  restrictions 
upon  his  authority  have  expired  has  pursued  a  course  equally 
unexpected  to  his  former  friends  and  adversaries.  It  is 
perhaps  too  soon  to  pronounce  definitely  upon  its  character. 
Louis  XII  did  not  avenge  the  injuries  of  the  Duke  of  Orleans. 
The  sovereign  of  Britain  buries  in  oblivion  the  animosities 
of  the  heir  apparent.  In  this  point  of  view  he  might  say  like 
Harry  the  Fifth  in  Shakespeare  that 

Consideration  like  an  angel  came 

And  whipped  the  offending  Adam  out  of  him. 

But  other  motives  and  other  impulses  are  attributed  to  his 
present  conduct  which,  if  true,  exhibit  him  in  a  light  far  less 
heroical.  These  are  not  merely  circulated  in  the  whispers  of 
private  scandal,  they  have  been  proclaimed  by  a  peer  of  the 
realm  in  open  Parliament,  and  in  language  the  most  ener- 

1  “Mr.  Jefferson  used  to  say,  it  was  only  necessary  to  consider  what  was  the  true 
policy  of  England,  and  you  might  be  sure  that  she  would  act  directly  contrary  to 
it.”  Abigail  Adams  to  John  Quincy  Adams ,  February  11,  1812.  Ms. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


343 


1812] 

getic  and  indignant — uncontradicted.  So  that  the  only 
change  yet  discovered  at  the  head  of  that  government  is  an 
individual  unprotected  by  that  wall  of  brass  which  amidst 
the  innumerable  errors  and  miseries  and  calamities  of  the 
late  reign  surrounded  and  defended  the  person  of  the  sover¬ 
eign — a  respected  private  character.  There  is  no  symptom 
of  a  change  of  policy  towards  America. 

Of  France,  and  Russia,  and  the  European  continent,  I 
shall  say  nothing,  and  would  to  heaven  there  were  little  to 
be  said!  You  will  hear  enough  and  too  much  by  public  re¬ 
port.  Though  we  had  a  snowstorm  here  last  Monday,  being 
the  25th  day  of  May,  we  have  now  what  passes  in  this  coun¬ 
try  for  summer.  I  long  for  the  pleasure  rustication  which 
we  enjoyed  the  last  season,  but  they  are  luxuries  with  which 
I  cannot  indulge  myself.  We  are  to  pass  the  summer  in  the 
city.  .  .  . 


TO  LEVETT  HARRIS 

St.  Petersburg,  4  June,  1812. 

Sir: 

I  did  not  say  that  you  had  allowed  last  year  an  entry  into 
this  port  of  ships  under  the  American  flag  which  you  knew 
were  not  American  hut  English  ships . 

From  the  tone  and  style  of  expression  which  you  thought 
proper  to  assume  with  me  at  my  house,  in  answer  to  the 
representations  I  was  making  to  you  in  behalf  of  unfortunate 
and  injured  American  seamen,  entitled  to  your  protection, 
I  am  not  surprised  that  you  misunderstood  what  I  did  say. 


344 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 


TO  THE  CREW  OF  THE  “MONTICELLO”  AT  CRON- 

STADT 

I  have  received  your  letter  and  have  represented  to  Mr. 
Harris  your  complaints.  If  your  wages  are  at  all  recoverable 
it  must  be  through  his  means  and  those  of  Mr.  Sparrow. 

If  you  go  away  without  recovering  them,  you  will  do  well 
to  leave  your  demands  for  them  liquidated  with  Mr.  Harris, 
or  with  some  person  who  may  hereafter  recover  them  for 
you.  My  advice  to  those  of  you  who  are  real  Americans  is, 
not  to  ship  in  any  vessel  which  came  here  with  false  Amer¬ 
ican  colors. 

I  am  your  friend  and  well-wisher 
St.  Petersburg,  June  4,  1812. 

TO  LEVETT  HARRIS 

Sir: 

I  have  made  no  specific  charge  against  you.  I  neither  am 
nor  wish  to  be  your  accuser. 

If,  after  the  manner  in  which  you  chose  to  denounce  to 
me  the  total  dissolution  of  all  relations  between  you  and  me, 
you  still  have  doubts  whether  your  tone  and  expressions 
were  such  as  I  have  high  and  just  reason  to  be  offended  with, 
I  perceive  no  claim  that  you  can  have  to  a  written  specifica¬ 
tion  of  the  facts  I  had  stated  and  the  sentiments  I  had  ex¬ 
pressed  to  you  which  may  have  given  you  displeasure.  A 
correspondence  of  altercation  and  reproach  is  quite  unneces¬ 
sary,  and  between  us  would  be  very  improper  after  all  other 
relations  between  us  have  ceased. 

St.  Petersburg,  4  June,  1812. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


345 


1812] 


TO  LEVETT  HARRIS 

St.  Petersburg,  4  June,  1812. 

Sir: 

I  accept  with  pleasure  your  apology  and  beg  you  to  be 
assured  that  as  the  interruption  of  our  friendly  and  confi¬ 
dential  relations  has  given  me  sincere  concern,  and  their  dis¬ 
solution  would  be  to  me  cause  of  serious  regrets,  so  nothing 
could  be  more  agreeable  to  me  than  their  entire  restoration. 

I  have  assured  you  that  accusation  was  by  no  means  the 
object  of  the  remarks  which  I  made  with  warmth  indeed, 
but  without  any  disposition  of  unkindness  to  you.  Specifi¬ 
cation  in  writing  was  therefore  needless  for  your  defence; 
but  in  candid  and  amicable  explanation  I  should  have  been, 
and  am  yet,  willing  to  give  it.  You  will  recollect  the  re¬ 
peated  applications  which  have  been  made  both  in  writing 
and  individually  to  me  by  numbers  of  American  seamen 
belonging  to  the  vessels  which  arrived  here  last  summer 
under  false  American  colors.  I  have  always  referred  them 
to  you  as  to  the  only  person  who  could  procure  for  them  jus¬ 
tice  or  relief.  I  had  received  repeated  complaints  from  them 
that  means  were  using  to  compel  them  to  ship  in  the  same 
vessels,  or  some  of  them  which  had  been  seized  for  coming 
with  those  false  papers.  I  had  the  day  before  you  called 
received  a  letter  from  the  crew  of  the  Monticello  stating  anew 
their  complaints,  and  adding  that  they  were  refused  a  pass. 
I  had  seen  the  same  morning  three  of  the  men  who  stated  to 
me  that  Mr.  Sparrow  had  attempted  to  prevent  them  from 
coming  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  that  it  was  only  by  an  express 
order  from  the  Admiral  to  whom  they  appealed,  that  they 
obtained  the  permission.  You  read  me  part  of  a  letter  from 
Mr.  Sparrow  in  which  those  men  were  spoken  of  as  if  they 


34-6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

were  culpable  and  deserving  severity  for  insisting  upon 
what  appeared  to  me  not  unreasonable.  I  thought  them  in¬ 
jured  men  who,  even  if  no  relief  could  be  obtained  for  them, 
deserved  better  usage.  I  was  displeased  at  the  manner  in 
which  Mr.  Sparrow  mentioned  them,  and  gave  you  to  un¬ 
derstand  it.  You  assumed  to  yourself  the  whole  of  Mr. 
Sparrow’s  proceedings  on  this  occasion,  and  expressed  dis¬ 
satisfaction  at  the  impression  which  I  entertained  of  them. 
Then  indeed,  though  with  great  pain  to  myself,  I  was  led  to 
observations  which  personally  touched  your  feelings,  and 
which  might  assume  in  your  mind  the  appearance  of  charges, 
though  solely  meant  by  me  as  expostulation.  You  expressed 
yourself  in  terms  of  disdain  at  imputations  upon  your 
character.  You  asserted  your  entire  independence  of  any 
accountability  to  me  in  your  official  capacity  (in  which  re¬ 
spect  you  were  certainly  correct  as  to  the  fact).  You  de¬ 
clared  you  would  not  suffer  such  imputations  from  me.  The 
rest  I  wish  no  longer  to  remember. 

I  beg  you  now  to  consider  what  I  have  here  said  not  as 
intended  for  reproach,  or  to  renew  discussion  so  unpleasant 
to  us  both.  It  is  merely  to  account  to  you  for  the  origin  of 
those  reflections  which  gave  you  pain  and  the  effect  of  which 
I  regret  no  less  than  you.  I  retain  my  sentiments  with  re¬ 
spect  to  Mr.  Sparrow’s  letter.  I  still  think  that  the  unfortu¬ 
nate  seamen  so  shamefully  kidnapped  to  this  country,  un¬ 
able  to  obtain  either  their  discharge  or  their  wages,  burthened 
with  debts  contracted  for  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  turned 
adrift  upon  the  street,  did  not  deserve  to  be  treated  as 
mutineers  for  merely  claiming  their  right.  I  am  willing  to 
believe  Mr.  Sparrow’s  asperity  towards  them  to  have  arisen 
merely  from  inconsideration,  and  would  gladly  be  convinced 
that  it  was  entirely  without  your  participation.  I  should 
have  needed  no  such  conviction  had  you  not  in  the  most 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


347 


1812] 

explicit  terms  declared  that  Sparrow  did  nothing  but  exe¬ 
cute  your  orders.  You  have  long  known  my  principles 
with  regard  to  the  rights,  the  claims  and  the  complaints  of 
common  seamen ,  that  though  often  troublesome,  occasion¬ 
ally  turbulent  and  sometimes  unjust,  they  are  by  no  means 
always  wrong.  I  may  add  that  in  the  present  case  they 
appear  to  me  eminently  entitled  to  regard. 

Two  of  those  men  have  been  again  to  me  this  day.  They 
say  that  Mr.  Sparrow  refuses  to  arrest  the  captain  of  the 
Monticello  without  orders  from  you.  They  say  further  that 
Marks  is  shipping  men  for  the  vessel  in  which  he  came,  while 
the  wages  of  all  his  men  are  still  unpaid.  They  think  that 
if  Sail  was  personally  arrested  their  wages  would  be  paid.  I 
know  nothing  as  to  the  correctness  of  their  opinion,  but  I 
have  no  reason  to  disbelieve  their  statements  of  facts. 

If  a  more  particular  explanation  of  any  expression  used 
by  me  can  tend  to  give  you  satisfaction,  I  will  give  it  verb¬ 
ally  or  in  writing  as  you  may  desire.  In  the  meantime  I 
remain  with  due  consideration  and  esteem  your  very  humble 
and  obedient  servant. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  86.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  ii  June,  1812. 

Sir: 

The  political  drama  in  the  north  of  Europe  is  drawing 
towards  its  catastrophe.  Nearly  two  months  have  elapsed 
since  the  Emperor  Alexander  left  his  capital.  On  the  9th 
of  May  the  French  Emperor,  accompanied  by  his  Empress, 
quitted  his  residence  at  St.  Cloud.  They  arrived  on  the  16th 


348 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

of  the  same  month  at  Dresden,  and  on  the  18th  were  met 
there  by  the  Emperor  and  Empress  of  Austria.  The  King 
of  Westphalia  had  preceded  them,  and  was  at  Warsaw, 
waiting  the  arrival  of  his  brother.  The  king  of  Naples  ar¬ 
rived  at  Berlin  on  the  18th  and  the  Viceroy  of  Italy  had 
passed  through  Dresden  10  days  before.  The  Emperor  of 
Austria  is  accompanied  by  Count  Metternich  his  Minister 
of  Foreign  Affairs,  and  by  Prince  Schwarzenberg  his  am¬ 
bassador  at  the  French  court.  The  Duke  of  Bassano  is  with 
the  Emperor  Napoleon.^  I  mentioned  in  my  last  that  the 
Count  de  Narbonne,  an  aide  de  camp  general  of  the  Emperor 
of  France,  had  been  with  a  letter  (said  to  be  merely  compli¬ 
mentary)  from  him  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  at  Wilna. 
Since  then  Prince  Trubetzkoi,  an  officer  of  the  same  rank,  has 
been  dispatched  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  from  Wilna  with 
the  answer. 

It  is  impossible  for  me  to  give  you  precise  information  of 
what  is  passing  at  Wilna.  Rumors  founded  upon  such 
private  correspondence  as  can  be  transmitted  rise  and  fall 
in  daily  succession — mere  exhalations  of  the  night,  which 
the  morning  sun  again  disperses.  Sometimes  they  portend 
war,  and  sometimes  negotiation.  Of  material  facts,  none 
are  public  excepting  such  as  in  their  nature  admit  not 
of  concealment.  The  principal  persons  who  accompanied 
the  Emperor  to  Wilna,  or  followed  him  thither  by  his  orders 
were  the  Councillor  Count  Romanzoff,  Count  Kotschubey 
a  member  of  the  Council  and  President  of  the  Department 
of  Legislation,  Admiral  Tchitchagoff,  Count  Arakcheieff, 
formerly  Minister  of  War  and  now  a  general  of  artillery  and 
President  of  the  War  Department  in  the  Council,  Baron 
Armfeldt,  the  new  Secretary  General  of  the  Empire,  Vice 
Admiral  Shishkoff,  and  the  Minister  of  the  Police,  Lieu¬ 
tenant  General  Balaschoff.  Immediately  after  his  arrival 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


349 


1812] 

at  Wilna,  the  Emperor  paid  a  visit  in  person  to  General 
Bennigsen,  at  his  country  seat  in  the  neighborhood  of  that 
city,  where  since  the  peace  of  Tilsit  he  had  lived  in  retire¬ 
ment.  Shortly  afterwards  General  Bennigsen  was  ordered 
to  be  in  attendance  upon  his  Majesty,  but  has  hitherto 
had  no  specific  command  assigned  to  him.  The  governor  of 
Moscow,  Field  Marshal  Gudovich,  has  been  removed,  and 
in  his  place  General  Kutuzoff  who  commanded  the  Army 
of  the  Danube  has  been  appointed.  Prince  Labanoff,  who 
was  one  of  the  Russian  ambassadors  at  the  peace  of  Tilsit, 
has  also  been  removed  from  the  Government  of  Riga.  Dur¬ 
ing  the  Emperor’s  absence  from  St.  Petersburg,  the  Presi¬ 
dency  of  the  Imperial  Council,  which  had  been  held  until 
then  by  Count  Romanzoff,  was  committed  to  Field  Marshal 
Count  Nicholas  Soltikoff,  formerly  the  Emperor’s  governor, 
and  the  direction  of  the  Department  of  Foreign  Affairs,  as 
I  have  already  informed  you,  to  Count  Alexander  Soltikoff, 
his  son.  General  Wiasmitinoff,  formerly  Minister  at  War, 
was  appointed  military  governor  of  St.  Petersburg  in  place 
of  Minister  of  Police  Balaschoff. 

The  selection  of  persons  to  attend  the  Emperor,  and  the 
appointments  at  and  since  his  departure  are  considered  as 
symptoms  indicative  of  the  probable  result.  In  the  country 
there  are  political  parties,  and  vicious  rivalries,  and  personal 
animosities,  perhaps  not  the  less  violent  and  inveterate,  for 
being  much  cramped  and  restricted  in  the  expression  of  their 
sentiments  and  purposes.  Count  Romanzoff ,  who  since  the 
peace  of  Tilsit  has  been  considered  as  the  most  confidential 
minister  of  the  Emperor ,  naturally  has  a  multitude  of  adver¬ 
saries  and  who  are  all  those  who  have  strong  attachments  to 
England  or  to  the  English  cause .  It  is  universally  expected 
that  a  war  with  France  will  be  the  signal  for  his  retirement ,l 


1  Cypher. 


350 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

Perhaps  among  the  chief  personages,  whose  wishes  tend  to 
that  event,  there  are  some  who  desire  it  more  from  the 
persuasion  that  this  will  be  one  of  its  first  inevitable  conse¬ 
quences  than  from  any  other  motive.  As  the  Count’s  anxious 
wishes  that  the  peace  may  yet  be  preserved  are  well  known, 
the  eagerness  for  his  removal  increases,  as  the  prospect  of 
war  approaches;  and  since  his  absence  scarcely  a  day  had 
passed  without  rumors  that  he  had  resigned  his  office,  and 
of  supposed  appointments  of  other  persons  to  succeed  him. 
He  was  taken  ill,  immediately  after  his  arrival  at  Wilna, 
and  several  days  severely  indisposed.  Here  it  was  imme¬ 
diately  reported  that  his  illness  was  a  stroke  of  apoplexy,  and 
though  afterwards  contradicted,  this  report  still  maintains 
its  credit.  By  the  most  recent  accounts,  however,  it  is  cer¬ 
tain  that  he  retains  his  office,  and  has  so  far  recovered  his 
health  as  to  transact  business  as  usual.  It  is  understood  that 
his  opinions  and  counsel ,  as  well  as  those  of  Count  Kotschuhey , 
are  still  of  a  pacific  tendency ,  hut  that  the  other  advisers  attend¬ 
ing  the  Emperor  have  an  opposite  leaning.  This  disposition 
is  especially  attributed  to  Baron  Armfeldt  a  person  who  has  1 
long  been  known  in  the  history  of  the  present  times,  but  who 
has  very  recently  become  a  Russian  subject.  He  was  a 
Swedish  nobleman,  a  native  of  the  province  of  Finland,  lately 
ceded  to  Russia,  and  where  his  principal  possessions  are 
situated.  Conformably  to  an  article  of  the  treaty  he  has 
elected  to  transfer  his  allegiance,  and  has  been  treated  by 
the  Emperor  with  the  highest  personal  distinction  and  favor. 
These  honors  and  dignities  are  not  unenvied,  and  perhaps 
he  may  be  made  in  the  public  opinion  peculiarly  responsible 
for  perilous  advice,  which  others  may  have  given  as  readily 
as  himself.  Whether  from  the  habits  of  his  education,  or 
the  features  of  his  personal  character,  he  is  less  reserved  in 

1  Cypher. 


1812] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


3Si 


the  free  and  open  avowal  of  his  general  sentiments  and 
opinions,  than  is  customary  among  the  original  Russians ,  and 
he  has  taken  no  pains  to  conceal  or  disguise  his  impressions  in 
relations  to  France.1 

Count  Lowenhielm,  the  king  of  Sweden’s  aide  de  camp, 
who  had  been  here  some  months  on  a  special  mission,  left 
this  city  last  week  to  join  the  Emperor  at  Wilna.  Mr. 
Thornton  has  laid  aside  his  incognito,  and  appears  openly 
at  Orebro  the  seat  of  the  Swedish  Diet.  It  is  said  from  Stock¬ 
holm  that  he  is  negotiating  a  treaty  of  commerce,  but  there 
is  no  symptom  of  the  revocation  of  the  British  Orders  in 
Council.  Mr.  Prevost,  a  secretary  of  the  French  embassy 
here,  was  despatched  as  a  courier  immediately  after  the 
Emperor  Alexander  left  this  city.  He  had  not  time  to  reach 
Paris,  but  met  the  French  Emperor  at  Mentz,  followed  him 
to  Dresden,  and  from  thence  was  sent  back  as  a  courier  to 
the  ambassador  here.  He  arrived  last  week,  and  immediately 
after  he  came,  the  ambassador,  Count  Lauriston,  applied 
for  passports  to  go  to  Wilna.  Count  Soltikoff  not  being 
authorized  to  grant  them,  immediately  sent  a  courier  with 
the  request  to  the  Emperor.  The  answer  is  expected  this 
day  or  tomorrow. 

The  first  arrivals  of  vessels  from  the  United  States  at 
Cronstadt  this  season  was  on  the  8th  instant,  since  which  the 
number  arrived  amounts  to  ten.  The  commercial  prospects 
of  the  present  summer  are  not  favorable  to  the  adventurers. 

I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 

1  Cypher. 


352 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  12  June,  1812. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

Within  a  few  days  I  have  received  your  kind  favors  of 
19  February  and  10  December  last,  the  first  of  which  was 
forwarded  to  me  by  Mr.  Hall  from  Gothenburg,  and  the 
last  by  Mr.  Russell  from  London.  Mr.  Hall  came  from 
Boston  to  Gothenburg,  and  has  since  arrived  here  in  the 
Minerva ,  a  vessel  belonging  to  Mr.  W.  R.  Gray.  He  brought 
your  letter  of  19  February,  and  although  from  thence  he 
transmitted  it  by  the  post,  I  believe  it  had  not  been  opened 
before  it  came  to  my  hands.  Mr.  Russell  informs  me  that 
your  letter  of  10  December,  together  with  one  of  8  December 
from  my  dear  mother,  were  inclosed  originally  under  cover 
to  Mr.  Barlow.  That  they  were  taken  by  an  English  cruiser* 
on  board  the  ship  John,  bound  from  Baltimore  to  Bordeaux, 
and  were  opened  at  the  Admiralty  Court  in  London.  How 
far  Sir  William  Scott  was  edified  by  your  remarks  upon  the 
liberties  which  the  gentlemen  called  emperors  and  kings 
take  with  the  correspondence  of  us  republicans  I  have  not 
learnt,  but  it  seems  he  was  willing  to  give  another  proof  of  the 
generosity  of  the  world  by  permitting  the  letter  to  be  taken 
out  of  his  court,  and  forwarded  to  its  true  destination  after 
having  had  the  benefit  of  reading  it  himself. 

In  the  days  of  Demosthenes  we  read  that  the  republican 
Athenians  once  intercepted  certain  letters  from  that  gentle¬ 
man ,  King  Philip  of  Macedon,  with  whom  they  were  at  war, 
and  who  was  but  too  successfully  plotting  their  destruction. 
The  public  letters  they  naturally  and  justly  considered  as 
lawful  prizes,  but  when  they  came  to  that  for  Olympias,  they 
transmitted  it  to  her  unopened  and  untouched.  This  I  think 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


353 


1812] 

may  pass  for  generosity;  more  generosity  than  I  am  afraid 
the  admiralty  courts  of  any  modern  state,  monarchical  or 
republican,  would  ever  display.  Why  is  it  that  for  an  ex¬ 
ample  of  that  delicacy  and  decorum  of  manners  which  man¬ 
kind  in  all  ages  have  admired  and  celebrated,  we  must  look 
back  five  centuries  before  Christianity  and  to  a  pure  de¬ 
mocracy? 

I  shall  follow  your  advice  and  be  very  careful  of  my  opin¬ 
ions  of  the  common  law.  One  of  my  motives  for  declining  a 
judicial  station  was  to  avoid  the  duty  of  producing  them  to 
the  public  in  a  manner  which  might  have  a  tendency  to  dis¬ 
turb  the  public  tranquillity.  I  have  neither  weight  of  in¬ 
fluence  nor  energy  of  character  enough  to  undertake  the 
reformation  of  the  moral  and  legal  code  of  my  country, 
though  I  think  I  have  discernment  enough  to  perceive  de¬ 
fects  in  them  which  a  man  like  those  “qu’on  ne  trouve  plus 
que  dans  les  vies  du  Plutarque”  might  reform.  When  the 
present  Mr.  John  Lowell  took  his  second  degree  at  Cam¬ 
bridge  (Anno  Domini  1789)  he  delivered  a  part  in  a  forensic 
dispute,  in  which  he  said  that  with  regard  to  any  principles 
relating  to  the  liberties  of  the  people  you  might  as  well  take 
the  odes  of  the  poet  laureate  for  an  authority  as  Blackstone’s 
“  Commentaries.”  This  was  about  the  time  too  when  Mr. 
Harrison  Gray  Otis  said  in  a  public  oration  to  the  town  of 
Boston,  that  words  only  made  the  difference  between  Punic 
faith  and  British  plausibility.  English  laws  and  English 
virtue  were  not  at  that  time  in  high  repute  at  Harvard  and 
Faneuil  Halls.  Now  it  would  not  be  safe  at  either  of  those 
places  to  utter  such  opinions.  I  know  not  that  I  ever  could 
have  concurred  in  them  to  the  full  extent.  The  common 
law  has  some  admirable  institutions,  some  excellent  prin¬ 
ciples,  and  many  valuable  usages  which  our  countrymen  en¬ 
joy.  God  forbid  they  should  ever  be  deprived  of  them  or 


354 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

become  disgusted  with  them.  For  the  sake  of  the  good  con¬ 
tained  in  them  I  had  rather  tolerate  much  infirmity  and 
much  evil  connected,  perhaps,  inseparably  with  them,  than 
launch  forth  upon  innovation  which  I  could  not  control  and 
which  might  sweep  away  good  and  evil  without  discrimina¬ 
tion. 

I  perceive  by  the  newspapers  and  other  publications  from 
America  that  the  supreme  judicial  court  of  Massachusetts 
have  decided  that  the  common  law  does  not  apply  to  that 
Commonwealth  in  certain  cases  of  libel,  and  that  the  gov¬ 
ernor  of  the  State  questions  the  propriety  of  their  decision. 
As  represented  by  him  it  appears  to  me  so  extraordinary 
that  although  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  his  accuracy  I  feel 
under  an  absolute  necessity  of  hesitating  in  my  assent  to  his 
conclusions.  For  the  protection  of  individual  good  name 
against  defamation,  one  law  for  members  of  the  legislature 
and  the  supreme  executive,  and  another  law  for  judges  and 
officers  not  eligible  by  the  people!  Is  that  the  constitution 
of  Massachusetts?  Is  that  the  nature  of  our  government? 
Divers  weights,  a  great  and  a  small!  divers  measures,  a  great 
and  a  small!  And  this  law  subtilized  out  of  the  Massachu¬ 
setts  constitution  by  judges  upon  the  bench!  A  hedge  for 
themselves,  and  the  unsheltered  tempest  for  others!  Can 
these  things  be?  Your  extract  of  the  letter  from  Monticello 
gave  me  pleasure.  As  to  the  works  not  having  so  much 
vogue  as  an  author’s  paternal  feelings  might  wish,  I  shall 
easily  reconcile  time  to  its  destiny.  Had  it  been  more  suc¬ 
cessful  it  would  certainly  have  allowed  me  less  future  tran¬ 
quillity.  That  it  should  have  no  artificial  bolstering  from 
caballing  friends  or  puffers  I  was  fully  determined.  From 
the  natural  decision  of  the  public  upon  its  merits  I  shall  not 
appeal.  .  .  . 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


355 


1812] 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  88.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  25  June,  1812. 

Sir: 

The  continuance  of  the  commercial  treaty  between  Por¬ 
tugal  and  Russia  of  1798  for  three  years,  which  I  mentioned 
in  my  last  letter,  was  concluded  in  the  form  of  a  declara¬ 
tion,  a  copy  of  which  I  have  now  the  honor  to  enclose.  The 
alteration  in  the  6th  article  is  conformable  to  the  regulation 
of  the  last  year,  and  the  motive  for  it  was  explained  in  my 
letter  to  you  of  29  April,  1811. 

The  reason  assigned  for  the  refusal  of  passports  to  the 
French  Ambassador  to  go  to  Wilna  was  the  stoppage  of  the 
letters  at  the  frontiers,  and  it  was  also  mentioned  that  pass¬ 
ports  had  been  refused  to  Prince  Kurakin  at  Paris.  The 
state  of  the  facts  has  been  mentioned  to  me  to  be  these:  At 
the  time  when  the  Emperor  Napoleon  left  St.  Cloud  upon 
his  journey  for  the  inspection  of  his  troops ,  Prince  Kurakin 
applied  to  the  Duke  of  Bassano  for  passports  for  himself  and 
his  family.  The  Duke  suggested  to  him  that  unless  he  had 
orders  from  his  government  to  ask  for  them  it  would  be  most 
advisable  to  wait,  rather  than  insist  upon  this  measure, 
which  would  at  least  have  the  appearance  of  a  rupture;  when 
it  might  perhaps  yet  be  avoided.  The  Prince  acquiesced; 
but  after  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon  at  Dresden, 
applied  a  second  time  for  passports,  without  stating  that  it 
was  by  order  of  his  government.  It  seems  that  the  passports 
for  all  his  family  were  then  granted,  but  with  respect  to  his 
own,  he  was  requested  to  state  that  he  was  directed  by  his 
government  to  ask  for  it.  He  applied  for  it,  however,  a  third 
time;  and  this  application  was  accompanied  with  an  official 


356 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

note  declaring  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  considered  the 
total  evacuation  by  the  French  troops  of  all  the  Prussian 
territories,  as  an  indispensable  preliminary  to  all  negotia¬ 
tion,1  and  that  should  that  proposal  be  complied  with,  he 
would  commission  some  person  with  the  necessary  powers  to 
treat  concerning  an  indemnity  for  the  Duchy  of  Oldenburg. 
Immediately  on  the  receipt  of  this  note  by  the  Emperor  Na¬ 
poleon,  Prince  Kurakin’s  passport  was  sent  him,  with  an  in¬ 
timation  from  the  Duke  of  Bassano,  that  to  the  note  itself 
no  other  answer  would  be  returned.  At  the  same  time  an 
order  was  dispatched  to  Count  Lauriston,  the  French  Am¬ 
bassador  here,  to  demand  his  passports  for  himself  and  all 
the  persons  attached  to  the  Embassy.  On  the  23  rd  instant, 
the  day  before  yesterday,  he  made  the  application  to  Count 
Soltikoff,  and  received  for  answer  that  the  demand  had  been 
dispatched  to  the  Emperor  at  Wilna.  The  answer  may  be 
received  in  six  days  more,  but  may  possibly  be  delayed  until 
Prince  Kurakin  shall  have  reached  the  frontier.  The  Aus¬ 
trian,  Wurtemberg  and  Westphalian  envoys,  and  the  Prus¬ 
sian,  Saxon  and  Bavarian  charge  d’affaires  applied  for  their 
passports  at  the  same  time  with  the  ambassador,  and  have 
received  the  same  provisional  answer. 

The  ambassador  told  me  that  the  Duke  of  Bassano  had  sent 
him  an  English  newspaper  containing  almost  word  for  word 
the  substance  of  Prince  Kurakin’s  last  note ,  a  paper  printed 
too  before  the  note  was  presented.  From  this  circumstance  it  is 
obvious  the  French  government  [regard]  the  intercourse  between 
Russia  and  England  as  having  been  previously  concerted  be¬ 
tween  the  parties ,  a  fact  of  which  I  have  for  some  time  had  little 
doubt  myself ,  though  it  has  been  constantly  denied  on  both  sides 
from  sources  which  powerful  facts  could  have  constrained  me 
to  distrust . 


1  See  p.  362,  infra. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


357 


1812] 

Of  these  last  incidents  preceding  the  rupture  my  information 
is  from  the  first  hand ,  hut  it  may  possibly  he  colored  hy  the  feel¬ 
ings  of  the  moment  or  hy  the  natural  prejudices  of  the  party.  On 
the  other  side  I  have  reported  to  you  what  Count  Romanzojf 
said  to  me  the  day  before  his  departure  for  Wilna.  Certainly 
negotiation  then  was  his  wish  and  expectation.  [Nine  lines  of 
this  paragraph  not  decyphered.] 

I  have  repeatedly  mentioned  to  you  as  a  suggestion  from  an 
indirect  hut  usually  authentic  source  that  a  proposition  had  at 
least  been  hinted  from  France  to  Russia  that  to  secure  the  ef¬ 
fectual  operation  of  the  continental  system  the  Russian  ports 
on  the  Baltic  must  he  garrisoned  hy  French  troops.  From  one 
of  the  most  influential  members  of  the  Russian  Imperial  Coun¬ 
cil ,  and  from  one  of  the  most  judicious  and  esteemed  ministers 
from  a  member  of  the  Rhenish  confederation ,  I  have  had  assur¬ 
ances  the  most  explicit ,  that  no  such  proposal  from  France  had 
been  made  or  even  intimated,  while  at  the  same  time  I  was 
assured  hy  another  minister  of  the  [blank]  that  it  had.  The 
first  statement  of  it  that  I  saw  was  in  an  English  newspaper  to 
which  I  gave  no  credit .  I  mentioned  it  to  the  French  ambassa¬ 
dor ,  who  treated  it  as  an  idle  rumor  hut  without  explicitly  deny¬ 
ing  it.  Within  a  very  few  weeks ,  and  long  since  the  departure 
of  the  Emperor ,  he  has  declared  to  me  that  no  proposition  of  a 
nature  dishonorable  to  Russia  had  been  made ,  and  he  added 
with  an  emphasis  of  manner  corresponding  to  the  force  of  the 
words ,  “J‘  puis  vous  protester  que  la  negociation  est  encore 
vierge.”  Notwithstanding  which  there  are  in  the  Duke  of  Bas- 
sano’s  report  of  10th  March  last  very  strong  indications  that  such 
had  been ,  or  to  say  the  least  such  would  be ,  the  French  1  [remain¬ 
der  of  letter  with  exception  of  few  lines  undecyphered.]  I 
am  with  great  respect,  etc. 


1  Cypher. 


3S8 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  29  June,  1812. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

I  inclose  you  a  press  copy  of  my  last  letter,  though  it  is 
more  than  ever  uncertain  whether  either  the  original  or  the 
copy  will  be  suffered  to  reach  you.  We  have  lived  in  event¬ 
ful  times,  but  in  the  course  of  my  life  I  have  no  recollection 
of  a  moment  so  full  of  portent  as  the  present.  We  have  ac¬ 
counts  here  from  the  United  States  to  9  May  by  the  way  of 
England.  They  are  more  immediately  warlike  than  I  ex¬ 
pected  or  could  have  wished.  It  has  indeed  long  been  my  con¬ 
viction,  even  from  the  time  when  I  participated  so  strongly 
in  the  former  embargo,  that  the  British  Orders  in  Council 
unless  abandoned  would  inevitably  produce  a  war  between 
us  and  England;  and  in  looking  back  it  is  an  extraordinary 
demonstration  of  our  extreme  reluctance  to  engage  in  this 
war  that  we  have  averted  it  for  nearly  five  years.  That 
England  will  abandon  them  without  a  war  is  extremely 
doubtful  yet;  but  there  are  circumstances  upon  which  I 
have  wished  to  found  a  hope  that  with  a  little  more  patience 
and  forbearance  we  shall  see  the  downfall  of  that  infamous 
compound  of  robbery,  perjury  and  fraud  by  the  weight  of 
its  mischief  recoiling  upon  its  authors,  without  being  obliged 
on  our  part  to  resort  to  force  for  its  destruction. 

The  most  powerful  patron  and  supporter  of  the  Orders  in 
Council  Mr.  Perceval,  First  Lord  of  the  Treasury  and  Chan¬ 
cellor  of  the  Exchequer,  was  murdered  within  the  walls  of 
the  House  of  Commons  on  the  nth  of  last  month  by  an 
individual  of  disordered  mind,  but  not  mad  enough  to  be 
absolved  from  the  punishment  of  the  laws.  Perceval’s 
administration,  which  even  before  his  death  was  struggling 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


359 


1812] 

against  the  weight  of  a  strong  and  growing  opposition,  was 
unable  to  support  itself  after  his  decease.  They  endeavored 
to  recruit  their  force  by  taking  in  Wellesley  and  Canning  as 
subalterns  under  them,  but  were  refused.  The  House  of 
Commons  passed  a  vote  to  address  the  Regent  and  ask 
him  to  form  a  new  administration,  with  a  friendly  hint  how 
it  was  to  be  formed.  Wellesley,  and  Moira,  and  Canning, 
and  the  opposition,  and  the  wrecks  of  the  Perceval  ministry, 
were  alternately  manceuvering,  mining,  countermining, 
and  protracting,  resigning  and  resuming,  and  publishing 
in  the  newspapers,  as  if  they  were  throwing  dice  or  turning 
cards  for  the  executive  authority.  This  state  of  interregnum 
or  anarchy  continued  to  the  date  of  our  last  accounts,  5 
June.  I  had  flattered  myself  when  the  survivors  of  the 
Perceval  administration  resigned,  that  their  successors 
would  immediately  remove  the  great  stumbling  block,  the 
Orders  in  Council,  and  that  we  should  be  saved  thereby 
from  the  impending  war.  But  the  formation  of  the  new 
ministry  lingers  so  long  that  I  now  forbode  little  or  nothing 
good  from  the  issue  of  the  struggle.  The  Perceval  policy 
appears  likely  to  maintain  its  ascendency  yet  a  little  longer, 
long  enough  I  fear  to  produce  that  catastrophe  from  which 
we  have  so  long  endeavored  to  preserve  ourselves,  but  in 
which  it  seems  the  will  of  Heaven  that  we  should  be  in¬ 
volved. 

At  the  same  time  while  this  drama  draws  towards  a  tragi¬ 
cal  conclusion,  another  still  more  terrible  in  its  aspect  is 
opening  in  the  north  of  Europe.  Russia  there  stands  arrayed 
against  the  united  forces  of  France,  Germany  and  Italy. 
The  parties  have  been  two  years  assembling  against  each 
other  the  whole  power  it  was  possible  for  them  to  put  in 
motion,  and  last  week  the  hostilities  commenced  by  an  in¬ 
vasion  of  the  Russian  territories  in  Poland.  The  French , 


3<5o 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

Austrian ,  Spanish ,  Neapolitan ,  Saxon ,  Bavarian ,  Wurtem- 
hurg  and  Westphalian  ministers,  and  other  diplomatic  agents 
at  this  court,  have  all  asked  for  passports  and  are  on  the 
eve  of  departure.  The  Russian  ambassador  at  Paris  has 
done  the  same,  and  before  this  must  be  out  of  France.  One 
of  the  greatest  causes  of  this  war,  indeed,  in  my  opinion  its 
only  immediate  cause,  is  the  same  British  Orders  in  Council 
which  have  bred  the  war  between  our  country  and  England. 
The  expectation  of  this  explosion  also  may  contribute  to 
procrastinate  the  final  ministerial  arrangements  in  England. 

It  was  but  yesterday  that  the  account  of  the  first  hostili¬ 
ties  in  Poland  reached  this  city.  No  event  of  importance 
is  yet  known  to  have  occurred,  but  it  is  believed  impossible 
that  many  days  should  pass  without  a  shock  such  as  perhaps 
is  unparalleled  even  in  the  sanguinary  modern  annals  of 
Europe.  What  its  event  will  be  human  wisdom  cannot  fore¬ 
see,  but  here  it  is  a  moment  of  profound  and  gloomy  anxiety. 
And  what  singularly  characterizes  the  period  is  that,  pro¬ 
digious  as  the  armaments  and  preparations  have  been  on 
both  sides,  not  an  intimation  has  been  given  to  the  public 
on  either  side  of  any  misunderstanding  between  them. 
Russia  has  declared  and  adhered  to  the  determination  not  to 
begin  the  war;  but  on  the  subject  of  the  difference  which  had 
arisen  between  them  there  has  been  a  persevering  refusal  on 
her  part  to  negotiate  at  all,  the  motive  for  which  will  doubt¬ 
less  now  be  assigned,  but  which  as  yet  is  unaccountable. 
The  opinion  prevails  here  that  Sweden  will  be  in  alliance  with 
Russia,  but  the  professed  desire  of  Sweden  is  to  remain 
neutral.  She  rejected  great  offers  made  to  her  to  join  in  the 
alliance  of  France  and  Austria,  and  gave  the  first  notice  of 
that  alliance  here.  She  has  made  her  own  peace  with  Eng¬ 
land,  upon  the  promise  that  England  would  acquiesce  in 
her  neutrality.  But  it  does  not  appear  that  by  this  was 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1812] 


understood  the  revocation  of  the  Orders  in  Council,  without 
which  there  can  be  no  neutrality. 

The  publication  of  the  documents  communicated  to  our 
government  by  Mr.  Henry  took  place  very  shortly  after 
the  date  of  your  letter  of  19  February.  I  perceive  by  the 
Boston  newspapers  that  the  federalists  there  wish  Mr. 
Henry’s  evidence  to  be  construed  as  a  testimony  to  their 
political  virtue,  and  he  certainly  has  taken  pains  to  have  it 
understood  that  he  did  not  intend  to  expose  the  individuals 
with  whom  he  treated.  You  observe  that  the  tory  projects 
of  H.  and  P.  were  not  to  be  dreaded.  I  have  perhaps  thought 
them  more  formidable  than  they  were,  but  Mr.  Henry’s 
mission  and  his  letters  have  given  further  countenance  to  my 
opinions.  If  the  leaders  of  the  Massachusetts  and  Connec¬ 
ticut  legislatures  in  1809  were  not  ripe  for  open  and  avowed 
negotiation  with  Henry,  it  was  evidently  not  owing  to  any 
scruples  of  their  own,  but  to  their  fears  that  the  people 
would  not  go  with  them  in  their  plan  of  rebellion.  Henry’s 
letters  throw  a  new  and  powerful  light  on  the  compilation 
entitled  Works  of  Fisher  Ames.  It  was  published  while 
Henry  was  in  Boston,  and  I  knew  at  the  time  that  an  extraor¬ 
dinary  number  of  copies  were  purchased  for  the  express 
purpose  of  extensive  circulation  in  the  state  of  Vermont.1 

1  “Of  this  mission  of  Henry,  your  son  had  got  wind  in  the  time  of  the  embargo 
and  communicated  it  to  me.  But  he  had  learned  nothing  of  the  particular  agent, 
although,  of  his  workings,  the  information  he  had  obtained  appears  now  to  have 
been  correct.  He  stated  a  particular  which  Henry  has  not  distinctly  brought 
forward,  which  was  that  the  Eastern  States  were  not  to  be  required  to  make  a 
formal  act  of  separation  from  the  Union,  and  to  take  a  part  in  the  war  against  it; 
a  measure  deemed  much  too  strong  for  their  people;  but  to  declare  themselves  in 
a  state  of  neutrality,  in  consideration  of  which  they  were  to  have  peace  and  free 
commerce,  the  lure  most  likely  to  insure  popular  acquiescence.  Having  no  indica¬ 
tions  of  Henry  as  the  intermediate  in  this  negotiation  of  the  Essex  junto,  suspi¬ 
cions  fell  on  Pickering,  and  his  nephew  Williams,  in  London.  If  he  was  wronged 
in  this,  the  ground  of  the  suspicion  is  to  be  found  in  his  known  practices  and  avowed 


362 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

If  you  have  not  read  that  book  I  beg  you  to  procure  it,  and 
cast  your  eye  upon  it  with  the  recollection  of  the  time  when 
it  was  given  to  the  public,  the  manner  in  which  it  was 
published,  and  the  tendencies  of  its  doctrines,  to  the  state 
of  popular  sentiments  to  which  the  object  of  Henry’s  mission 
was  adapted.  The  present  time  is  less  favorable  for  the 
British  intrigue  to  dismember  our  Union  than  that  was, 
but  whenever  we  have  a  war  with  England,  we  shall  have 
to  contend  against  an  internal  struggle  of  the  same  spirit. 
God  grant  that  it  may  be  suppressed  without  blood.  I 
trust  in  God  it  will  be  suppressed.1 

Ever  faithfully  yours. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  91.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  ii  July,  1812. 

Sir: 

There  was  an  inaccuracy  in  the  statement  of  circum¬ 
stances  immediately  preceding  the  rupture  between  France 
and  Russia  contained  in  my  No.  88  which  in  a  more  recent 

opinions,  as  that  of  his  accomplices  in  the  sameness  of  sentiment  and  of  language 
with  Henry,  and  subsequently  by  the  fluttering  of  the  wounded  pigeons.,,  Jefferson 
to  John  Adams ,  April  20,  1812,  Writings  of  Jefferson  (Ford),  VIII.  347. 

1  War  with  Great  Britain  was  declared  by  act  of  Congress  June  18,  1812. 

“In  resorting  to  war  against  Great  Britain  as  the  United  States  has  done  by 
inevitable  necessity,  it  is  their  desire  and  hope  that  it  may  be  confined  to  her. 

“It  is  seen  with  much  regret  that  the  Emperor  of  Russia  is  also  likely  to  be  re¬ 
duced  to  the  necessity  of  becoming  a  party  to  the  war,  if  he  has  not  already  done 
it.  Should  that  event  take  place  there  is  no  reason  why  it  should  affect  in  the  slight¬ 
est  degree  the  very  friendly  relations  which  now  exist  between  the  United  States 
and  Russia.  It  is  the  serious  desire  of  this  government  to  preserve  to  their  utmost  ex¬ 
tent  those  relations  with  that  power”  Secretary  of  State  to  John  Quincy  Adams , 
July  1,  1812.  Ms.  Italics  represent  cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


363 


1812] 

conversation  with  the  late  French  ambassador  I  have  perceived , 
and  1  which,  in  the  wish  to  give  you  the  most  precise  in¬ 
formation,  I  think  it  proper  to  notice.  The  proposition 
made  by  Russia  to  France  “that  the  French  troops  should 
evacuate  Prussia  and  Swedish  Pomerania,  and  withdraw 
beyond  the  Elbe ,  as  a  preliminary  to  negotiation  upon  the 
points  at  variance  between  the  two  governments,”  was 
made,  not  with  Prince  Kurakin’s  third  demand  for  pass¬ 
ports,  but  at  a  prior  period.  It  was  dispatched  from  hence 
a  short  time  before  the  Emperor  Alexander’s  departure, 
and  in  the  first  instance  was  communicated  by  Prince 
Kurakin,  with  a  letter  of  complimentary  form,  from  his 
sovereign  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon.  He  is  said  to  have 
listened  very  coolly  to  the  proposition  as  made  by  Prince 
Kurakin,  and  to  have  said  in  answer,  “C’est  forte  bien! 
J’aime  qu’on  me  parle  franchement,”  at  the  same  time 
referring  the  Prince  to  the  Duke  of  Bassano,  for  the  official 
notice  of  his  determination.  It  is  added,  that  there  was  so 
much  calmness  in  his  manner,  that  the  Russian  ambassador 
entertained  some  hopes  that  the  proposal  would  be  com¬ 
plied  with.  But  on  repeating  it  in  form  to  the  Duke  of 
Bassano  the  Duke  told  him  that  he  should  not  answer  it, 
because  such  a  proposition  could  admit  of  no  other  formal 
answer  than  a  declaration  of  war.  That  if  it  had  been  made, 
as  the  basis  of  a  negotiation,  it  would  have  been  unobjection¬ 
able;  but  to  comply  with  it,  dictated  as  a  preliminary  after 
the  engagements  France  had  made  with  the  king  of  Prussia, 
and  when  the  French  troops  were  on  the  banks  of  the  Vistula, 
would  be  dishonorable .  France  could  neither  hearken  nor 
reply  to  it.  Then  it  was  that  the  Emperor  Napoleon  resolved 
upon  his  departure,  and  that  Prince  Kurakin  first  asked 
for  his  passports  without  saying  that  it  was  by  order  of  his 

1  Cypher. 


364 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

government.  The  statement  of  the  preliminary  terms, 
required  by  Russia  which  appeared  in  the  English  newspapers 
was  not  therefore  as  I  had  at  first  understood  prior  in  date  to 
Prince  Kurakin’s  communication  of  them  to  the  French  govern¬ 
ment ,  hut  it  was  so  nearly  at  the  same  time  as  to  have  produced 
in  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s  mind  the  conviction  suggested 
in  my  letter ,  and  in  no  small  degree  aggravated  his  irri¬ 
tation,1 

It  appears  that  the  Minister  General  of  the  Police,  Balas- 
choff,  had  been  sent  from  Wilna  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s 
headquarters  only  two  days  before  the  commencement  of 
hostilities.  It  is  scarcely  possible  but  that  he  should  have 
been  charged  with  some  other  propositions  than  the  final 
one  of  Prince  Kurakin.  What  they  were,  however,  has  not 
yet  been  made  known.  It  is  circulated  here  that  the  Em¬ 
peror  Alexander,  previous  to  his  departure,  formally  pledged 
himself  that  he  would  enter  into  no  negotiation  with  France, 
unless  the  French  troops  should  be  first  withdrawn  from 
Prussia  and  beyond  the  Elbe.  The  refusal  of  passports  to 
the  French  ambassador  to  go  to  Wilna  for  the  purpose  of 
negotiating  was  probably  founded  upon  the  same  determina¬ 
tion.  I  have  reported  to  you  the  tone  of  opinions  which  were 
very  assiduously  maintained  here  by  certain  persons  inti¬ 
mately  connected  with  the  court:  that  France  was  reduced 
to  the  extremity  of  distress;  that  Napoleon  would  not  dare 
to  begin  this  war;  that  he  could  not  begin  it  if  he  would. 
How  far  the  measures  of  the  Russian  cabinet  were  stiffened  by 
ideas  of  this  description,  I  cannot  expressly  say;  but  in  the 
transactions  between  independent  states,  I  know  not  of  an 
expedient  in  human  contrivance  more  effectual  to  defeat 
all  possible  arrangement,  than  for  one  party  to  require  of 
the  other,  as  a  preliminary  to  negotiation,  a  public  act 

1  Cypher. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1812] 


shrinking  from  its  own  ground  previously  taken.  A  memor¬ 
able  example  in  our  own  recent  history  has  not  a  little  con¬ 
tributed  to  show  the  character  and  tendency  of  such  proposi¬ 
tions. 

I  shall  enclose  with  this  letter  the  several  short  narratives 
of  the  events  which  have  occurred  since  the  commencement 
of  the  war,  published  by  official  authority  here.  They  merely 
represent  the  Russian  armies  as  having  retreated  for  the 
purpose  of  uniting  their  forces  previous  to  a  general  action, 
and  as  having  proceeded  hitherto  almost  without  annoyance 
in  effecting  this  operation.  A  considerable  extent  of  country 
has  thus  been  for  a  time  abandoned  to  the  invader,  but  as 
the  strength  and  resources  of  the  country  are  unimpaired, 
the  spirit  of  the  people  here  is  rather  acquiring  than  losing 
confidence  and  encouragement. 

An  English  negotiator,  a  Mr.  Smith,  is  said  to  have  arrived 
at  the  Emperor  Alexander’s  headquarters  while  they  were 
at  Wilna;  and  since  the  campaign  commenced  a  Mr.  Novo- 
siltzoff  has  been  dispatched  from  them  to  England. 

The  French  ambassador,  and  the  allied  ministers  who  asked 
for  their  passports,  at  the  same  time  with  him,  have  now 
received  them,  after  the  application  had  been  three  times 
renewed.  Mr.  Rayneval,  the  first  secretary  of  the  French 
embassy,  was  dispatched  as  a  courier,  and  was  furnished  by 
Count  Soltikoff  with  a  passport  as  such;  but  was  neverthe¬ 
less  stopped  at  Mittau,  and  not  permitted  to  proceed.  The 
mails  from  France  and  Germany  have  all  been  stopped,  and 
nothing  is  known  here  of  the  movements  of  the  French  armies 
excepting  what  is  mentioned  in  the  handbills  of  which  trans¬ 
lations  are  enclosed.  The  three  first  of  these  handbills 
though  dated  from  headquarters,  did  not  mention  where  they 
were.  This  circumstance  occasioned  rumors  that  they  had 
been  transferred  to  the  northern  bank  of  the  Dwina,  which 


3  66 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

is  proved  by  the  fourth  handbill  to  have  been  a  mistake. 
I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  13  July,  1812. 

The  political  condition  of  the  world  not  only  engrosses 
all  our  thoughts,  but  absorbs  all  our  faculties.  A  new  war  is 
just  blazing  out  in  the  country  where  I  reside,  and  within 
three  days  distance  of  where  I  am.  I  have  been  nearly 
three  years  observing  its  causes  and  witnessing  its  approaches 
with  the  deep  concern  that  a  common  feeling  of  humanity, 
strengthened  by  the  peculiar  interest  in  favor  of  this  nation 
which  my  situation  rendered  so  natural,  could  not  fail  to 
inspire.  I  long  cherished  the  hope  that  some  unforeseen 
event,  some  special  and  providential  interposition,  would 
avert  a  conflict,  from  the  issue  of  which  I  could  augur  noth¬ 
ing  propitious  to  mankind,  but  which  the  process  of  time 
appeared  to  be  bringing  on  with  almost  the  regularity  and 
certainty  of  the  revolutions  of  the  spheres.  It  has  not  so 
seemed  good  to  that  Providence  whose  ways,  however  dark, 
are  wise  and  merciful.  The  trial  by  battle  is  upon  its  issue, 
and  the  destinies  of  the  civilized  world  are  once  more  staked 
upon  its  events. 

With  a  still  more  anxious  and  painful  sentiment  I  have 
seen  during  the  same  period,  and  partly  from  the  same 
causes,  the  same  scourge  of  war  suspended  over  my  own 
country.  There,  too,  the  natural  and  seemingly  inevitable 
result  of  the  passing  events  was  war,  and  there  I  more  fondly 
indulged  the  hope  of  some  sudden  and  unexpected  light  to 
arise  from  darkness  which  the  volume  of  sacred  inspiration 
promises  to  the  upright .  When  the  frantic  hand  of  an  assas- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


367 


l8l2] 

sin,  without  apparent  motive  and  without  accomplice,  cut 
short  the  days  of  the  man  whom  I  considered  as  the  only  nec¬ 
essary  producer  and  efficient  author  of  this  war,1  the  first 
sentiment  which  succeeded  that  of  horror  at  the  deed  which 
sent  him  so  instantly  to  his  account  was  that  of  a  reviving 
wish,  which  was  at  that  moment  nearly  extinct,  that  this 
very  act  might  in  its  consequences  snatch  my  country  from 
that  calamity  which  to  all  human  appearance  has  become 
unavoidable.  After  an  interval  of  more  than  a  month- 
wasted  in  cabals  and  intrigues,  and  serving  only  to  prove 
the  irreconcilable  discussions  between  the  leaders  of  the 
various  parties  squabbling  for  the  government  of  England, 
another  event  as  unexpected  as  the  first,  but  consequent 
upon  it,  has  again  cheered  me  with  an  additional  gleam  of 
hope,  which  would  even  be  strong  and  vivid  but  for  the  ap¬ 
prehension  that  the  ardors  and  impatience  of  indignation 
at  our  wrongs  may  have  precipitated  measures  on  our  part 
which  may  yet  involve  us  in  that  conflict,  from  which  we 
have  no  otherwise  the  prospect  of  being  happily  extricated. 

On  the  1 6th  of  June  the  death  blow  was  given  in  the  Brit¬ 
ish  House  of  Commons  to  that  political  pestilence  which 
has  been  raging  nearly  five  years  under  the  denomination  of 
the  Orders  in  Council.2  Their  revocation  has  been  extorted 
with  the  most  extreme  reluctance  from  the  remnants  of  the 
very  same  ministry  by  which  they  were  enacted,  extorted 
by  the  cries  of  famine  which  it  had  spread  over  their  own 
people,  and  by  the  fear  of  that  convulsive  desperation  pro¬ 
duced  among  them  by  it.  As  if  determined  to  display 
before  all  mankind  the  clear  unequivocal  and  unanswerable 
demonstration  of  the  efficacy  of  commercial  restrictions  in 
America  to  control  the  willful  and  wanton  injustice  of  a 
British  administration,  they  persisted  in  maintaining  this 

1  Spencer  Perceval.  *  See  Henry  Adams,  History ,  VI.  267. 


368 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

infamous  system  until  the  proofs  that  thousands  upon 
thousands  of  their  manufacturers  were  starving  under  its 
operation  had  been  exhibited  in  the  minutest  detail  by  the 
concurrent  and  uncontradicted  evidence  of  an  inquiry  of 
many  weeks,  daily  pursued.  They  then  in  a  manner,  as 
awkward  and  ungracious  as  that  with  which  they  had  before 
adhered  to  their  folly,  declared  their  intentions  to  abandon 
it,  and  with  one  and  the  same  breath  avowed  that  they 
yielded  only  to  the  gasping  hunger  of  their  people,  and  that 
they  meant  to  clog  their  concession  with  conditions  which 
America  is  under  no  obligation  to  grant,  and  some  of  which 
she  will  probably  reject.  There  is  even  now  an  appearance 
of  insincerity  in  their  mode  of  proceeding,  indicating  that 
they  have  a  trickish  purpose  to  get  the  American  markets 
open  to  relieve  their  people,  and  then  to  enforce  again  their 
piratical  orders.  But  as  I  believe  the  American  govern¬ 
ment  is  more  than  a  match  for  them  at  negotiation,  and  as 
they  now  confess  they  must  negotiate,  I  have  no  doubt  they 
will  be  driven  from  this  skulking  hole  as  they  have  from  all 
their  strongholds  by  the  address  and  sagacity  they  will 
have  to  treat  with,  if  by  a  commencement  of  hostilities  on 
our  part  their  lingering  and  forced  compliance  should  not 
now  come  too  late. 

My  principal  anxiety,  therefore,  now  is  for  what  may  have 
been  done  in  America.  The  embargo  of  last  April  was 
applied  at  the  moment  when  its  power  was  most  effectual 
and  was  I  strongly  believe,  the  wrenching  stroke  to  the 
stubbornness  of  the  British  ministers.  Everything  that 
preceded  viewed  as  preparatory  for  war  was  of  similar 
tendency,  and  the  publication  of  Henry’s  correspondence 
was  not  lost  upon  the  two  present  heads  of  the  administra¬ 
tion.  But  I  hear  so  much  said  foreboding  a  declaration  of 
war,  or  an  actual  commencement  of  hostilities  by  us,  that 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


369 


l8l2] 

I  am  uneasy  lest  in  the  moment  of  hurry  to  show  the  serious¬ 
ness  of  our  intention  to  vindicate  our  right  we  may  have 
lost  the  benefit  of  their  tardy  repentance,  and  put  the 
weapon  of  defence  from  our  own  hands  into  theirs. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  13  July,  1812. 

The  issue  of  the  election  of  governor  in  Massachusetts 
has  been  already  some  time  known  to  us.  Entertaining  a 
favorable  opinion  of  the  moderation  and  discretion  of 
Mr.  Strong,  I  augur  no  very  great  evil  from  his  recovery  by 
so  scanty  a  majority  of  the  place  which  he  lost  by  a  majority 
nearly  as  weak.  That  the  English  faction  have  been  com¬ 
pelled  to  take  him  for  their  champion  is  proof  enough  that 
they  are  still  wide  of  their  mark.  He  was  heretofore  shy  of 
them  and  their  politics.  If  he  calculates  upon  a  long  second 
career  as  commander  in  chief  of  Massachusetts,  he  will 
beware  of  them  and  their  measures  again.  If  Henry’s  cor¬ 
respondence  gave  him  votes  this  year,  I  doubt  whether  it 
will  produce  the  same  effect  the  next.  That  party  as  long 
as  they  can  keep  up  the  struggle  for  the  dominion  of  New 
England  or  their  hopeful  eastern  empire  are  doomed  to  roll 
the  stone  of  Sisyphus;  it  will  recoil  upon  them  every  time 
they  succeed  in  rolling  it  up  to  the  top  of  the  hill. 

Truckle  to  England  and  go  to  war  with  France,  so  said  in 
his  last  days  Fisher  Ames.  So  snarled  from  the  first  embargo 
time  down  to  the  argument  for  Captain  Bingham,  Timothy 
Pickering.  So  chattered  from  the  affair  of  the  Chesapeake 
downwards,  the  Yankee  Farmer  and  Boston  Rebel,  the 


370 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

Gentleman  who  writes  analyses  and  comments  upon  sup¬ 
pressed  documents,  the  Gentleman  1  who  began  by  main¬ 
taining  against  me  in  a  public  insurance  office  of  Boston, 
that  Berkeley’s  attack  upon  the  Chesapeake  to  search  for  and 
take  deserters  was  perfectly  justifiable.  So  openly  and  boldly 
said  Mr.  Gore  to  the  patriotic  Massachusetts  legislature 
of  1809,  and  for  so  saying  was  made  governor  of  the  Com¬ 
monwealth  at  the  next  election.  So  have  said,  still  say,  and 
must  say  in  so  many  words,  or  in  full  substance  to  the  same 
effect,  not  only  every  man  who  hankers  after  the  separation 
of  the  states,  hatched  between  Boston,  Connecticut  and 
Washington  in  1804,  but  every  man  who  pretends  to  have  a 
system  concerning  our  foreign  affairs  in  opposition  to  that 
of  our  government.  How  Mr.  Strong  has  extricated  himself 
from  the  difficulty  of  talking  to  the  legislature  on  this  sub¬ 
ject  I  know  not.  I  hope  not  as  Mr.  Griswold  talked  to  the 
legislature  of  Connecticut.  I  think  Mr.  Gore’s  open  dealing 
infinitely  preferable  to  that. 

But  this  doctrine  of  truckling  to  England  for  the  sake  of 
going  to  war  with  France  never  will,  never  can,  obtain  an 
ascendency  over  the  people  of  the  United  States,  and  it 
will  forever  end  by  tripping  up  the  heels  of  those  who  build 
it  upon  the  narrow  scale  of  a  New  England  or  Massachusetts 
system.  By  pinning  themselves  upon  Old  England  they 
will  not  only  always  have  to  share  more  or  less  the  odium 
of  her  outrages  upon  our  country,  but  the  danger  of  her 
treachery  and  perfidy  to  themselves,  the  depression  of  her 
disasters  in  her  wars  with  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  the 
contempt  at  the  notorious  profligacy  and  the  stupid  blunders 
of  her  rulers. 

I  have  the  most  respectful  deference  for  your  opinions 
upon  the  importance  of  naval  armament  and  an  inclination, 

1  John  Lowell. 


1 8 1 2)  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  371 

perhaps  more  powerful  than  my  own  judgment,  to  concur 
with  them  all.  But  I  have  read  with  very  little  edification 
the  speeches  of  Mr.  Quincy  and  Mr.  Lloyd  on  the  subject. 
Both  these  gentlemen  are  abundantly  eloquent,  and  their 
discourses  appear  to  me  to  contain  a  great  deal  of  everything 
but  persuasion.  Mr.  Quincy  threatens  separation  again, 
peaceably  if  we  can,  forcibly  if  we  must — “a  navy,  or  separa¬ 
tion.”  And  pray  if  you  separate,  my  good  sir,  will  not  such 
men  as  General  Varnum,  and  Mr.  Cutts,  and  Mr.  Seaver, 
have  as  bad  an  opinion  of  a  navy  afterwards  as  they  have 
now,  and  will  they  not  quite  as  probably  form  the  majority 
in  your  fragment  of  an  empire  as  they  form  part  of  it  now  in 
the  whole  one?  Will  Connecticut  now,  and  the  Genesee, 
and  the  White  and  Green  mountains,  make  their  home  upon 
the  mountain  wave,  any  more  than  Ohio,  or  Kentucky,  or 
Tennessee?  Separate,  and  in  addition  to  all  your  external 
and  internal  enemies  look  out  for  border  wars;  but  do  not 
talk  of  separating  for  a  navy  while  New  England  votes  turn 
the  question  against  the  navy  on  the  floor  of  the  present 
Congress.  You  are  afraid  the  Europeans  will  call  us  pigmy 
statesmen;  but  while  we  can  show  them  such  great  statesmen 
as  you,  we  may  laugh  at  their  derision  and  return  them 
scorn  for  scorn.  Your  excess  of  stature  shall  make  up  for 
our  deficiency,  and  restore  all  to  a  level  according  to  the 
modern  moral  doctrine  of  compensations.  You  call  for  a 
navy  to  protect  our  commerce,  and  show  us  calculation 
upon  calculation  of  exports,  tonnage,  freight  percentage 
and  what  not;  but  in  conclusion  you  admit  that  an  attempt 
to  protect  all  this  against  Great  Britain  would  be  ludicrously 
wild  and  [blank],  and  that  all  you  ask  is  a  force  to' protect 
your  coasts,  harbors  and  coasting  trade,  which  impartially 
speaking  she  has  but  little  injured,  and  which  you  have  not 
proved  that  your  half  a  dozen  74^  and  your  ten  or  twenty 


372 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

frigates  would  not  supply  with  both  temptation  and  apology 
for  attacking. 

Mr.  Lloyd  does  not  threaten  a  dissolution  of  the  Union, 
though  he  should  not  get  his  twenty  frigates;  but  to  concili¬ 
ate  the  good  will  of  his  hearers  he  takes  of  their  measures  a 
review  compounded  of  ignorance,  prejudice  and  party  spirit 
with  five  parts  error  to  one  of  truth,  and  brands  them  all 
as  a  series  of  dishonorable  actions.  He  too  is  a  stupendous 
calculator,  and  to  prove  that  commerce  has  been  utterly 
abandoned  and  ruined  by  our  government,  quotes  official 
returns  stating  our  exports  of  vegetable  food  in  1791  to  have 
been  about  four  millions  and  a  half,  and  in  1811  upwards 
of  twenty  millions  of  dollars.  I  suspect  that  Edmund  Burke 
taught  these  gentlemen  their  custom  house  and  counting- 
house  oratory.  But  Burke’s  arithmetic  was  in  unison  with 
his  logic.  Quincy  casts  up  one  account  and  argues  to  another, 
and  Lloyd’s  returns  give  the  lie  direct  to  his  argument. 

Verily  such  colossal  dialectics,  such  Patagonian  ratiocina¬ 
tion  as  these  speeches  unfold,  are  not  suited  to  the  diminu¬ 
tive  faculties  of  us  “  little  sons  of  little  men,”  of  us  pigmy 
statesmen,  at  whose  puny  dimensions  the  future  cynic  is 
to  swear  with  such  piercing  truth. 

The  question  of  a  navy  is  a  great  one ,  and  in  my  humble 
opinion  embraces  considerations  far  more  important  and 
extensive  than  any  that  Mr.  Quincy  or  Mr.  Lloyd  have  seen 
fit  to  contemplate  in  their  discussion  of  it.  Far  be  it  from 
me  to  depreciate  the  millions  of  dollars  to  which  freight 
and  tonnage,  and  exported  fish,  flour,  or  manufactures,  may 
amount.  But  in  this  question  something  besides  dollars 
and  cents  is  concerned.  I  have  no  room  to  say  more,  and  I 
entreat  your  indulgence  for  having  said  so  much.  I  am  etc. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


373 


1812] 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  14  July,  1812. 

*•••••• 

By  what  singular  and  unaccountable  accident  the  letters 
taken  from  Captain  Hinckley  last  year  at  Hamburg  ever 
found  their  way  to  you,  is  matter  of  much  more  surprise  to 
me  than  the  seizure  of  them  by  the  police  at  the  time.  It 
must  certainly  be  that  generosity ,  which  your  father  gives  the 
world  credit  for,  which  induced  the  honorable  seal  breakers 
to  forward  the  letters  after  reading  them,  and  there  is  a 
candor  and  bonhommie  in  the  inclosure  of  their  own  ab¬ 
stract  and  translation  which  I  like  much  better  than  my 
Lord  Castlereagh’s  report  from  the  Right  Honorable  the 
Lords  Commissioners  of  the  Admiralty,  that  “no  letters, 
public  or  private  were  broken  open.,, 

When  I  first  learnt  that  my  number  II  to  you  had  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  the  French  police,  and  that  in  all  prob¬ 
ability  it  has  been  transmitted  to  Paris,  I  very  well  knew  that 
the  paragraph  of  which  the  translation  is  now  in  your  hands 
would  excite  attention,  and  have  a  degree  of  interest  there 
stronger  than  you  could  imagine.  It  referred  to  transactions 
and  to  the  exertion  of  an  influence  with  which  they  were 
well  acquainted,  and  which  had  given  me  more  trouble  and 
concern  than  anything  else  that  has  happened  during  my 
residence  here.  When  they  got  the  letter  the  struggle  was 
over,  and  their  objects  had  been  completely  defeated.  I 
have  no  doubt  diey  understood  every  word  of  the  extract 
better  than  you  to  whom  the  letter  was  directed,  because 
they  had  reports  from  other  sources  relative  to  the  same 
subject,  which  you  have  had  no  opportunity  of  perusing. 
His  Majesty  the  Emperor  Napoleon  occupies  himself  much 


374 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

more  with  details  of  commerce  than  you  seem  to  be  aware  of, 
and  if  he  does  not  exactly  reason  from  his  information,  as 
you  and  I  might  do,  it  is  because  certain  motives  enter  into 
the  composition  of  his  deliberations  which  we  should  not  so 
readily  admit. 

Mr.  John  Henry’s  correspondence  is  one  of  the  most  in¬ 
structive  political  pamphlets  that  has  fallen  under  my  cog¬ 
nizance  for  several  years.  Among  many  other  interesting 
revelations  it  discloses,  or  at  least  asserts,  that  the  pleasures 
and  the  indolence  of  certain  ministers  abandon  to  subalterns 
the  administration  of  public  affairs.  One  of  the  great  mis¬ 
fortunes  of  all  the  old  governments  of  Europe,  and  it  has  not 
a  little  contributed  to  their  greatest  calamities  of  late  years, 
has  been  precisely  this,  that  their  great  men,  their  ministers 
and  generals,  have  been  and  are  men  of  pleasure  and  of  in¬ 
dolence,  and  of  course  that  their  business  has  of  necessity 
been  abandoned  to  subalterns.  Ignorance  of  what  they 
ought  to  know  has  been  no  inconsiderable  source  of  the 
blunders  which  have  been  punished  by  such  heavy  calamities 
to  themselves.  Whatever  may  be  the  vices  of  France 
under  her  new  system  this  is  not  among  them.  She  at  least 
is  not  governed  by  subalterns.  The  activity  of  all  her  official 
administrations  might  teach  her  enemies  a  lesson  of  wisdom, 
if  luxury,  sensuality,  and  indolence,  could  learn  wisdom 
from  either  friend  or  foe.  But  when  indolence  contends 
with  toil,  when  pleasure  wrestles  with  diligence,  which  party 
think  you  will  bear  away  the  prize?  I  certainly  do  not  ap¬ 
prove  the  manner  in  which  his  Majesty’s  police  obtained 
possession  of  my  letter,  but  the  extract  and  translation 
sufficiently  show  that  it  was  not  obtained  without  a  purpose, 
and  I  incline  to  the  belief  that  its  final  inclosure  to  you  was 
intended  as  a  hint  that  its  contents  Ifad  not  been  perused 
without  suitable  notice. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


375 


1812] 

The  city  of  St.  Petersburg  has  no  longer  the  honor  of  being 
the  scene  of  negotiations,  either  political  or  commercial. 
The  Emperor  and  his  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  have  both 
been  nearly  three  months  absent  from  it,  and  now,  in  the 
political  convulsion  which  is  shaking  Europe  to  its  deepest 
foundations,  Russia  has  once  more  changed  her  side  and 
entered  upon  the  bloody  “arena.”  The  war  has  been  com¬ 
menced  more  than  three  weeks.  Of  its  events  hitherto  our 
information  here  is  not  very  distinct,  nor  perhaps  very  ac¬ 
curate.  The  Russians  have  been  retreating  to  unite  their 
forces,  but  nothing  decisive  of  the  issue  of  the  campaign 
has  to  our  knowledge  hitherto  occurred. 

This  explosion  has  tended  very  much  to  aggravate  my  ap¬ 
prehensions  that  another  of  a  similar  nature  may  before 
this  have  burst  upon  our  country.  A  last  hope  still  lingers 
upon  my  mind;  that  the  recent  abandonment  of  the  British 
Orders  in  Council,  forced  as  it  has  been  by  the  desperation 
of  hunger  from  the  very  grasp  of  their  authors  and  support¬ 
ers,  and  insidious  as  the  appearance  of  their  conduct  is  in 
their  manner  of  yielding  to  the  storm  they  have  raised,  may 
still  lead  to  arrangements  which  shall  save  us  from  the  ex¬ 
tremity  of  war.  The  debate  in  the  British  House  of  Commons 
on  the  16th  of  June,  upon  Mr.  Brougham’s  motion,  was 
of  such  import  to  us,  to  our  government,  and  to  the  sup¬ 
porters  of  its  policy  among  ourselves,  that  I  hope  it  will  be 
duly  known  and  in  all  its  particulars  in  America.  The 
evidence  appears  to  have  been  all  printed.  I  have  not  seen 
it,  but  I  hope  that  too  will  be  transmitted  across  the  At¬ 
lantic.  Not  only  the  speeches  of  Mr.  Brougham  and  Mr. 
Baring,  but  those  of  Mr.  Rose  and  Lord  Castlereagh,  are 
memorable  documents  to  us.  “War  in  Disguise”  dared  not 
show  his  face.1  And  Marryat,  the  kinsman  of  our  writers , 

1  James  Stephen. 


376 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

the  man  who  in  a  pamphlet  had  urged  the  policy  of  forcing 
the  American  government  to  terms  by  distressing  the  Amer¬ 
ican  people  into  riot  against  their  rulers,  this  man  was  re¬ 
duced  to  the  necessity  of  complaining  in  open  Parliament 
that  he,  his  wife  and  children  were  in  danger  of  being  torn 
to  pieces  by  the  frenzy  of  the  starving  manufacturers. 

God  grant  that  we  may  yet  be  spared  from  the  trials  and 
dangers  of  this  war.  Or,  if  we  must  pass  through  them, 
that  the  spirit  which  conducted  us  through  that  of  our 
revolution  may  again  lead  us  in  triumph  through  all  its 
evils — a  sentiment  as  profound  and  irradicable  in  my  heart 
as  that  of  the  affection  with  which  I  am  ever  yours. 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  92.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  25  July,  1812. 

Sir: 

The  French  ambassador  and  the  consul,  with  their  fami¬ 
lies,  the  Wiirttemberg  and  Westphalian  ministers,  the  Ba¬ 
varian  and  Neapolitan  charges  d’affaires,  embarked  at  Or- 
anienbaum  (opposite  to  Cronstadt)  and  sailed  on  the  23  rd 
instant  to  be  landed  at  Memel.  A  frigate,  a  corvette,  and 
two  transports,  were  provided  by  the  Russian  government 
for  their  conveyance,  it  having  been  thought  not  advisable 
to  permit  their  departure  by  land.  The  Bavarian  minister 
had  left  this  city  some  weeks  before  the  commencement  of 
hostilities,  and  was  at  a  country  seat  in  the  neighborhood 
of  Riga.  In  answer  to  his  application  for  passports  he  re¬ 
ceived  permission  to  go,  by  water,  from  one  of  two  ports 
named  to  him  in  the  vicinity,  and  was  informed  by  a  letter 


1812}  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  377 

from  Count  Romanzoff  that  the  Russian  frontier  from  the 
Baltic  to  the  Black  Sea  being  invaded,  the  French  embassy 
and  the  legations  from  the  Rhenish  confederation  would  be 
under  the  necessity  of  departing  by  sea.  As  Count  Lauriston 
is  a  military  officer,  and  intends  proceeding  immediately 
to  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s  headquarters,  it  was  perhaps 
thought  best  not  to  afford  him  the  means  of  observation 
which  a  journey  passing  directly  through  the  Russian  line  of 
defence  might  yield.  Upon  what  principle  the  extension  of 
the  same  cautious  arrangement  was  governed  is  merely  mat¬ 
ter  of  conjecture.  But  the  Austrian  and  Spanish  ministers, 
the  Saxon  and  Prussian  charges  d’affaires,  and  a  Prussian 
military  agent  who  has  resided  here  some  years,  all  of  whom 
applied  also  for  their  passports  at  the  same  time  with  the 
French  ambassador,  were  exempted  from  its  operations. 
They  were  permitted,  notwithstanding  the  invasion  of  the 
frontier,  to  go  by  land.  The  Spanish  minister’s  infirm  state 
of  health,  and  circumstances  of  private  concernment  to  the 
Saxon,  were  alleged  as  motives  of  indulgence  to  them;  but 
the  favor  shewn  to  the  Austrians  and  Prussians  was  more 
probably  dictated  by  motives  of  policy,  with  views  still  to 
conciliate  their  governments,  or  at  least  to  excite  jealousies 
between  them  and  their  allies.  It  appears  that  Count 
Stackelberg,  the  Russian  minister  at  Vienna,  has  obtained 
permission  to  remain  there  in  a  private  character,  and  Count 
St.  Julien,  the  Austrian  minister  here,  has  been  given  to 
understand  that  the  same  privilege  would  be  allowed  him, 
if  he  should  think  proper  to  remain.  It  is  not  certain  that 
his  orders  from  his  court  to  depart  were  peremptory.  He 
still  lingers  here,  though  I  believe  some  manifestation  of 
impatience  at  his  delay  by  the  late  ambassador  had  in¬ 
duced  him  to  fix  for  his  own  departure  the  same  day  on  which 
the  ambassador  himself  was  to  embark.  The  Prussians 


37» 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

had  asked  the  permission  of  their  government  to  remain  here, 
but  had  not  obtained  it.  They  are,  however,  not  yet  gone. 

A  charge  d’affaires  from  Sweden  arrived  here  on  the  same 
day  that  the  ambassador  and  his  colleagues  left  the  city. 
He  is  a  young  man,  named  Hochschild,  and  was  formerly 
here  as  one  of  the  secretaries  of  Count  Stedingk.  He  comes 
directly  from  Orebro,  where  the  Diet  is  still  in  session.  The 
negotiation  of  the  peace  with  England  is  conducted  in  con¬ 
cert  between  Sweden  and  Russia.  The  English  negotiator 
is  Mr.  Thornton,  the  Russian,  General  Van  Suchtelen.  But 
the  French  charge  d’affaires,  Mr.  de  Cabre,  is  yet  at  Stock¬ 
holm,  and  in  the  course  of  the  negotiation  both  Britain  and 
Russian  have  perhaps  discovered  great  distrust  of  Sweden. 
Mr.  Thornton  was  gone  to  Gothenburg  when  Mr.  Hochs¬ 
child  left  Orebro. 

A  Mr.  Lea  has  been  to  the  headquarters  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander,  and  has  there  been  received  and  recognized  as 
the  official  representative  of  the  Spanish  government  at 
Cadiz;  though  without  formal  diplomatic  character.  He 
has  generally  resided  here  the  last  eighteen  months,  as  a 
partner  of  a  commercial  house,  at  the  head  of  which  was  the 
late  Mr.  Anthony  Colombi,  heretofore  the  Spanish  Consul. 
The  Spanish  minister  who  has  just  gone,  had  by  a  singular 
fortune  arrived  here  with  credentials  from  King  Ferdinand, 
from  the  Junta  then  at  Seville,  and  from  King  Joseph. 

The  last  only  had  been  presented  by  him  and  received. 
He  was  recognized  as  the  minister  of  King  Joseph.  An  in¬ 
formal  intercourse  has,  however,  constantly  been  main¬ 
tained  with  the  government  at  Cadiz . 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


379 


1812] 


TO  BENJAMIN  WATERHOUSE 

St.  Petersburg,  31  July,  1812. 

Dear  Sir: 

Your  favor  of  18  March,  together  with  the  inclosed  paper 
containing  Mr.  John  Henry’s  correspondence  on  his  memo¬ 
rable  mission  to  Boston,  I  received  not  many  days  since.  I 
have  observed  by  the  newspapers  of  a  later  date  that  the 
party  with  whom  he  was  sent  to  negotiate  disavow  all  con¬ 
nection  with  him,  and  deny  all  participation  in  his  trans¬ 
actions  on  that  occasion.  Thus  far  their  conduct  is  laudable, 
and  by  the  law  of  our  land  every  man  must  be  presumed  in¬ 
nocent  who  pleads  not  guilty,  until  proof  of  his  guilt  is  pro¬ 
duced.  But  the  party  to  whom  he  was  accredited  have 
certainly  countenanced  the  project  upon  which  he  was  sent. 
From  the  complexion  of  their  newspaper  publication  they 
even  yet  dare  to  countenance  it.  That  as  long  as  they  have 
the  impudence  to  threaten  a  separation  of  the  States ,  and  even 
as  long  as  they  shall  sneakingly  hanker  after  it  without 
daring  to  avow  it,  their  plans  will  all  terminate  in  their  utter 
discomfiture  and  confusion,  I  am  thoroughly  convinced. 
That  was  the  purport  of  Henry’s  errand,  and  to  that  their 
measures  were  driving  with  Jehu-like  fury  when  he  was 
sent  among  them.  Erskine’s  arrangement  broke  them  up 
into  fragments  “  utterly  harmless  and  contemptible,”  as 
Mr.  Canning  says;  and  when  that  momentary  gleam  of 
good  sense  on  the  part  of  Great  Britain,  by  removing  the 
real  cause  of  all  the  distresses  of  our  commerce  left  our 
people  calmly  to  estimate  the  measures  of  our  government 
and  the  opposition  projects  of  those  gentlemen,  they  very 
soon  found  what  the  people  thought  of  both.  The  British 
ministry,  however,  less  wise  than  their  envoy  in  America, 


38° 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

chose  to  renew  the  experience  of  injustice,  insolence,  and  op¬ 
pression,  refused  to  sanction  his  engagements,  recalled  him, 
and  put  in  his  stead  a  man  to  bully  and  insult  us.  From 
the  feasting,  and  banqueting,  and  toasting,  which  this  man 
received  at  Boston,  he  seems  to  have  been  a  character  to  the 
heart’s  content  of  our  wise  men  of  the  east.  They  seconded 
all  his  insults,  and  passed  resolutions  in  honor  and  support 
of  him  as  patriotic  as  those  they  had  passed  while  Henry 
was  with  them.  But  the  people  did  not  go  with  them. 

Now  after  another  trial  of  two  years  more  by  the  British 
government  how  far  the  temper  of  the  American  govern¬ 
ment  and  nation  would  endure  injury  and  outrage  rather 
than  resort  to  the  last  and  only  remedy  of  war,  the  same  men 
who  so  loftily  spurned  at  Erskine’s  accommodation  have  been 
forced,  with  the  most  extreme  reluctance  compelled  by  fam¬ 
ine  and  revolt  among  the  victims  of  their  foolish  policy  in 
their  own  country,  to  tread  back  every  step  they  had  taken, 
to  adjust  the  affair  of  the  Chesapeake  exactly  as  Erskine 
had  done,  even  with  the  very  severe  but  just  rebuke  upon 
their  hypocrisy  and  falsehood,  for  pretending  they  had 
punished  Berkeley,  while  they  refused  to  punish  him  at  all, 
that  very  rebuke  at  which  their  pride  had  affected  to  be 
so  much  wounded;  to  repeal  not  only  the  Orders  in  Council 
to  which  they  had  so  long  and  so  obstinately  clung,  but  that 
very  paper  blockade  of  May,  1806,  which  laid  the  foundation 
of  the  French  “continental  system,”  and  of  all  the  subse¬ 
quent  anti-neutral  decrees  and  orders  both  of  France  and 
England;  to  do  more  than  they  were  asked  to  do  when 
Erskine  made  his  settlement,  and  to  proclaim  by  their 
manner  of  doing  it  to  all  mankind,  that  they  had  been 
forced  to  it  by  the  firm  and  temperate  resistance  of  the 
American  government. 

I  please  myself  with  the  hope  that  these  great  and  real 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


381 


1812] 

concessions  extorted  from  the  stubbornness  of  the  British 
councils,  though  at  the  last  extremity,  will  preserve  us  from 
that  greatest  of  scourges  war.  Though  until  the  Orders  in 
Council  were  removed  I  thought  that  war  inevitable,  I 
cannot  think  it  so  now,  as  the  great  objects  for  which  we 
have  been  struggling  are  substantially  yielded. 

What  the  cool  and  deliberate  judgment  of  the  people  in 
America  upon  this  event  will  be,  I  cannot  undertake  to 
foretell.  I  suppose,  however,  it  will  be  discoverable  in  the 
elections  that  are  near  at  hand.  I  do  not  imagine  that  it 
will  be  very  propitious  to  the  projectors  of  a  separation  of 
the  States. 

I  was  much  gratified  in  learning  that  the  legislature  of 
Massachusetts  had  restored  to  the  University  their  old 
Board  of  Overseers.  It  has  exceedingly  grieved  me  to  see 
the  spirit  of  party  creeping  like  a  poisonous  weed  into  our 
venerable  seminary  of  education.  Believing  the  change  of 
the  overseers  to  have  been  altogether  a  party  measure,  I 
lamented  it  sincerely.  I  cannot  say  that  I  should  be  pleased 
to  see  nine  republicans  added  to  the  corporation  for  the  very 
same  reason,  because  it  would  be  an  innovation  dictated  by 
party  spirit.  I  wish  there  were  less  politics,  and  especially 
less  violent  and  erroneous  politics,  than  I  know  there  are  in 
the  corporation.  But  let  the  overseers  do  their  duty,  and 
bad  politics  in  the  corporation  will  never  do  much  harm. 
I  would  say  to  all  who  feel  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the 
college,  beware  above  all  things  of  innovation  in  the  heat  of 
political  dissension. 


I  remain  etc. 


38a 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  93.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  i  August,  1812. 

Sir: 

The  above  is  the  latest  official  account  from  the  armies 
that  has  yet  been  published.  The  first  handbill  observed 
that  it  was  expedient  to  avoid  a  general  action,  until  the 
army  under  Prince  Bagration  should  have  formed  its  junc¬ 
tion  with  that  commanded  by  the  Minister  of  War,  General 
Barclai  de  Tolli.  It  does  not  appear  that  this  junction  has 
been  effected.  In  one  of  the  official  publications  it  was 
said  that  Prince  Bagration  had  received  orders  to  attack. 
An  unauthentic  rumor  has  been  in  circulation  that  he  did 
attack,  but  without  success,  and  that  after  the  action  he 
retired  upon  the  Dnieper;  that  the  French  army  after 
cutting  off  his  passage  have  successively  occupied  Minsk, 
Borisow,  Orsha,  and  Smolensk  on  the  direct  road  to  Moscow, 
and  that  if  the  junction  between  the  two  Russian  armies 
should  now  be  formed,  it  must  be  in  the  rear  of  the  French 
forces. 

On  the  6/18  July  the  Emperor  Alexander  issued  from  the 
headquarters  at  or  near  Polotsk,  a  proclamation  to  the  Rus¬ 
sian  nation,  expressing  his  entire  confidence  in  the  valor  and 
strength  of  his  forces  already  assembled  for  the  defence  of 
the  Empire:  but  stating  at  the  same  time,  that  their  enemy, 
hoping  by  force  and  treachery  to  attain  his  object,  had  in¬ 
vaded  the  country  with  very  considerable  forces,  and  that 
it  was  necessary  to  make  seasonable  preparations  even  for 
the  worst  contingencies.  A  distinct  appeal  was  therefore 
made  to  all  the  several  classes  of  the  people,  to  the  nobility, 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


383 


l8l2] 

the  clergy  and  the  citizens,  to  come  forward  according  to 
the  duties  of  their  respective  stations  in  defence  of  the 
liberty,  the  religion,  and  the  independence  of  the  nation. 
The  nobility  were  specially  called  upon  to  meet  in  the  several 
governments,  and  to  provide  an  additional  temporary 
military  force,  in  the  nature  of  a  militia,  the  officers  of  which 
should  be  elected  by  themselves,  and  a  commander  in  chief, 
to  be  elected  in  like  manner,  by  a  deputation  from  the  several 
governments,  to  meet  at  Moscow. 

The  day  after  this  proclamation  was  issued  the  Emperor 
left  the  headquarters  of  the  First  Army,  and  proceeded  to 
Moscow,  to  direct  the  necessary  arrangements  for  the  or¬ 
ganization  of  this  new  force.  At  the  same  time  Prince  George 
of  Holstein-Oldenburg,  husband  of  the  Grand  Duchess 
Catherine,  son  of  the  Duke  of  Oldenburg,  whose  Duchy  was 
annexed  with  the  Hanseatic  cities  to  France,  and  governor 
general  of  the  three  governments  of  Novgorod,  Tver,  and 
Yaroslaff,  also  left  for  a  short  time  the  army,  and  went  to 
Novgorod  and  Tver  to  assemble  the  nobility  of  those  gov¬ 
ernments  for  the  purpose  of  taking  measures  in  conformity 
to  the  imperial  proclamation.  On  his  arrival  at  Novgorod, 
where  he  met  the  Grand  Duchess  arriving  from  St.  Peters¬ 
burg,  he  addressed  a  summons  to  the  nobility  of  the  govern¬ 
ment,  who  held  a  meeting  and  agreed  to  furnish  a  body  of 
ten  thousand  men,  to  be  maintained  at  their  own  expense 
during  the  war.  Similar  meetings  have  been  held  at  Moscow 
and  in  this  city,  where  the  same  spirit  of  exertion  and  of 
devotion  to  the  public  has  been  manifested  The  nobility 
of  the  government  of  St.  Petersburg  met  three  days  succes¬ 
sively  in  the  course  of  this  week,  and  agreed  to  furnish  from 
their  estates  four  men  upon  every  hundred.  Among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  city,  five  thousand  volunteers  have  pre¬ 
sented  themselves  to  be  enrolled.  General  Kutuzoff,  now 


384 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

here,  was  elected  as  the  commander  in  chief  for  the  organiza¬ 
tion  of  this  levy,  which  is  to  be  ready  at  the  disposal  of  the 
government  by  the  1st  of  November. 

A  Te  Deum  was  celebrated  last  Sunday  for  the  conclusion 
of  the  peace  with  Turkey,  of  which  the  ratifications  have  at 
length  been  exchanged.  The  treaty  itself  has  not  yet  been 
published,  but  it  is  said  the  Pruth  is  to  be  the  boundary. 
The  Ottoman  Porte  does  not  appear  to  have  paid  much 
regard  to  the  guarantee  of  their  territory  in  the  alliance 
between  France  and  Austria. 

A  circumstance  not  a  little  extraordinary  is,  that  the  con¬ 
clusion  of  peace  with  England,  if  accomplished,  has  not  yet 
been  made  public.  An  Admiral  Bentinck  was  at  the  Em¬ 
peror  Alexander’s  headquarters,  dispatched,  it  is  said,  by 
Admiral  Saumarez  from  the  British  Fleet  in  the  Baltic,  to 
which  he  has  again  returned.  All  the  prohibitions  against 
the  admission  of  English  vessels,  and  of  vessels  from  Eng¬ 
land  still  subsist  in  form,  and  no  vessels  have  yet  entered 
at  Cronstadt  directly  from  an  English  port;  or  cleared  from 
Cronstadt  to  an  English  port.  At  Archangel,  I  am  informed 
by  Mr.  Hazard,  that  vessels  entering  from  English  ports 
have  been  admitted. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  has  been  expected  here  all  this 
day,  and  orders  were  given  by  the  police  for  a  general  il¬ 
lumination  upon  his  arrival.  This  expectation  however 
was  disappointed.  He  is  still  hourly  expected. 

3  August,  1812.  The  Emperor  arrived  at  two  o’clock  this 
morning.  The  peace  with  England  is  said  to  have  been 
signed  in  Sweden,  and  is  gone  to  England  for  ratification. 
The  rumor  of  a  triple  alliance  between  Russia,  Sweden,  and 
England,  is  strongly  circulated,  and  willingly  credited  here. 
The  Russian  fleet  has  been  so  long  waiting  at  Helsingfors 
as  to  countenance  the  report  that  Swedish  troops  are  to 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


l8l2] 


embark  in  it  with  the  Russians,  and  that  its  destination  is 
for  Swedish  Pomerania.  I  am  with  great  respect, 


TO  GEORGE  JOY 

St.  Petersburg,  4  August,  1812. 

Sir: 

Mr.  Richardson  brought  me  on  his  arrival  here  a  packet 
containing  two  pamphlets,  with  a  minute  from  you  promis¬ 
ing  a  duplicate  and  letter  by  Mr.  Willing. 

That  gentleman  had  already  been  some  time  here,  but  I 
was  disappointed  in  the  hope  which  the  minute  had  excited. 
I  found  upon  inquiry  that  he  had  neither  pamphlet  nor 
letter  for  me.  Since  then,  however,  and  within  a  few  days, 
the  duplicate  of  the  “American  Question,”  the  manuscript 
copy  of  the  letter  to  the  Noble  Lord,  and  half  the  letter 
which  was  to  have  been  sent  by  Mr.  Willing  have  come  to 
hand.  For  the  other  half  of  the  letter  I  still  live  in  hope,  and 
in  the  meantime  will  no  longer  postpone  my  thanks  for 
what  I  have  received. 

I  have  read  the  pamphlets  with  the  attention  which  the 
subject  and  the  manner  of  discussing  it  were  calculated  to 
excite,  and  observing  the  main  object  of  their  argument  and 
the  meridian  for  which  they  were  intended,  I  consider  their 
reasoning  as  quite  unanswerable,  and  it  is  presented  in  lights 
suitable  to  carry  conviction  where  it  was  to  be  produced. 
There  is  a  passage  in  page  64  of  the  letters  to  a  clergyman 
which  I  have  understood  as  alluding  to  a  publication  of 
mine  written  at  a  very  early  period  of  these  controversies; 
but  this  being  mere  conjecture  and  the  allusion  being  in 
general  terms  I  may  have  mistaken  its  object.  I  certainly 
did  believe  and  publish  my  belief  that  “young  Mr.  Rose’s 


386 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

mission”  was  intended  not  to  succeed.  I  gave  much  at 
large  my  reasons  for  that  opinion,  nor  have  I  seen  cause 
since  to  apprehend  that  I  had  entertained  it  unjustly.  I 
did  not  know,  however,  until  now  that  either  the  king  or  the 
Prince  Regent  had  felt  or  manifested  personally  so  strong 
and  clear  an  inclination  that  reparation  should  be  made  for 
the  outrage  upon  the  Chesapeake ,  and  indeed  the  5th  letter 
to  the  clergyman  leaves  some  doubt  upon  my  mind  whether 
its  meaning  in  this  respect  is  explicit  or  ironical.  There  is, 
however,  a  concession  in  it  which  in  candor,  and  merely 
as  it  regards  the  impression  upon  your  own  mind,  I  ask 
you  to  reconsider.  It  says  “as  it  was,  I  am  no  advocate  for 
any  expression  of  dissatisfaction  on  the  part  of  that  govern¬ 
ment  in  accepting  the  proffered  atonement,”  etc.  Re¬ 
member,  that  in  the  very  instrument  offering  this  atonement 
the  British  government  falsely  pretended  that  it  included  the 
punishment  of  the  offending  officer,  while  in  reality  they 
inflexibly  refused  to  punish  him  at  all.  By  accepting  an 
atonement,  relinquishing  that  most  important  part  of  the 
satisfaction  which  America  had  so  just  a  right  to  demand, 
was  it  not  incumbent  upon  the  President  to  show  that  he 
did  not  recognize  the  pretence  of  Berkeley's  punishment  to 
have  been  really  such;  and  would  it  not  have  been  really 
more  honorable  to  the  king  of  England  to  have  punished 
the  offender  in  fact,  than  to  have  pretended  he  had  punished 
him,  when  he  really  had  not,  but  had  peremptorily  refused 
to  punish  him?  Had  no  expression  of  dissatisfaction  been 
used  in  accepting  the  atonement,  any  future  appeal  to  the 
documents  would  have  shown  that  America  had  actually 
taken  for  substantial  punishment  a  mockery  of  words  noto¬ 
riously  false.  Who  shall  engage  to  say  that  it  would  not  have 
been  produced  as  a  precedent  to  refuse  future  malefactors 
of  the  same  class  from  all  punishment?  The  exclusion  of  this 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


387 


1812] 

conclusion  was  in  my  view  so  essential  in  that  transaction 
that  I  do  most  heartily  approve  that  expression  of  dissatis¬ 
faction  which  Mr.  Smith  inserted  by  Mr.  Madison’s  express 
command,  and  which  in  his  pamphlet  he  says  he  himself 
disapproved.  After  all  the  bluster  of  Mr.  Canning  about  this 
expression  of  dissatisfaction  the  British  government  have 
finally  agreed  to  make  the  very  same  atonement,  accepted 
with  an  expression  still  stronger  of  the  very  same  dissatis¬ 
faction.  This  even  in  the  Times  newspaper  is  spoken  of  as  a 
smart  and  just  observation  upon  the  inconsistency  of  the 
pretension  that  Berkeley  had  been  punished.  I  regret  the 
more  that  the  clergyman’s  correspondent  yields  this  point, 
because  it  has  been  made  so  personal  to  Mr.  Madison,  be¬ 
cause  it  has  been  so  often  misstated  and  misunderstood  both 
in  Europe  and  America,  and  because  its  justification  never 
has  been  placed  upon  its  true  grounds,  or  indeed  so  far  as  I 
have  seen  publicly  attempted  at  all. 

Since  the  publication  of  these  two  pamphlets  what  a 
change  in  the  relations  between  the  United  States  and  Great 
Britain!  How  many  questions  to  settle  besides  anti-neutral 
Orders  in  Council,  and  non-importation,  or  impressment 
of  seamen,  and  exclusion  of  ships  of  war.  Even  yet,  however, 
I  would  not  despair  that  peace  may  be  restored,  if  not  pre¬ 
served.  Mr.  Foster’s  letter  of  30  May  to  Mr.  Monroe  would 
have  left  the  case  perfectly  hopeless,  had  not  the  Regent’s 
proclamation  of  22  June  given  a  new  commentary  upon  it 
and  upon  the  whole  system  of  the  Orders  in  Council,  the 
beneficial  effect  of  which  will,  I  hope,  not  yet  be  lost.  When 
England  has  yielded  the  substance,  I  am  willing  to  hope  she 
will  persist  in  the  purpose  of  obtaining  the  object  for  which 
it  was  conceded.  Upon  herself  alone  I  am  persuaded  it 
depends.  I  am  etc. 


388 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  10  August,  1812. 

•  •••••• 

I  then  flattered  myself  that  the  revocation  of  the  British 
Orders  in  Council,  of  which  I  had  just  been  informed,  would 
be  known  in  the  United  States  in  season  to  prevent  the  war 
which  I  knew  would  otherwise  be  unavoidable.  In  this  hope 
I  have  been  disappointed.  After  reading  Mr.  Foster’s  letter 
to  Mr.  Monroe  of  30  May  I  cannot  indeed  perceive  any 
other  course  which  was  left  to  the  American  government 
without  self  degradation  to  pursue  than  that  which  they 
did  adopt;  but  when  I  remark  that  within  fifteen  days  after 
that  letter  of  Mr.  Foster  was  written,  the  very  same  British 
ministers  by  whose  instructions  he  sent  it  had  determined 
totally  to  repeal  the  whole  system  which  was  kindling  the 
war,  which  they  had  always  pretended  was  necessary  to 
the  national  existence  of  England,  and  which  they  now 
ordered  Mr.  Foster  to  say  was  more  necessary  than  ever, 
I  see  no  room  left  for  calculation  beforehand  upon  anything. 
I  lament  the  declaration  of  war  as  an  event  which  in  the 
actual  state  of  things  when  it  passed  was  altogether  un¬ 
necessary,  the  greatest  and  only  insuperable  causes  for  it 
having  been  removed;  but  as  it  was  not  and  could  not  be 
known  to  Congress  I  cannot  be  surprised  that  they  should 
have  considered  all  pacific  and  conciliatory  means  of  ob¬ 
taining  justice  as  exhausted,  and  no  alternative  left  but  war 
or  the  abandonment  of  our  right  as  an  independent  nation. 

The  declaration,  however,  so  essentially  alters  the  aspect 
of  affairs  between  the  two  countries  and  their  governments 
that  I  now  consider  everything  again  thrown  upon  the 
chances  of  events.  That  the  British  ministers  are  now  de- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


389 


1812] 

sirous  of  peace  with  us  is  obvious  from  the  steps  they  have 
taken.  How  far  the  policy  of  our  government  will  be  affected 
by  the  revocation  of  the  Orders  in  Council  when  they  learn 
that  it  preceded  the  declaration  of  war,  I  can  hardly  foresee. 
My  own  most  fervent  wishes  and  prayers  are  that  peace 
may  be  restored  before  any  further  irritating  and  aggravating 
hostilities  shall  have  been  committed  on  either  side. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  95.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  30  September,  1812. 

Sir: 

I  have  the  honor  to  enclose  copies  of  a  note  which  I  re¬ 
ceived  from  the  Chancellor,  Count  Romanzoff,  communicat¬ 
ing  two  printed  copies  of  the  treaty  of  peace  late  concluded 
with  the  Ottoman  Porte,  and  of  my  answer.  One  of  the 
copies  of  the  treaty  is  likewise  enclosed. 

On  the  20th  instant  I  received  a  note  from  the  Chancellor 
requesting  me  to  call  upon  him  the  next  evening  which  I  ac¬ 
cordingly  did .  He  told  me  that  he  had  asked  to  see  me  by  the 
Emperor's  command;  that  having  made  peace  and  established 
the  relations  of  amity  and  commerce  with  Great  Britain ,  the 
Emperor  was  much  concerned  and  disappointed  to  find  the 
whole  benefit  which  he  expected  his  subjects  would  derive  com¬ 
mercially  from  that  event  defeated  and  lost  by  the  new  war  which 
had  arisen  between  the  United  States  and  England;  that  he  had 
thought  he  perceived  various  indications  that  there  was  on  both 
sides  a  reluctance  at  engaging  in  and  prosecuting  this  war , 
and  it  had  occurred  to  the  Emperor  that  perhaps  an  amicable 


390 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

arrangement  of  the  differences  between  the  parties  might  be 
accommodated  more  easily  and  speedily  by  indirect  than  by  a 
direct  negotiation;  that  his  Majesty  had  directed  him  to  see 
me  and  to  enquire  if  I  was  aware  of  any  difficulty  or  obstacle 
on  the  part  of  the  government  of  the  United  States ,  if  he  should 
offer  his  mediation  for  the  purpose  of  effecting  a  pacification . 
I  answered  that  it  was  obviously  impossible  for  me  to  speak 
on  this  subject  any  otherwise  than  from  the  general  knowledge 
which  I  had  of  the  sentiments  of  my  government;  that  I  was  so 
far  from  knowing  what  their  ideas  were  with  regard  to  the  con¬ 
tinuance  of  the  war ,  that  I  had  not  to  that  day  received  any 
official  communication  of  its  declaration ,  but  that  I  well  knew 
it  was  with  reluctance  they  had  engaged  in  the  war;  that  I  was 
very  sure  whatever  determination  they  might  form  upon  the 
proposal  of  the  Emperor's  mediation ,  they  would  receive  and 
consider  it  as  a  new  evidence  of  his  Majesty's  regard  and  friend¬ 
ship  for  the  United  States ,  and  that  I  was  not  aware  of  any 
obstacle  or  difficulty  which  could  occasion  them  to  decline  ac¬ 
cepting  it.  For  myself  I  deeply  lamented  the  very  existence  of 
the  war;  that  I  should  welcome  any  facility  for  bringing  it  to 
a  just  and  honorable  termination.  I  lamented  it,  because  I 
thought  that  the  only  cause  which  had  made  it  absolutely  un¬ 
avoidable  was  actually  removed  at  the  moment  when  the  declara¬ 
tion  was  made.  If  the  course  which  had  been  adopted  by  my 
government  had  been  such  as  I  could  not  in  my  own  mind 
approve,  it  would  still  not  become  me  to  censure  it,  but  it  was  not 
so.  The  declaration  of  the  English  Regent  in  April,  and  the 
letter  Mr.  Foster  had  written  to  the  American  Secretary  of 
State  in  communicating  it,  had  as  it  appeared  to  me  left  the 
American  government  no  alternative  but  an  immediate  appeal 
to  arms,  or  a  dishonorable  abandonment  of  all  the  unquestion¬ 
able  rights  for  which  they  had  contended,  and  even  the  essential 
characteristics  of  an  independent  nation .  The  blame  of  the  war 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


39i 


1812] 

was  therefore  entirely  on  the  English  side,  but  the  war  was  not 
the  less  disagreeable  to  me.  I  lamented  it  particularly  as  oc¬ 
curring  at  a  period  when,  from  my  good  wishes  for  Russia  and 
the  Russian  cause,  I  should  have  rejoiced  to  see  friendship  and 
harmony  taking  place  between  America  and  England,  rather 
than  discord  and  hostility.  I  knew  the  war  would  affect  un¬ 
favorably  the  interests  of  Russia.  I  knew  it  must  be  highly  in¬ 
jurious  both  to  the  United  States  and  England.  I  could  see 
no  good  result  as  likely  to  arise  from  it  to  anyone.  The  Count 
replied  that  he  had  considered  it  altogether  in  the  same  light , 
and  so  had  the  Emperor  who  was  sincerely  concerned  at  it,  and 
who  had  himself  conceived  this  idea  of  authorizing  his  mediation. 
He  thought  one  indirect  negotiation  conducted  here,  aided  by  the 
conciliatory  wishes  of  a  friend  to  both  parties,  might  smooth 
down  difficulties  which  in  direct  discussion  between  the  princi¬ 
pals  might  be  found  insuperable.  To  a  mutual  friend  each 
party  might  exhibit  all  its  claims  and  all  its  complaints,  without 
danger  of  exciting  irritations  or  raising  impediments.  The 
part  of  Russia  would  only  be  to  hear  both  sides,  and  to  use  her 
best  endeavors  to  conciliate  them.  I  observed  that  there  was  a 
third  party  to  be  consulted  as  to  the  proposal — the  British  govern¬ 
ment.  The  Count  answered  that  it  had  already  been  suggested 
by  him  to  the  British  ambassador,  Lord  Cathcart,  who  had  the 
day  before  dispatched  it  by  a  messenger  to  his  court.  Some 
question  occurred  concerning  the  mode  of  enabling  me  to  trans¬ 
mit  this  communication  to  the  United  States,  upon  which  the 
Count  promised  to  see  me  again  in  the  course  of  a  few  days. 
He  said  that  he  should  write  to  Mr.  Daschkoff  and  instruct  him 
to  make  the  proposition  to  the  government  of  the  United  States.1 
I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 

1  Cypher. 


392 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  96.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  2  October,  1812. 

Sir: 

•  •••••* 

It  has,  indeed,  constantly  been  my  wish  not  to  be  continued 
in  the  mission  here  beyond  the  ensuing  Spring,  and  I  sug¬ 
gested  this  desire  to  the  President  as  early  as  last  February. 
I  still  retain  it,  subject  to  the  supposition  that  my  return  to 
the  United  States  with  my  family  should  be  practicable, 
which  in  the  event  of  the  continuance  of  our  war  with  Great 
Britain  it  would  scarcely  be.  If  the  proposition  communi¬ 
cated  to  you  in  my  last  letter  should  be  deemed  by  the 
President  acceptable,  he  may  perhaps  think  it  advisable  to 
commit  the  negotiation  to  some  other  person,  which  I  do 
not  feel  the  inclination  or  the  duty  to  ask;  but  in  which  I 
should  very  readily  acquiesce.  But  whether  he  should  judge 
it  expedient  to  commit  the  trust  to  me,  or  to  another,  it 
may  probably  occasion  the  dispatching  of  a  vessel,  protected 
from  capture,  by  which  a  remittance  in  specie  might  be 
made  to  me,  which  would  save  me  from  the  almost  incredible 
loss  in  exchange,  which  by  drawing  upon  Amsterdam  I 
must  incur.  And  if  it  be  his  pleasure  to  recall  me,  the  same 
vessel  might  perhaps  furnish  me  a  safe  conduct  home. 

There  is  another  subject  upon  which  I  may  possibly  be  called 
to  act  before  I  can  receive  the  President’s  instructions ,  but 
which  1  have  hitherto  thought  unsuitable  to  be  anticipated  so 
far  as  to  ask  for  them.  It  is  at  least  within  the  compass  of 
possible  events  that  the  Emperor  with  his  family  and  all  his 
court  may  remove  for  a  time  from  this  capital  into  the  interior 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


393 


1812] 

of  the  empire .  Although  no  suggestion  of  such  a  design  has 
been  officially  made ,  it  is  generally  understood  by  the  public 
to  be  contemplated  upon  certain  contingencies ,  and  it  is  supposed 
that  upon  such  an  event  it  would  be  expected ,  and  perhaps 
required ,  of  the  foreign  ministers  to  accompany  or  to  follow 
the  sovereign.  The  city  may  fall  into  the  possession  of  a  hostile 
arrny  as  has  already  happened  to  Moscow ,  in  which  case  the 
character  of  a  public  minister  might  be  no  farther  recognized 
than  as  securing  the  right  to  retire  without  molestation.  The 
danger  if  any  such  now  exists  will  I  trust  be  entirely  removed 
before  the  Spring;  but  as  it  may  be  otherwise  I  request  the  Presi¬ 
dent's  eventual  instructions  for  the  government  of  my  conduct 
in  the  cases  supposed.  My  present  intentions  are ,  if  invited , 
to  attend  the  Emperor ,  to  comply  as  my  duty  resulting  from  my 
credentials;  if  requested  to  remain  {which  is  possible ),  likewise 
to  comply ,  trusting  to  the  general  protection  secured  to  my 
character  and  family  by  the  law  of  nations.  If  left  at  my 
option  to  stay ,  to  follow  the  Emperor ,  or  to  move  where  I  may 
judge  proper ,  I  shall  still  remain ,  unless  circumstances  should 
occur  to  make  it  necessary  for  the  safety  of  my  family  to  with¬ 
draw.1 

I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  4  October,  1812. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

But  of  the  war  in  the  country  where  I  reside  you  may 
expect  me  to  speak  more  at  large,  and,  besides  the  general 
interest  to  which  it  is  entitled  as  forming  so  large  a  portion 

1  Cypher. 


394 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

of  the  history  of  the  civilized  world,  our  residence  here  may 
give  you  a  particular  concern  with  it,  as  our  own  situation 
and  circumstances  are  in  no  small  degree  involved  in  its 
events.  On  the  24th  of  June  the  war  began,  and  from  that 
day  to  this,  according  to  the  official  bulletins  published  here, 
has  consisted  of  an  uninterrupted  series  of  Russian  victories. 
We  have  had  Te  Deums,  illuminations,  cannon  firing,  bell 
ringing  and  all  the  external  demonstrations  of  continual 
triumph,  while  the  French  armies  have  been  advancing 
with  rapid  and  steady  pace,  until  on  the  15th  of  September, 
the  very  day  that  my  poor  child  died,  they  took  possession 
of  Moscow,  the  ancient  and  renowned  metropolis  of  the 
Russian  empire.  The  real  progress  of  military  operations 
has  been  known  very  tardily,  and  only  by  the  dates  from 
time  to  time  of  the  official  reports  from  headquarters.  It  is 
not  prudent  to  have  the  knowledge  of  disasters  when  they 
have  happened,  still  less  to  anticipate  those  which  may 
come.  The  private  correspondence  from  the  armies  must 
tally  with,  or  at  least  not  materially  vary  from,  the  official 
reports  of  the  Commanders  in  Chief.  Discretion  is  one  of 
the  most  universal  virtues  in  government  organized  like 
this,  as  the  want  of  it  is  one  of  those  the  most  surely  and  most 
severely  punished.  The  concealment  and  disguise  practised 
to  keep  the  knowledge  from  the  public  of  facts  which  it 
would  be  disagreeable  to  them  to  know,  give  rise,  however, 
to  many  rumors  of  defeat  and  misfortune  still  more  un¬ 
founded  than  the  official  reports  of  victories;  so  that  be¬ 
tween  flattering  misrepresentations  on  one  side  and  fictitious 
alarms  on  the  other,  the  real  state  of  affairs  is  perhaps  better 
and  sooner  known  in  the  other  hemisphere  than  here,  as  it 
were  upon  the  very  scene  of  action. 

Here,  however,  the  spectator  has  the  opportunity  of  wit¬ 
nessing  the  impressions  produced  upon  the  public  mind  by 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


395 


1812] 

the  course  of  the  war  which  could  not  be  so  well  observed  at 
a  distance.  The  hopes  of  the  Russians  that  the  issue  will 
be  glorious  and  successful  to  them  are  founded,  first  on  their 
army,  and  secondly  on  the  natural  advantages  of  their 
situation.  To  judge  of  the  operations  of  their  generals  from 
their  measures  would  seem  that  their  whole  instructions  are 
on  no  consideration,  and  in  no  event  whatsoever,  to  risk 
any  essential  disaster  to  the  army;  to  abandon  everything 
else  rather  than  stake  the  army  upon  the  chances  of  a  battle. 
This  system  is  cautious,  and  perhaps  the  best  that  could 
have  been  adopted;  but  it  gives  an  appearance  of  timidity 
to  all  their  warlike  operations  singularly  contrasting  with 
the  boldness  and  impetuosity  of  the  invader,  and  which  he 
has  not  failed  to  turn  to  his  own  advantage.  Twice  on  the 
passage  from  the  river  Niemen  to  Moscow  the  Russians 
appear  to  have  determined  to  meet  their  enemy  in  battle, 
and  on  both  occasions  they  assert  that  the  field  of  battle 
was  theirs.  But  the  fear  of  hazarding  the  safety  of  the  army 
has  not  only  prevented  them  from  profiting  by  their  success, 
but  has  induced  them  to  yield  to  their  vanquished  antago¬ 
nist  all  the  fruits  of  victory.  For  the  battle  of  Borodino,  St. 
Petersburg  was  illuminated  and  a  Te  Deum  was  performed. 
The  Russian  general  who  commanded  at  it  was  made  a  Field 
Marshal,  and  received  a  gratuity  of  a  hundred  thousand 
rubles;  and  eight  days  afterwards  Napoleon  entered  Moscow, 
and  the  Field  Marshal,  with  excuse  and  apology,  reported 
to  his  master  that,  notwithstanding  his  victory,  he  had  sur¬ 
rendered  the  capital  to  preserve  the  army. 

But  Napoleon  is  in  an  enemy’s  country,  hemmed  in  be¬ 
tween  four  Russian  armies  over  whose  bodies  he  must  either 
advance  or  retreat;  two  thousand  miles  distant  from  his 
own  capital;  having  lost  one  half  the  forces  with  which  he 
commenced  the  war;  and  surrounded  in  the  midst  of  his 


396 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

camp  by  auxiliary  armies  so  disaffected  to  him  and  his  cause, 
that  at  the  first  symptom  of  defeat  they  would  more  eagerly 
turn  their  arms  against  him  than  they  now  follow  his  banners. 
Notwithstanding  his  rapid  and  hitherto  triumphant  career 
the  hope  of  finally  expelling  and  even  of  annihilating  him 
and  his  whole  host  here  grows  sanguine  in  proportion  as  he 
proceeds.  It  is  far  stronger  and  more  confident  than  it  was 
at  the  commencement  of  the  war,  and  the  Emperor  Alexander 
who  then  pledged  himself  to  his  people  that  he  would  never 
make  peace  while  one  armed  enemy  should  have  his  foot  on 
the  Russian  territory,  has  since  the  loss  of  Moscow  publicly 
said  that  none  but  a  scoundrel  can  at  the  present  juncture 
pronounce  the  name  of  peace. 

•  •••••• 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  97.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  12  October,  1812. 

Sir: 

I  have  received  from  Count  Soltikoff,  the  member  of  the 
Imperial  Council  charged  with  the  Department  of  Foreign 
Affairs,  two  printed  copies  of  the  treaty  of  peace  between 
Ru  ssia  and  Great  Britain,  signed  at  Stockholm  the  18th  of 
July  last,  with  a  circular  note  from  the  Count,  of  which,  and 
of  my  answer,  together  with  one  of  the  printed  treaties,  I 
herewith  inclose  copies.  It  was,  as  you  may  have  observed, 
the  Chancellor  Count  Romanzoff  who  recently  communi¬ 
cated  in  a  similar  manner  the  peace  with  Turkey.  It  seems 
that  since  the  Chancellor’s  return  he  occasionally  resumes 
the  exercise  of  his  functions  in  the  Foreign  Department, 


1812]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  397 

but  that  Count  Soltikoff  continues  to  transact  the  business 
of  it  likewise. 

I  continue  to  send  you  translations  of  the  official  bulletins 
published  here  exhibiting  the  progress  of  the  war,  and  the 
military  operations  of  the  armies.  It  is  now  so  extremely 
seldom  that  I  can  enjoy  any  opportunity  of  transmitting 
dispatches  to  you,  that  I  fear  none  of  these  publications  will 
reach  you  until  the  news  they  contain  will  have  been  so 
long  known  to  you,  or  have  become  by  the  operation  of 
subsequent  events  so  totally  uninteresting,  that  the  mere 
perusal  of  them  will  be  an  insupportable  burden  upon  your 
time.  Yet  I  have  thought  it  might  be  deemed  useful  to 
possess  the  series  of  these  official  documents,  and  particularly 
of  those  which  describe  the  most  important  events  of  the 
war,  as  they  contain  the  representation  of  occurrences  as 
viewed  and  authenticated  by  the  Russian  government.  In 
war,  it  seldom  perhaps  never  happens  that  the  official 
narratives  of  great  events,  or  of  military  operations  in  gen¬ 
eral,  on  either  side  contain  the  whole  truth.  It  is  rare  among 
the  European  nations  that  they  do  not  contain  much  un¬ 
truth;  nor  will  you  think  it  extraordinary  that  after  perusing 
the  whole  series  of  these  publications  you  should  find  an 
uninterrupted  succession  of  Russian  victories,  without  a 
single  defeat,  result  in  the  entrance  of  the  French  army 
at  Moscow  within  three  months  after  they  had  stepped 
over  a  frontier  eight  hundred  miles  distant  from  it.  As  the 
principle  of  the  war  on  the  part  of  Russia  has  been  strictly 
defensive,  the  system  has  been  to  avoid  any  general  action 
which  might  risk  too  large  a  part  of  the  army.  It  is  the 
general  opinion  that  both  Smolensk  and  Moscow  might 
have  been  saved,  had  the  Russian  generals  chosen  to  stake 
them  upon  the  issue  of  a  battle;  and  so  universally  do  all 
the  private  reports  and  letters  from  the  army  concur  with 


398 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[l8l2 

Prince  Kutuzoff’s  reports  to  the  Emperor,  that  the  battle 
of  Borodino  was  a  great  victory  to  the  Russians,  that  the 
Prince  himself  does  not  escape  censure  not  merely  for  having 
surrendered  Moscow,  without  further  resistance,  but  for 
having  suffered  the  French  army  to  escape.  It  is  certain 
that  from  the  Russian  commander’s  first  report,  not  only  the 
public  in  general,  but  the  Emperor  Alexander  himself, 
fully  expected  that  pursuit  and  not  retreat  was  to  be  the 
next  operation  of  the  victorious  army.  I  enclosed  to  you 
with  one  of  my  late  letters  a  bulletin  extraordinary  in  the 
French  language,  two  copies  of  which  were  sent  to  me  from 
the  Chancellor’s  office.  It  expressly  states  that  General 
Platoff  had  been  dispatched  the  day  after  the  battle  in  pur¬ 
suit  of  the  fugitive  French,  and  had  overtaken  their  rear  guard . 
When  that  bulletin  was  issued  here,  Napoleon  was  at 
Moscow. 

It  had  been  an  opinion  generally  entertained  by  both 
parties  here  (I  mean  the  peace  and  the  war  party)  that  if 
Moscow  should  be  taken,  the  Emperor  Alexander  would  be 
inclined  to  negotiate.  Both  parties  assumed  it  as  unquestion¬ 
able  (though  I  think  without  sufficient  evidence),  that  the 
French  Emperor  is  anxiously  desirous  to  negotiate.  They 
consider  his  situation  as  precarious  and  perilous  in  the 
extreme.  They  suppose  him  to  have  the  same  idea  of  it 
himself,  and  they  believe  that  his  great  object  now  is  to 
extricate  himself  fromdt.  The  argument  inferred  from  this 
state  of  facts  on  one  side  is,  that  now  is  the  time  to  take  ad¬ 
vantage  of  these  embarrassments,  and  to  withdraw  from  a 
contest,  in  which  too  much  may  be  hazarded  by  persever¬ 
ance;  on  the  other,  that  mere  delay  will  infallibly  accomplish 
the  ruin  and  destruction  of  the  invading  army,  and  that  the 
present  is  the  worst  of  all  possible  times  for  negotiation. 
The  Emperor  has  adopted  the  latter  of  these  opinions,  and 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


399 


1812] 

has  expressed  himself  in  the  most  decisive  terms  against 
every  idea  of  peace  since  the  loss  of  Moscow.  The  official 
proclamations,  of  which  I  have  enclosed  translations  hold 
the  same  language. 

The  Emperor  Alexander  had  a  personal  interview  with  the 

o 

Prince  Royal  of  Sweden  at  Abo  on  the  27th  of  August; 

and  immediately  afterwards  returned  to  this  capital;  where 

he  arrived  on  the  2nd  of  September.  Lord  Cathcart,  the 

0 

British  ambassador  appointed  to  reside  here,  was  at  Abo 
on  his  way  hither  at  the  same  time,  and  arrangements  for 
a  triple  alliance  between  Russia,  Great  Britain  and  Sweden, 
are  said  to  have  been  agreed  to  there.  A  joint  Russian  and 
Swedish  expedition  has  long  been  supposed  to  be  con¬ 
templated  against  Swedish  Pomerania,  but  at  the  interview 
between  the  Emperor  and  the  Prince  it  was  concluded  that 
the  Russians  and  the  Swedes  should  act  separately,  though 
in  concert.  On  his  return,  the  Emperor  gave  orders  at  his 
passage  through  Helsingfors,  for  the  immediate  departure 
of  the  fleet  and  troops  which  had  been  so  long  waiting  there. 
They  sailed  the  same  day.  The  troops  to  the  number  of 
16,000  men  a  few  days  after  landed  at  Reval,  and  marched 
to  reenforce  the  garrison  at  Riga.  The  ships  of  war  then 
returned  to  Cronstadt.  A  Swedish  force  of  25,000  men  was 
immediately  afterwards  assembled  at  Landscrona,  almost 
directly  facing  Copenhagen;  and  another  of  15,000  men  at 
Gothenburg.  They  were  to  sail  in  the  last  days  of  Sep¬ 
tember,  and  their  destination  is  understood  to  be  a  direct 
attack  upon  the  Island  of  Zealand.  In  the  meantime,  no 
complaint  has  been  alleged;  no  demand  has  been  made  by 
Sweden  to  Denmark.  The  justification  of  this  procedure 
is  understood  to  rest  upon  principles  of  state  policy;  and  to 
explain  the  seemingly  unaccountable  course  of  Sweden 
during  the  last  year.  Great  Britain,  the  disinterested  ally 


400 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

of  Spain,  is  said  to  have  had  some  scruples  at  this  new  sample 
of  retaliation  for  French  aggressions,  but  was  at  last  brought 
to  acquiesce  and  cooperate  in  it. 

Immediately  after  the  surrender  of  Moscow,  the  Em¬ 
peror  Alexander  appointed  Count  Lieven  as  ambassador 
extraordinary  to  England;  a  Mr.  Tatishtcheff,  envoy  ex¬ 
traordinary  and  minister  plenipotentiary  to  the  king  of  Spain, 
Ferdinand;  and  Baron  Strogonoff,  with  the  same  character, 
to  the  king  of  Sweden;  Prince  Koslofsky,  to  the  king  of 
Sardinia;  and  Count  Mocenigo,  to  the  King  of  Sicily  (Fer¬ 
dinand).  There  had  constantly  been  here  a  minister  from 
Sardinia.  Mr.  Lea-Bermudez  appears  as  plenipotentiary 
from  Ferdinand  VII  of  Spain,  and  in  that  capacity  signed 
at  Veliki  Luki  a  treaty  with  the  Chancellor  Count  Roman- 
zoff,  the  contents  of  which  have  not,  however,  been  made 
public.  The  Duke  of  Serra  Capriola  had  been  many  years 
minister  from  the  king  of  the  two  Sicilies,  but  since  the  peace 
of  Tilsit  his  functions  had  been  suspended.  Having  married 
a  Russian  lady,  he  had  personally  remained  here  with  his 
family,  and  has  now  resumed  and  again  been  recognized  in 
his  official  character.  Count  Lowenhielm  has  just  returned 
from  Sweden,  and  has  been  received  in  the  formal  character 
of  envoy  extraordinary  and  minister  plenipotentiary.  The 
Portuguese  minister,  the  Chevalier  Bezarra,  having  received 
orders  to  repair  to  Rio  Janeiro,  left  this  place  very  lately. 
A  Portuguese  charge  d’affaires  remains  in  his  stead.  I  am 
with  great  respect,  etc. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


401 


1812] 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 

No.  98.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  17  October,  1812. 

Sir: 

I  received  a  few  days  since  a  letter  from  Mr.  Russell, 
dated  at  London,  the  9th  of  September,  and  informing  me 
that  his  mission  there  had  closed;  that  he  had  received  his 
passports,  and  that  in  three  days  from  that  time  he  should 
leave  the  city  to  embark  at  Plymouth  for  the  United  States. 
He  adds  that  the  British  government  had  rejected  a  proposi¬ 
tion  which  he  had  been  authorized  to  make  for  a  suspension 
of  hostilities. 

The  evening  before  last  I  had  another  interview  with  the 
Chancellor  Count  Romanzoff  at  his  request.  There  had 
been  rumors  in  circulation  here  of  an  armistice  in  Canada, 
and  of  the  appointment  of  commissioners  by  the  President 
for  a  new  negotiation  with  Great  Britain.  The  Count  asked 
me  if  I  had  any  authentic  information  of  these  circumstances. 
I  said  I  had  not,  that  my  information  was  altogether  of 
a  different  aspect,  and  I  told  him  the  substance  of  Mr. 
Russell’s  communication.  He  then  observed  that  this  incident 
would  not  discourage  this  government  from  making  an  offer 
of  its  mediation  which  he  had  suggested  to  me  in  a  former  con¬ 
ference;  on  the  contrary ,  the  failure  of  every  new  attempt  at 
direct  negotiation  confirmed  him  in  the  belief  and  hope  that  a 
mediation  might  be  more  successful — a  mediation  of  a  common 
friend ,  not  only  desirous  from  the  sentiment  of  friendship  to  see 
the  parties  reconciled  to  each  other ,  but  having  also  a  strong 
interest  of  his  own  in  their  reconciliation . 

The  Count  said  he  had  his  despatches  for  Mr .  Daschkoff 


402 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

ready ,  instructing  him  to  make  the  proposition  in  form  to  the 
American  government ,  and  he  asked  me  whether  I  could  indicate 
to  him  a  mode  of  transmitting  them  directly  to  the  United  States . 
In  our  former  conversation  ( reported  in  No.  95)  I  had  offered 
to  dispatch  one  of  the  American  vessels  now  at  Cronstadt ,  if  the 
British  ambassador  would  furnish  her  a  passport ,  or  any 
document  that  would  protect  her  from  capture  by  British  armed 
vessels.  The  Count  said  he  had  made  the  proposal  to  the 
ambassador ,  who  had  expressed  his  readiness  to  give  the 
document ,  provided  the  vessel  and  messenger  should  go  by 
the  way  of  England — a  condition  which  the  Count  said  he  had 
told  the  ambassador  he  could  not  ask  me  to  agree  to ,  and  with 
which  I  did  not  think  it  in  fact  suitable  to  comply.  There  are , 
however ,  two  American  gentlemen  here  on  the  point  of  departure 
for  the  United  States ,  and  by  them  I  shall  transmit  this  dispatch 
and  its  duplicate ,  together  with  those  of  the  Chancellor  to  Mr. 
Daschkoff.1  I  am  with  great  respect,  etc. 

TO  THE  COMTE  DE  ROMANZOFF 

St.  Petersbourg,  7/19  October,  1812. 
Monsieur  le  Comte: 

Le  Sieur  Robert  Fulton,  citoyen  des  Etats  Unis,  est  Fin- 
venteur  d’une  espece  de  chaloupe  ou  navire  pour  naviguer 
sur  les  rivieres,  meme  contre  les  vents  et  les  courans  par  le 
moyen  du  feu  et  de  la  vapeur.  Associe  au  Sieur  Robert 
R.  Livingston,  autre  citoyen  connu  et  distingue  des  Etats 
Unis,  il  a  fait  construire  une  de  ces  chaloupes  qui  depuis 
le  mois  de  Juillet,  1807,  navigue  constamment  sur  la  riviere 
de  Hudson,  entre  les  villes  de  New  York  et  d ’Albany,  serv¬ 
ant  de  diligence  pour  le  transport  de  voyageurs.  La  dis- 

1  Cypher.  See  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Rufus  King,  V.  343. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


403 


1812] 

tance  entre  ces  deux  villes  est  de  240  versts,  dont  le  trajet 
se  fait  par  ce  moyen  quelquefois  en  24  heures,  et  toujours 
en  moins  de  40.  L’experience  est  tellement  decisive  en  faveur 
de  cette  invention  que  d’apres  ce  premier  succes  des  le  mois 
d’Avril  dernier  il  existait  sur  les  diverses  rivieres  des  Etats 
Unis  quatorze  de  ces  chaloupes,  naviguees  sur  le  principe  de 
Finvention  du  Sieur  Fulton,  et  construites  sous  le  privilege 
exclusif  accorde  par  la  loi  des  Etats  Unis  aux  associes  Livings¬ 
ton  et  Fulton. 

Les  renseignements  que  le  Sieur  Fulton  a  re^u  au  sujet 
de  la  navigation  sur  quelques  rivieres  de  la  Russie,  et  surtout 
de  celle  entre  St.  Petersbourg  et  Cronstadt,  lui  ont  fait  croire 
que  Pusage  des  chaloupes  de  son  invention  serait  de  la  plus 
grande  utilite,  tant  pour  le  transport  des  personnes  que  pour 
les  commodites  du  commerce  de  cette  capitale. 

Comme  la  construction  de  ces  navires  exige  des  frais 
tres  considerables  il  s’est  addresse  a  moi  pour  prendre  des 
informations  s’il  lui  serait  possible  d’obtenir  du  gouverne- 
ment  de  Sa  Majeste  PEmpereur  un  privilege  exclusif  pour 
la  construction  ou  Pusage  de  ces  chaloupes,  soit  sur  toutes  les 
rivieres  de  la  Russie,  soit  seulement  entre  les  ports  de  St. 
Petersbourg  et  de  Cronstadt.  Dans  le  premier  cas  il  propose 
que  la  duree  du  privilege  soit  fixee  a  vingt  ans,  et  dans  le 
second  a  vingt-cinq  ans,  et  que  le  privilege  soit  accorde  sous 
condition  que  dans  Pespace  de  trois  ans  a  dater  du  jour 
qu’il  en  serait  possesseur  il  aurait  le  premier  de  ces  navires 
construit  et  en  activite. 

Il  est  persuade  que  le  trajet  entre  St.  Petersbourg  et  Cron¬ 
stadt  se  ferait  en  quatre  heures  et  demi  sur  une  barque  pour 
le  transport  des  personnes,  et  en  six  heures  pour  une  barque 
a  merchandises  du  port  de  cinquante  lasts;  sauf  les  augmen¬ 
tations  partielles  de  temps  que  pourrait  occasioner  un  vent 
violent  ou  un  courant  rapide  et  contraire. 


404  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1812 

Sur  cette  proposition  je  me  permettrai  seulement  de  re- 
marquer  que  Futilite  et  Fimportance  de  cette  invention  est 
universellement  reconnu  dans  les  Etats  Unis  ou  elle  est 
depuis  plus  de  cinq  ans  reduite  en  pratique.  Qu’en  tant 
que  je  puis  etre  a  meme  de  juger  je  suis  personellement 
persuade  que  le  meme  utilite  en  serait  ressentie  et  d’une  ma- 
niere  tres  avantageuse  pour  le  commerce  de  St.  Petersbourg 
par  son  introduction  dans  ce  pays.  Le  privilege  exclusif 
de  la  construction  et  de  Fusage  des  chaloupes  et  navires 
navigues  par  le  moyen  du  feu  et  de  la  vapeur  est  le  seul  en¬ 
couragement  que  le  Sieur  Fulton  sollicite  de  la  part  du 
gouvernement  et  seulement  pour  un  temps  limite.  Ce 
privilege  necessaire  pour  assurer  a  Finventeur  le  rembourse- 
ment  meme  des  frais  indispensables  semble  etre  une  con¬ 
cession  peu  considerable  au  gouvernement  meme,  puisque  s’il 
ne  Faccordait  pas  il  est  tres  sur  vraisemblable  que  d’autres 
navigateurs  par  ce  meme  moyen  se  presentassent  dans  Fes- 
pace  des  vingt  ou  vingt  cinq  ans  que  durerait  le  privilege.  II 
s’entend  naturellement  qu’avec  ce  privilege  serait  accorde 
le  droit  d’exiger  pour  le  transport  des  merchandises  ou  des 
personnes  sur  ces  chaloupes  les  memes  prix  que  Fusage  ou 
la  loi  permettent  de  recevoir  pour  le  meme  service  sur  les 
navires  et  chaloupes  ordinaires. 

Votre  Excellence  m’a  fait  Fhonneur  de  me  donner  a  con- 
naitre  que  les  privilege  exclusifs  de  la  nature  de  celui  que 
desire  le  Sieur  Fulton  ne  s’accordent  en  Russie  que  par  des 
ordonnances  expres  de  Sa  Majeste  L’Empereur,  c’est  par 
cette  consideration  que  je  prends  la  liberte  de  soumettre 
a  Votre  Excellence  ces  observations.  Quant  a  Favantage  que 
produirait  au  commerce  de  cette  ville  le  pouvoir  pendant  la 
saison  navigable  de  transporter  les  merchandises  d’importa- 
tion  ou  d’exportation  entre  elle  et  Cronstadt  sans  etre  sujet 
a  souffrir  le  delai  d’un  seul  jour  par  la  contrariete  des  vents  ou 


405 


1 3 1 2]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 

des  courans,  Votre  Excellence  mieux  que  moi  en  sait  ap- 
precier  la  valeur. 

Si  Sa  Majeste  L’Empereur  daignait  accorder  en  cette 
occasion  le  privilege  que  sollicite  le  Sieur  Fulton  je  suis 
autorise  de  sa  part  a  en  recevoir  Pexpedition.  L’octroi 
pourrait  etre  au  nom  seul  de  Robert  Fulton  de  la  ville  de 
New  York  et  de  ses  causes  ou  a  son  nom  conjointement 
avec  celui  de  Robert  R.  Livingston  de  Clermont  dans  l’Etat 
de  New  York  et  de  leurs  causes  selon  que  serait  le  bon  plaisir 
de  Sa  Majeste  Imperiale  de  l’accorder. 

Veuillez  bien  agreer  Monsieur  le  Comte,  Fassurance  de 
ma  consideration  la  plus  distinguee. 

St.  Pgtersbourg  le  7  (19)  October  1812. 


TO  ROBERT  FULTON 

St.  Petersburg,  19  October,  1812. 

Sir: 

I  have  recently  received  your  favor  of  24  April  last  and 
its  duplicate,  and  avail  myself  of  the  first  opportunity  which 
has  occurred  to  transmit  an  answer. 

There  is  in  this  country  no  general  law  or  established 
principle  for  grants  of  privileges  to  the  authors  of  useful 
inventions.  Special  grants  of  this  kind  are  sometimes 
made  by  express  ordinances  of  the  Emperor.  I  have  there¬ 
fore  applied  in  your  behalf  directly  to  the  Chancellor  of  the 
Empire,  Count  Romanzoff,  and  after  a  conversation  with 
him  in  which  I  stated  to  him  the  object  of  your  wish,  as  ex¬ 
pressed  in  your  letter  to  me,  the  success  and  utility  of  your 
steam  boats  in  the  United  States,  and  my  own  personal 
conviction  that  they  would  prove  eminently  useful  in  this 
country,  I  have  at  his  request  submitted  to  him  the  sub- 


40  6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

stance  of  the  same  observations  in  writing.  It  is  probable 
that  some  time  may  elapse  before  I  shall  receive  from  him 
a  positive  answer,  but  from  the  manner  in  which  he  received 
the  proposition,  and  from  the  earnestness  with  which  he  is 
known  to  promote  every  object  of  public  utility  to  his  coun¬ 
try,  I  am  encouraged  to  hope  that  the  application  will  prove 
successful.  When  I  receive  his  answer  I  shall  take  the  ear¬ 
liest  opportunity  of  communicating  it  to  you.  .  .  . 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  24  November,  1812. 

Sir: 

You  know  how  deeply  I  was  disappointed  at  the  breaking 
out  of  our  war,  precisely  at  the  moment  when  I  entertained 
the  most  ardent  and  sanguine  hopes  that  war  had  become  un¬ 
necessary.  Its  events  have  hitherto  been  far  from  favorable 
to  our  cause,  but  they  have  rather  contributed  to  convince 
me  of  its  necessity  upon  principles  distinct  from  the  con¬ 
sideration  of  its  causes.  The  termination  of  General  Hull’s 
campaign  in  upper  Canada  is  known  to  us,  as  far  as  the 
English  government  have  seen  fit  to  make  it  known,  by  the 
dispatches  from  the  Governor  General  and  General  Brock, 
and  by  the  capitulation.  We  are  informed  also  of  an  armis¬ 
tice  agreed  to  by  General  Dearborn,  which  the  President 
refused  to  ratify,  and  from  these  two  portents  I  have  come 
to  the  conclusion,  which  indeed  it  was  not  very  difficult  to 
anticipate  before,  that  our  projected  invasion  of  Canada  will 
end  this  year  in  total  and  most  disgraceful  defeat. 

This  misfortune,  considered  by  itself,  is  not  a  very  heavy 
one  to  the  nation.  But  it  is  a  deep  mortgage  of  reputation 
to  redeem.  Its  effects  upon  the  spirits  and  dispositions  of  the 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


407 


1812] 

people  present  the  most  important  light  in  which  it  is  to  be 
viewed,  and  these  to  my  mind  are  problematical.  If  the 
effect  upon  the  national  sentiment  should  be  similar  to  that 
of  the  Chesapeake  affair ,  we  shall  not  have  ultimately  much 
reason  to  regret  the  disasters  of  Hulks  army,  or  the  failure 
of  our  first  military  expeditions.  Our  means  of  taking  the 
British  possessions  upon  our  continent  are  so  ample  and  un¬ 
questionable  that,  if  we  do  not  take  them,  it  must  be  owing 
to  the  worst  of  qualities,  without  which  there  is  no  indepen¬ 
dent  nation,  and  which  we  must  acquire  at  any  hazard  and 
any  cost. 

The  acquisition  of  Canada,  however,  was  not  and  could  not 
be  the  object  of  this  war.  I  do  not  suppose  it  is  expected  that 
we  should  keep  it,  if  we  were  now  to  take  it.  Great  Britain 
is  yet  too  powerful,  and  values  her  remaining  possessions 
too  highly,  to  make  it  possible  for  us  to  retain  them  at  the 
peace,  if  we  should  conquer  them  by  the  war.  The  time  is 
not  come.  But  the  power  of  Great  Britain  must  soon  de¬ 
cline.  She  is  now  straining  it  so  excessively  beyond  its 
natural  extent,  that  it  must  before  long  sink  under  the  vio¬ 
lence  of  its  own  exertions.  Her  paper  credit  is  already 
rapidly  declining,  and  she  is  daily  becoming  most  extrava¬ 
gant  in  the  abuse  of  it.  I  believe  that  her  government  could 
not  exist  three  years  at  peace  without  a  national  convulsion, 
and  I  doubt  whether  she  can  carry  on  three  years  longer  the 
war  in  which  she  is  now  engaged  without  such  failure  of  her 
finances  as  she  can  never  recover.  It  is  in  the  stage  of  weak¬ 
ness  which  must  inevitably  follow  that  of  overplied  and 
exhausted  strength  that  Canada  and  all  her  other  possessions 
would  have  fallen  into  our  hands,  without  the  need  of  any 
effort  on  our  part,  and  in  a  manner  more  congenial  to  our 
principles  and  to  justice  than  by  conquest. 

The  great  events  daily  occurring  in  the  country  whence  I 


408 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

now  write  you  are  strong  and  continual  additional  warnings 
to  us,  not  to  involve  ourselves  in  the  inextricable  labyrinth 
of  European  politics  and  revolutions.  The  final  issue  of  the 
campaign  in  the  north  of  Europe  is  not  yet  completely  as¬ 
certained,  but  there  is  no  longer  a  doubt  but  that  it  must  be 
disastrous  in  the  highest  degree  to  France,  and  no  less 
glorious  to  Russia.  It  may  not  improbably  end  in  the  utter 
annihilation  of  the  invading  army,  three  fourths  of  which 
have  already  been  destroyed.  Whether  the  Emperor  Na¬ 
poleon  will  personally  escape  the  fate  which  has  befallen 
so  many  of  his  followers  is  yet  doubtful,  but  it  may  be  taken 
for  granted  that  he  will  never  be  able  again  to  assemble 
against  Russia  a  force  which  can  be  formidable  to  the 
security  or  integrity  of  her  empire.  The  politicians  who 
have  been  dreading  so  long  the  phantom  of  universal  mon¬ 
archy  may  possess  their  souls  in  quietness.  Never  having 
been  infected  with  the  terror  of  it  I  shall  desire  no  new  source 
of  tranquillity  from  these  occurrences,  but  I  cannot  say  that 
my  foresight  was  clear  enough  to  expect  that  the  Colossus 
of  French  power  would  in  so  short  a  period  be  staggering 
upon  its  foundations  so  manifestly  as  it  is.  It  is  impossible 
not  to  consider  the  internal  state  of  France  as  greatly  de¬ 
pending  upon  the  course  of  these  external  events.  The 
empire  of  Napoleon  was  built  upon  victory  alone.  Defeat 
takes  awa y  its  foundations,  and  with  such  defeat  as  he  is 
now  suffering  it  would  be  nothing  surprising  to  see  the  whole 
fabric  crumble  into  ruins.  France,  indeed,  still  remains  a 
formidable  mass  of  power,  but  into  what  condition  she  may 
be  plunged  by  the  overthrow  of  his  government  I  am  scarcely 
able  to  conjecture.  The  day  of  trial  to  Russia  has  been 
severe,  but  it  has  been  short,  and  her  deportment  under  it 
will  raise  her  high  in  the  estimation  of  mankind.  Her  plan 
of  defence  has  the  most  decisive  demonstration  in  its  favor — 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


409 


1812] 

success — and  success  under  numerous  incidental  circum¬ 
stances  disadvantageous  to  her.  Not  only  her  armies,  but 
her  peasantry,  armed  and  sent  into  the  field  as  if  by  enchant¬ 
ment,  have  fought  with  the  most  invincible  courage,  though 
not  always  with  favorable  fortune.  The  chances  of  war 
have  been  sometimes  with  and  sometimes  against  them,  but 
they  have  arrested  the  career  of  the  conqueror  of  the  age, 
and  drawn  him  on  to  ruin,  even  when  they  have  yielded 
him  the  victory. 


TO  ROBERT  FULTON 

St.  Petersburg,  27  November,  1812. 

Sir: 

I  have  the  pleasure  to  inclose,  together  with  a  duplicate 
of  my  last  letter  to  you,  copies  of  that  which  I  addressed 
to  the  Chancellor  of  the  Empire,  Count  RomanzofT  in  your 
behalf  and  of  his  answer,  by  which  you  will  perceive  that  the 
Emperor  has  determined  to  grant  you  the  privilege  for  the 
term  of  fifteen  years,  on  condition  that  the  grant  shall  be 
forfeited  if  the  first  boat  should  not  be  in  operation  within 
three  years  from  the  commencement  of  the  privilege. 

There  will  of  course  be  nothing  further  for  you  to  do  than 
to  procure  the  formal  edict  or  ukase  of  the  grant,  which  will 
meet  with  no  difficulty,  and  which  I  only  forbear  obtaining 
now,  because  as  the  term  of  the  privilege  will  commence 
from  its  date  it  will  be  most  for  your  interest  to  postpone 
it  until  you  can  be  prepared  for  the  construction  of  the  boat, 
and  because  I  would  leave  it  at  your  option  to  take  the  privi¬ 
lege  in  the  joint  names  of  Mr.  Livingston  and  yourself,  or 
in  yours  alone,  and  for  the  Russian  rivers  generally,  or  for 


4io 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

the  passage  between  St.  Petersburg  and  Cronstadt  in  par¬ 
ticular — the  Chancellor’s  letter  indicating  that  these  al¬ 
ternatives  will  be  at  your  own  choice. 

If  I  can  be  of  any  further  service  to  you  in  the  attainment 
of  your  object  here,  it  will  afford  me  great  pleasure  to  give 
you  every  assistance  in  my  power.  My  motives  for  declining 
the  remuneration  suggested  in  your  letter  are  chiefly  two. 
The  first,  that  I  have  no  just  claim  to  any  remuneration  for 
good  offices  which  it  would  be  my  duty  and  my  pleasure  to 
render  to  promote  any  just  and  laudable  interest  of  an  in¬ 
dividual  fellow  citizen,  but  which  in  this  instance,  associated 
with  an  object  of  great  public  utility  and  with  an  invention 
honorable  to  the  genius  and  enterprise  of  my  country,  carry 
with  themselves  a  reward  amply  sufficient  for  me.  The  sec¬ 
ond,  that  a  personal  confidence  in  my  representation  result¬ 
ing  only  from  my  official  character  and  situation  may  have 
contributed  to  induce  the  determination  of  the  Emperor, 
and  that  in  this  view  a  sentiment  of  delicacy  warns  me  that 
my  intervention  in  this  case  should  be  divested  of  any  par¬ 
ticular  interest  of  my  own. 

I  have  now  only  to  assure  you  of  my  warm  wish  that  your 
invention  may  be  introduced  here  with  as  much  benefit  to 
the  public  and  as  profitable  advantage  to  your  own  interest 
as  it  has  been  in  the  United  States,  and  that  I  am  with  high 
esteem  and  consideration,  sir,  your  very  humble  and  obedient 
servant. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1812] 


411 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  30  November,  1812. 

•  •••••• 

It  may  well  be  doubted  whether  in  the  compass  of  human 
history  since  the  creation  of  the  world  a  greater,  more  sudden 
and  total  reverse  of  fortune  was  ever  experienced  by  man, 
than  is  now  exhibiting  in  the  person  of  a  man  whom  fortune 
for  a  previous  course  of  nearly  twenty  years  had  favored 
with  a  steadiness  and  a  prodigality  equally  unexampled  in 
the  annals  of  mankind.  He  entered  Russia  at  the  head  of 
three  hundred  thousand  men  on  the  24th  of  last  June.  On 
the  15th  of  September  he  took  possession  of  Moscow,  the 
Russian  armies  having  retreated  before  him  almost  as  fast 
as  he  could  advance,  not,  however,  without  attempting  to 
stop  him  by  two  battles,  one  of  which  was  perhaps  the  most 
bloody  that  has  been  fought  for  many  years.  He  appears 
really  to  have  concluded  that  all  he  had  to  do  was  to  reach 
Moscow,  and  the  Russian  Empire  would  be  prostrate  at  his 
feet.  Instead  of  that  it  was  precisely  then  that  his  serious 
difficulties  began.  Moscow  was  destroyed  partly  by  his 
troops,  partly  by  the  Russians  themselves.  His  communi¬ 
cations  in  his  rear  were  continually  interrupted  and  harassed 
by  separate  small  detachments  from  the  Russian  armies. 
His  two  flanks,  one  upon  the  Dwina  and  the  other  upon  the 
frontier  of  Austria,  were  both  overpowered  by  superior  forces 
which  were  drawing  together  and  closing  behind  him, 
and  after  having  passed  six  weeks  in  total  inaction  at  Moscow 
he  found  himself  with  a  starving  and  almost  naked  army 
eight  hundred  miles  from  his  frontier,  exposed  to  all  the 
rigors  of  a  Russian  winter,  with  an  army  before  him  superior 
to  his  own,  and  a  country  behind  him  already  ravaged  by 


412 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

himself,  and  where  he  had  left  scarcely  a  possibility  of  any 
other  sentiment  than  that  of  execration  and  vengeance  upon 
himself  and  his  followers.  He  began  his  retreat  on  the  28th 
of  October,  scarcely  a  month  since,  and  at  this  moment,  if 
he  yet  lives,  he  has  scarcely  the  ruins  of  an  army  remaining 
with  him.  He  has  been  pursued  with  all  the  eagerness  that 
could  be  felt  by  an  exasperated  and  triumphant  enemy. 
Thousands  of  his  men  have  perished  by  famine,  thousands 
by  the  extremity  of  the  season,  and  in  the  course  of  the  last 
ten  days  we  have  heard  of  more  than  30,000  who  have  laid 
down  their  arms  almost  without  resistance.  His  cavalry 
is  in  a  more  dreadful  condition  even  than  his  infantry.  He 
has  lost  the  greatest  part  of  his  artillery,  has  abandoned  most 
of  the  baggage  of  his  army,  and  has  been  even  reduced  to 
blow  up  his  own  stores  of  ammunition.  The  two  wings  of 
the  Russian  armies  have  formed  their  junction  and  closed 
the  passage  to  his  retreat,  and  according  to  every  human 
probability  within  ten  days  the  whole  remnant  of  his  host 
will  be  compelled  like  the  rest  to  lay  down  their  arms  and 
surrender  at  discretion.  If  he  has  a  soul  capable  of  surviving 
such  an  event,  he  will  probably  be  a  prisoner  himself. 

Should  he  by  some  extraordinary  accident  escape  in  his 
own  person,  he  has  no  longer  a  force  nor  the  means  of  as¬ 
sembling  one  which  can  in  the  slightest  degree  be  formidable 
to  Russia.  Even  before  his  career  of  victory  had  ceased 
commotions  against  his  government  had  manifested  them¬ 
selves  in  his  own  capital,  on  a  false  alarm  of  his  death  which 
had  been  in  circulation.  Now  that,  if  he  returns  at  all,  it 
must  be  as  a  solitary  fugitive,  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  he 
should  be  safer  at  the  Tuileries  than  he  would  be  in  Russia. 
His  allies,  almost  every  one  of  whom  was  such  upon  the 
bitterest  compulsion,  and  upon  whom  he  has  brought  the 
most  impending  danger  of  ruin,  may  not  content  them- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


4i3 


1812] 

selves  merely  with  deserting  him.  Revolutions  in  Germany, 
France,  and  Italy,  must  be  the  inevitable  consequence  of 
this  state  of  things,  and  Russia,  whose  influence  in  the  politi¬ 
cal  affairs  of  the  world  he  expressly  threatened  to  destroy, 
will  henceforth  be  the  arbitress  of  Europe. 

It  has  pleased  heaven  for  many  years  to  preserve  this  man 
and  to  make  him  prosper  as  an  instrument  of  divine  wrath  to 
scourge  mankind.  His  race  is  now  run,  and  his  own  turn 
of  punishment  has  commenced.  “Fret  not  thyself  because 
of  him  who  prospereth  in  his  way,  because  of  the  man  who 
bringeth  wicked  devices  to  pass;  for  yet  a  little  while,  and 
the  wicked  shall  not  be;  yea,  thou  shalt  diligently  consider 
his  place,  and  it  shall  not  be.”  How  often  have  I  thought  of 
this  oracle  of  divine  truth  with  an  application  of  its  senti¬ 
ment  to  this  very  man  upon  whom  it  is  now  so  signally 
fulfilling;  and  how  ardently  would  I  pray  the  supreme  dis¬ 
poser  of  events  that  the  other  and  more  consolatory  part 
of  the  same  promise  may  now  also  be  near  its  accomplish¬ 
ment:  “But  the  meek  shall  inherit  the  earth;  and  shall  de¬ 
light  themselves  in  the  abundance  of  peace.” 

•  •••••« 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  102.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  ii  December,  1812. 

Sir: 

•  #••••• 

I  had  on  the  7th  instant  an  interview  with  the  Chancellor, 
Count  Romanzoff,  in  which  I  communicated  to  him  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  those  parts  of  your  dispatch  which  relate  to  Russia, 
and  those  which  concern  the  state  of  our  relations  with 


4H  THE  WRITINGS  OF  [1812 

France.  In  the  present  state  of  the  war  between  this  country 
and  France  I  was  convinced  that  the  view  of  the  American 
government’s  intentions  with  regard  to  that  power,  so 
explicitly  and  so  strongly  manifested  in  your  letter,  would 
not  only  be  gratifying  to  the  Chancellor,  but  that  it  would 
be  satisfactory  to  the  Emperor,  and  would  powerfully  coun¬ 
teract  any  impressions  unfavorable  to  the  United  States 
which  the  English  interest  here  is  endeavoring  to  excite. 
I  therefore  told  the  Count  that,  although  I  had  not  been  in¬ 
structed  to  make  to  him  any  official  communication  of  the 
declaration  of  war,  the  dispositions  of  the  American  Govern¬ 
ment  towards  other  powers,  and  particularly  towards  Russia 
on  this  occasion,  had  been  distinctly  suggested  to  me  in  a 
manner  which  I  felt  it  my  duty  to  make  known  to  him.  That 
the  United  States,  compelled  by  unavoidable  necessity  to  vin¬ 
dicate  their  violated  rights  against  Great  Britain  by  war, 
were  desirous  that  it  might  be  confined  exclusively  to  them 
and  their  enemy ,  and  that  no  other  power  might  be  involved 
in  it.  That  it  was  particularly  and  earnestly  their  wish  to 
propose  and  maintain  in  their  fullest  extent  their  commer¬ 
cial  and  friendly  relations  with  Russia.  That  the  war  on 
which  the  Emperor  is  now  engaged  against  France,  although 
it  could  not  be  known  by  the  President  to  have  been  actually 
commenced  at  the  time  when  your  dispatch  was  written, 
was,  however,  contemplated  as  more  than  probable,  and  the 
necessity  which  obliged  the  Emperor  to  take  a  part  in  it 
was  mentioned  to  me  as  a  cause  of  regret  to  the  American 
government.  But  it  was  hoped  it  would  not  in  the  slightest 
degree  affect  the  friendly  dispositions  between  Russia  and 
the  United  States.  That  I  was  informed  by  you  that  the 
principal  subjects  of  discussion  which  had  long  been  sub¬ 
sisting  between  us  and  France  remained  unsettled;  that  there 
was  no  immediate  prospect  that  there  would  be  a  satisfactory 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


4i5 


1812] 

settlement  of  them;  but  that  whatever  the  event  in  this 
respect  might  be,  it  was  not  the  intention  of  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  United  States  to  enter  into  any  more  intimate 
connections  with  France.  This  disposition  I  added  was  ex¬ 
pressed  in  terms  as  strong  and  clear  as  I  thought  language 
could  afford.  It  was  even  observed  that  the  government  of 
the  United  States  did  not  anticipate  any  event  whatever 
that  could  produce  that  effect,  and  I  was  the  more  happy 
to  find  myself  authorized  by  my  government  to  avow  this 
intention,  as  different  representations  of  their  views  had  been 
widely  circulated  as  well  in  Europe  as  in  America. 

The  Count  received  this  communication  with  assurances 
of  his  own  high  satisfaction  at  its  purport,  and  of  his  persua¬ 
sion  that  it  could  prove  equally  satisfactory  to  the  Emperor, 
before  whom  he  should  lay  it  without  delay.  He  said  that 
with  regard  to  the  friendly  and  commercial  relations  with 
the  United  States  it  was  the  Emperor’s  fixed  determination 
to  maintain  them  so  far  as  depended  upon  him  in  their  fullest 
extent .  Even  if  he  should  enter  into  engagements  more  intimate 
than  he  was  at  present  inclined  to  contract  with  any  power 
whatsoever ,  he  would  assent  to  nothing  which  could  interrupt 
or  impair  his  relations  of  friendship  with  the  United  States; 
and  it  was  the  wish  that  they  not  might  not  be  liable  to  the 
interruption  which  they  would  be  expected  to  suffer  by  the 
English,  that  had  been  his  principal  inducement  to  offer 
his  mediation  to  effect  a  reconcilement.  He  asked  me  if  I 
had  any  objection  to  his  communicating  to  the  British 
government  itself  that  part  of  my  information  to  him  which 
related  to  France?  I  said  that  on  the  contrary,  as  the 
British  government  had  in  the  course  of  our  discussions  with 
them  frequently  intimated  the  belief  that  the  American 
government  was  partial  to  France,  and  even  actuated  by 
French  influence,  I  supposed  that  the  knowledge  of  this 


416 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

frank  and  explicit  statement,  with  a  due  consideration  of 
the  time  and  occasion  upon  which  it  was  made,  must  have  a 
tendency  to  remove  the  prejudice  of  the  British  cabinet,  and 
I  would  hope  produce  on  their  part  a  disposition  more  in¬ 
clining  to  conciliation. 

Yesterday  the  Count  sent  me  a  note  requesting  me  to  call 
upon  him  again,  which  I  accordingly  did.  He  showed  me  the 
draught  of  a  despatch  to  Count  Lieven,  the  Russian  am¬ 
bassador  in  England,  which  he  had  prepared  to  lay  before 
the  Emperor  for  his  approbation,  and  which  related  the  sub¬ 
stance  of  my  conversation  with  him,  particularly  in  regard 
to  the  intentions  of  the  American  government  with  reference 
to  France,  instructing  Count  Lieven  to  make  it  known  to 
Lord  Castlereagh,  and  to  use  it  for  the  purpose  of  convincing 
the  British  government  of  their  error  in  suspecting  that  of 
the  United  States  of  any  subserviency  to  France;  in  the 
expectation  that  it  would  promote  in  the  British  ministry 
the  disposition  to  peace  with  the  United  States  which  he 
(Count  Lieven)  knew  his  Imperial  Majesty  had  much  at 
heart,  believing  it  equally  for  the  interest  of  both  powers  and 
also  for  that  of  his  own  empire.  The  Chancellor  said  that  as 
this  dispatch  would  refer  to  what  I  had  verbally  stated  to 
him  in  our  preceding  conversation,  he  wished  before  sub¬ 
mitting  it  to  the  Emperor  that  I  should  peruse  it,  to  satisfy 
himself  that  he  had  correctly  represented  the  purport  of 
my  communication  to  him,  and  he  desired  me,  if  I  should 
find  any  inaccuracy  or  variance  from  what  I  had  said  to 
him,  to  point  it  out  to  him  that  he  might  make  the  dispatch 
perfectly  correspond  with  what  I  had  said.  I  did  accordingly 
notice  several  particulars  in  which  the  exact  purport  of  what 
I  had  said  might  be  expressed  with  more  precision.  He  im¬ 
mediately  struck  out  the  passages  which  I  noticed  in  this 
manner  from  the  draught,  and  altered  them  to  an  exact  com 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


4i7 


1812] 

formity  with  the  ideas  I  had  intended  to  convey.  The 
changes  were  inconsiderable,  and  were  no  otherwise  material 
than  as  I  was  desirous  of  the  utmost  accuracy  in  the  relation 
of  what  I  had  said  under  the  authority  of  your  dispatch. 

Although  this  communication  of  the  settled  determination 
of  the  American  government,  not  to  contract  any  more  inti¬ 
mate  engagements  with  France,  will  thus  be  made  to  the 
British  ministry  with  my  full  consent,  the  Chancellor’s 
dispatch  does  not  say  that  he  was  authorized  by  me  to  make 
it.  It  merely  relates  the  substance  of  that  part  of  my  con¬ 
versation  with  him,  and  directs  Count  Lieven  to  use  it  with 
a  view  to  promote  the  purpose  of  pacification.  The  Chancel¬ 
lor  understands  that  my  consent  was  merely  my  own  act 
without  authority  from  you,  and  my  motive  in  giving  it 
was  the  same  with  that  of  his  instruction  to  Count  Lieven, 
because  I  believed  its  tendency  would  be  to  promote  the 
spirit  of  pacification  in  the  British  cabinet.  I  told  the  Chan¬ 
cellor  that  I  was  aware  that  its  effect  might  be  different. 
That  the  very  certainty  that  we  should  not  seek  or  even  ac¬ 
cept  a  community  of  cause  with  their  most  dreaded  enemy 
might  make  them  more  indifferent  to  a  peace  with  us.  But 
in  calculating  the  operation  of  a  generous  purpose  even  upon 
the  mind  of  an  inveterate  enemy,  I  feel  an  irresistible  impulse 
to  the  conclusion  that  it  will  be  generous  like  itself. 

I  asked  the  Chancellor  whether  he  had  received  an  answer 
from  England  upon  the  proposal  of  the  Emperor’s  mediation. 
He  said  that  without  accepting  or  rejecting  it  they  had  in¬ 
timated  the  belief  that  it  would  not  be  acceptable  in  America. 
He  added  that  they  rested  their  expectations  of  peace  with 
America  upon  the  result  of  the  American  election.  I  am 
with  great  respect,  etc. 


4i  8 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  103.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  16  December,  1812. 

Sir: 

•  •••••• 

An  imperial  manifesto  has  been  published  within  these  few 
days  commanding  a  new  levy  of  eight  men  upon  every  five 
hundred.  It  will  raise  nearly  three  hundred  thousand.  Part 
of  them  are  already  in  the  field  as  deductions  will  be  allowed 
in  the  governments  where  one  man  in  ten  was  actually 
furnished  the  last  summer.  Probably  the  new  levy  will  not 
much  more  than  fill  up  the  ranks  of  the  regular  army  thinned 
by  the  events  of  the  war.  The  expense  of  human  life  in  the 
memorable  campaign  not  yet  closed  cannot  be  estimated  at 
much  short  of  half  a  million  of  souls;  the  numbers  fallen 
on  both  sides  are  nearly  equal.  But  it  has  changed  the  face 
of  the  world.  Russia  has  henceforth  nothing  to  fear  from 
France.  She  must  herself  henceforth  be  the  predominating 
power  on  the  continent  of  Europe.  The  manifesto  as  I  am 
informed  disclaims  all  intention  on  the  part  of  the  Emperor 
of  enlarging  his  own  dominions  by  conquest,  but  declares 
that  the  object  of  this  new  armament  is  to  accomplish  a 
general  peace  upon  principles  of  universal  justice.  A  glory 
so  rare  and  so  truly  exalted  is  worthy  of  the  personal  virtues 
of  the  Emperor  Alexander  and  of  the  enlightened  counsels 
which  yet  surround  him.  It  was  universally  expected  pre¬ 
vious  to  the  commencement  of  the  war  that  it  would  be  the 
signal  at  least  for  the  retirement  of  the  Chancellor.  His 
character  which  has  been  much  misunderstood  and  mis¬ 
represented  by  the  partisans  of  English  politics,  appears 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


419 


1812] 

to  have  been  more  justly  appreciated  by  his  master.  He 
still  retains  his  office  and  apparently  with  favor  unimpaired. 
In  the  moderation  so  honorably  announced  in  the  manifesto 
I  am  happy  to  see  a  pledge  that  the  Emperor’s  sentiments 
in  the  hour  of  victory  are  still  congenial  to  those  which  I 
know  have  been  those  of  Count  Romanzoff  before  this  event¬ 
ful  struggle  commenced.  The  English  influence  will  con¬ 
tinue  to  be  as  active  as  possible  against  him.  In  the  last 
conversation  I  had  with  him  he  said  to  me,  “I  am  happy  to 
find  that  the  English  government  do  justice  to  the  senti¬ 
ments  of  the  Emperor.  More  justice  indeed  than  to  those 
of  his  Chancellor.  ”  And  as  I  know  moderation  will  be  the 
principle  of  the  Count’s  political  system,  the  lures  of  ambi¬ 
tion  and  aggrandizement  will  be  employed  by  the  British 
and  their  partisans  to  stagger  his  credit  and  to  press  upon 
the  Emperor  counsels  more  suitable  to  their  views.  It  is 
doubtless  their  purpose  to  make  Russia  subservient  to  their 
own  policy.  There  is  a  steadiness  in  the  Emperor’s  character 
which  I  trust  they  will  find  inaccessible  to  all  their  endeavors 
to  shake  it.  So  long  as  Count  Romanzoff  remains  the  first 
depositary  of  Imperial  confidence  their  disappointment  may 
be  considered  certain.  I  am  with  high  respect,  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  31  December,  1812. 

As  another  year  is  closing  upon  time  and  joining  “the 
years  beyond  the  flood,”  I  cannot  employ  its  last  moments 
more  satisfactorily  to  myself,  or  more  consistently  with  the 
duties  at  all  times  incumbent  upon  me,  than  in  renewing  to 
my  dear  and  honored  parents  the  testimonies  of  my  grati¬ 
tude,  duty  and  affection;  in  repeating  the  assurance  of  my 


420 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

ardent  desire  to  return  to  them,  to  my  long  absent  children 
and  to  my  country;  and  in  offering  to  heaven  the  fervent 
prayer  that  my  father  and  you  may  yet  for  many  many 
succeeding  years  continue  to  be  blessings  upon  earth  to 
each  other  and  to  us,  and  to  enjoy  all  the  other  blessings 
that  a  merciful  providence  has  allotted  to  the  condition  of 
humanity. 

A  Mr.  Andrew  1  of  Salem  left  this  place  about  three  weeks 
since  on  his  return  to  America.  By  him  I  wrote  to  you  and 
my  father,  to  my  brother,  and  a  short  letter  to  my  two  sons 
at  Atkinson.  Since  then  I  have  not  heard  from  you,  nor 
from  the  United  States  at  all.  But  an  English  gazette  ex¬ 
traordinary  has  informed  me  of  the  surrender  number  two — 
Brigadier  General  Wadsworth  and  nine  hundred  men  to 
Major  General  Roger  Hale  Sheaffe.2  If  we  go  on  at  this 
rate,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  there  will  be  prisoners  enough  in 
Upper  Canada  to  take  it  without  needing  any  fire-arms. 
I  perceive  the  Indians  have  the  greatest  share  in  the  exploits 
of  the  British  forces  against  us.  Major  General  Brock  was 
made  a  Knight  of  the  Bath  for  taking  General  Hull,  pretty 
much  as  Falstaff  took  Sir  John  Colevile  of  the  Dale,  who 
“gave  himself  away  gratis.”  As  General  Brock  will  have  no 
occasion  for  his  “blushing  ribband”  when  it  arrives  in  Amer¬ 
ica,  the  best  use  that  could  be  made  of  it  would  be  to  give  it 
to  Norton  who  seems  quite  as  much  entitled  to  it  on  the 
score  of  merit  and  service  as  the  conqueror  of  Detroit  him¬ 
self. 

As  this  propensity  to  surrender  appears  to  be  an  infectious 
distemper  among  our  troops,  I  am  in  daily  expectation  of 
hearing  the  third  instance  of  it,  which  I  hope  will  be  the 

1  John  Andrew,  who  was  the  bearer  of  despatches  for  the  government  of  the 
United  States. 

2  At  Queenstown,  October  13. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


421 


1812] 

last  for  some  time.  As  I  am  willing  to  believe  that  we  shall 
learn  something  by  experience,  I  flatter  myself  that  among 
the  acquisitions  which  our  warriors  will  make  they  will 
reckon  that  of  receiving  surrenders  in  return.  If  not,  the 
best  thing  we  can  do  will  be  to  turn  unanimously  disciples 
of  George  Fox  and  William  Penn,  and  be  conscientiously 
scrupulous  against  bearing  arms. 

If  indeed  the  practice  of  surrendering  were  about  to  be¬ 
come  a  military  fashion,  as  from  the  numerous  examples  of 
it  which  within  the  last  two  months  I  have  almost  had  under 
my  eyes  would  seem  probable,  there  might  be  reason  to 
hope  that  war  itself  would  lose  some  of  its  favor  as  the  only 
occupation  and  amusement  of  mankind.  In  my  last  letter 
I  gave  you  a  sketch  of  the  situation  at  that  time  of  Napoleon 
the  Great .  There  is  no  account  yet  that  he  has  personally 
surrendered  himself,  but  he  has  only  saved  himself  by  the 
swiftness  of  his  flight,  which  on  one  occasion  at  least  he  was 
obliged  to  pursue  in  disguise.  Of  the  immense  host  with 
which  six  months  since  he  invaded  Russia,  nine-tenths  at 
least  are  prisoners  or  food  for  worms.  They  have  been  sur¬ 
rendering  by  ten  thousands  at  a  time,  and  at  this  moment 
there  are  at  least  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  of  them 
in  the  power  of  the  Emperor  Alexander.  From  Moscow  to 
Prussia,  eight  hundred  miles  of  road  have  been  strewed  with 
his  artillery,  baggage  wagons,  ammunition  chests,  dead  and 
dying  men,  whom  he  has  been  forced  to  abandon  to  their 
fate — pursued  all  the  time  by  three  large  regular  armies  of  a 
most  embittered  and  exasperated  enemy,  and  by  an  almost 
numberless  militia  of  peasants,  stung  by  the  destruction  of 
their  harvests  and  cottages  which  he  had  carried  before  him, 
and  spurred  to  revenge  at  once  themselves,  their  country, 
and  their  religion.  To  complete  his  disasters  the  season  it¬ 
self  during  the  greatest  part  of  his  retreat  has  been  unusually 


422 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1812 

rigorous,  even  for  this  northern  climate;  so  that  it  has  be¬ 
come  a  sort  of  by-word  among  the  common  people  here  that 
the  two  Russian  generals  who  have  conquered  Napoleon 
and  all  his  Marshals  are  General  Famine  and  General  Frost . 
There  may  be,  and  probably  is,  some  exaggeration  in  the 
accounts  which  have  been  received  and  officially  published 
here  of  the  late  events;  but  where  the  realities  are  so  certain 
and  so  momentous  the  temptation  to  exaggerate  and  mis¬ 
represent  almost  vanishes.  In  all  human  probability  the 
career  of  Napoleon’s  conquests  is  at  an  end.  France  can  no 
longer  give  the  law  to  the  continent  of  Europe.  How  he  will 
make  up  his  account  with  Germany,  the  victim  of  his  former 
successful  rashness,  and  with  France,  who  rewarded  it  with 
an  imperial  crown,  is  now  to  be  seen.  The  transition  from 
the  condition  of  France  in  June  to  her  present  state  is  much 
greater  than  would  be  from  the  present  to  her  defensive 
campaign  against  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  in  1792.  A  new 
era  is  dawning  upon  Europe.  The  possibility  of  a  more  pro¬ 
pitious  prospect  is  discernible;  but  to  the  greatest  disposer 
of  events  only  is  it  known  whether  this  new  revolution  is  to 
be  an  opening  for  some  alleviation  to  human  misery,  or 
whether  it  is  to  be  only  a  variation  of  calamity. 

It  is  not  without  some  satisfaction  that  I  have  had  the 
opportunity  of  being  so  near  a  witness  to  the  great  and  deci¬ 
sive  events  of  the  year  now  ending.  It  has  been  full  of  moral 
and  political  instruction.  To  the  Russian  armies  and  gen¬ 
erals  it  has  also  been  a  great  military  school,  so  great  indeed 
as  not  altogether  to  leave  reflection  unconcerned  what 
future  uses  may  be  made  of  what  they  have  learnt.  But 
as  military  instruction  is  of  little  use  to  me,  I  have  only 
had  in  this  respect  the  opportunity  to  observe  the  general 
features  of  the  campaign.  Its  results  have  presented  noth¬ 
ing  new.  The  Fabian  system,  which  succeeded  in  our  rev- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


423 


1812] 

olutionary  war,  which  Lord  Wellington  has  with  equal  suc¬ 
cess  adopted  in  Spain  and  Portugal,  and  which  even  in  this 
country  had  triumphed  a  century  before  over  Charles  the 
Twelfth  of  Sweden,  has  again  been  signally  triumphant  over 
the  Hero  of  the  present  age;  but  his  errors  have  been  so 
gross  and  flagrant,  that  their  consequences  so  fatal  to  him¬ 
self  can  teach  nothing  to  the  military  student  but  what  had 
been  taught  a  thousand  times  before.  It  is  not  the  present 
disasters;  it  is  the  continuance  of  his  former  successes  which 
may  hereafter  excite  the  astonishment  of  posterity. 

The  last  result  upon  my  mind  in  pondering  over  these 
occurrences  is  that  it  clings  more  fondly  than  ever  to  the 
principles  of  peace.  There  has  been  something  so  fascinat¬ 
ing  and  so  dazzling  in  the  fortunes  of  this  military  adventurer 
and  his  followers,  that  it  has  kindled  into  tenfold  fierceness 
all  the  flames  of  individual  ambition  throughout  Europe. 
It  has  made  millions  of  hearts  pant  for  war  which  in  ordinary 
times  would  have  beaten  only  pulsations  of  tranquillity.  War 
had  become  the  only  career  of  glory.  It  will  cool  some  of 
this  inflammation  to  see  the  Corsican  Alexander  shrinking 
into  his  natural  dimensions,  flying  for  his  life  like  the  most 
abject  of  cowards,  and  meeting,  what  he  can  henceforth 
scarcely  fail  to  meet,  a  reverse  of  destiny  as  great  and  almost 
as  wonderful  as  his  elevation.  Bonaparte  as  well  as  General 
Hull  and  his  conqueror  Brock  may  all  exemplify, 

On  what  foundation  stands  the  warrior’s  pride! 

I  have  already  mentioned  that  the  season  has  been  un¬ 
usually  rigorous.  In  the  course  of  this  month  of  December 
we  have  had  seventeen  days  in  succession  with  Fahrenheit’s 
thermometer  almost  invariably  below  o.  I  now  write  you 
at  that  temperature,  and  notwithstanding  the  stoves  and 
double  windows  my  fingers  can  hardly  hold  the  pen.  The 


424 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

sun  rises  at  a  quarter  past  9  in  the  morning,  and  sets  a 
quarter  before  3  in  the  afternoon;  so  that  we  must  live  al¬ 
most  by  candle  light.  We  are  all  literally  and  really  sick  of 
the  climate.  It  is  certainly  contrary  to  the  course  of  nature 
for  men  of  the  south  to  invade  the  regions  of  the  north. 
Napoleon  should  have  thought  of  that.  So  should  the  visi¬ 
tors  of  Upper  and  Lower  Canada.  The  Normans  to  be 
sure — but  they  were  exceptions  to  all  general  rules. 

Again  and  again,  my  beloved  mother,  may  the  blessing  of 
God  rest  upon  you!  with  this  sentiment  I  close  the  old  and 
welcome  the  approaching  year! 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  12  January,  1813. 

•  •••••• 

In  one  of  your  last  letters  you  observed  to  me  that  I  was 
wasting  my  years  here  forgotten  by  my  countrymen,  though 
not  forgetting  them.  I  trust  I  never  shall  forget  them  wher¬ 
ever  the  providence  of  God  may  direct  my  wandering  or 
cast  a  portion  of  my  lot.  But  whether  it  would  be  any  ad¬ 
vantage  either  to  them  or  to  myself  that  I  should  be  re¬ 
membered  by  them,  is  known  only  to  the  all  wise  disposer. 
The  only  service  that  in  the  present  circumstances  of  the 
world  I  could  have  a  possible  opportunity  of  rendering  them 
would  be  to  contribute  a  fervent  though  feeble  effort  to 
restore  to  them  the  blessings  of  peace.  To  them  alone  it 
belongs  to  determine  whether  the  opportunity  shall  be  al¬ 
lowed  me,  and  if  they  deem  it  expedient,  this  will  be  the  place 
where  it  may  be  indulged.  As  the  war  was  commenced  by  a 
sort  of  fatality  when  the  only  indispensable  cause  for  it  was 
actually  removed,  I  would  still  hope  that  it  may  be  termi- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


425 


1813] 

nated  at  an  early  period.  It  has  been  hitherto  conducted 
on  our  part  in  a  manner  which  I  wish  it  were  in  my  power 
and  in  that  of  the  whole  world  to  forget,  but  which  will  be 
too  long  and  too  effectually  remembered. 

Mr.  Canning  has  become  the  representative  for  the  city 
of  Liverpool  in  the  British  House  of  Commons.  Liverpool 
has  been  for  nearly  twenty  years  the  most  flourishing  city 
in  the  British  Island,  and  its  prosperity  has  been  almost 
entirely  owing  to  the  commerce  with  America.  This  fact 
is  worth  a  volume  of  commentary  to  show  the  disposition  of 
the  people  of  England  towards  America.  If  there  was  a  spot 
in  the  British  dominions  where  a  sentiment  of  regret  for 
America  might  have  been  supposed  to  have  some  influence 
it  was  Liverpool,  and  Liverpool  is  the  place  where  the  most 
rancorous,  malicious  and  vindictive  enemy  of  America 
carries  a  triumphant  and  insulting  election.  His  first  speech 
in  his  new  capacity  was  to  reproach  the  ministers  that  after 
six  months  of  war  they  had  not  destroyed  the  seaports  of 
the  United  States.  So  you  see  the  same  spirit  which  pre¬ 
vailed  when  you  prophesied  to  Lord  Shelburne  the  second 
war  still  blooms  in  all  its  luxuriance.  Canning  boasted  at 
the  hustings  that  he  had  been  twice  offered  the  office  of 
Secretary  of  State  within  six  months,  and  it  appears  still 
highly  probable  that  he  will  soon \  have  it.  The  present 
ministers  appear  to  be  not  quite  so  eager  as  he  is  to  demolish 
the  American  seaports.  I  suppose  they  prefer  operating  in 
the  style  of  Captain  Henry’s  mission.  I  consider  Canning’s 
system  as  by  so  much  the  least  formidable  of  the  two;  but 
if  he  comes  in,  the  chance  or  the  possibility  of  peace  will  be 
more  precarious  and  remote  than  I  think  it  is  at  present. 
Canning’s  war  would  do  us  just  mischief  enough  to  show  the 
savage  temper  with  which  it  would  be  pursued.  It  would  be 
utterly  impotent  to  produce  any  other  effect  than  increased 


426 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

exasperation  and  bitterness.  It  would  very  soon  put  down 
the  British  party  among  us,  which  is  chiefly  concentrated  in 
those  very  seaports  that  Canning  longs  to  see  burnt. 

The  present  British  ministers  rely  upon  the  issue  of  our 
presidential  election  for  peace.  They  have  been  told,  and 
they  believe,  that  if  Mr.  Clinton  is  the  new  President  there 
is  to  be  no  question  between  the  United  States  and  them  for 
discussion.  Peace  is  to  be  asked  for  on  such  conditions  as 
they  shall  choose  to  dictate,  and  the  maritime  rights  of  men- 
stealing  and  so  forth  are  to  be  sanctioned  forever.  Anxiously 
as  I  sigh  for  peace  I  need  not  say  to  you  that  it  is  not  for  such 
a  peace  as  that. 

A  career  of  good  fortune  rather  than  of  success  has  fol¬ 
lowed  the  present  British  ministry  since  they  were  ultimately 
fixed  in  power,  which  will  prolong  their  duration  and  ex¬ 
aggerate  all  their  pretensions.  The  folly  and  disasters  of  the 
French  Emperor  will  contribute  to  the  same  end.  His 
Russian  campaign  is  now  terminated,  and  his  defeat  has  been 
as  signal  and  calamitous  as  any  of  his  former  successes  had 
been  dazzling.  Whether  his  own  government  can  stand 
the  shock  of  such  a  tremendous  campaign  is  at  least  prob¬ 
lematical;  but  he  has  in  six  months  crippled  the  power  of 
France  beyond  all  chance  of  restoration.  Poland  and  Prussia 
he  has  already  lost,  and  it  is  scarcely  possible  that  the  rest 
of  Germany  should  not  slip  from  his  grasp  and  turn  against 
him.  Russia  is  the  arbitress  of  Europe,  and  though  she 
purchased  the  prerogative  at  an  immense  expense  of  blood 
and  treasure,  she  has  obtained  it  cheaper  than  her  most 
sanguine  friends  could  have  expected.  She  has  now  in  her 
turn  become  the  invader,  and  probably  the  year  now  com¬ 
mencing  will  witness  dangers  on  the  European  continent  as 
great  as  those  which  have  distinguished  the  last.  I  am  etc. 


i8i3] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


427 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  31  January,  1813. 

•  •••••• 

The  English  government  have  declared  a  blockade  at 
Chesapeake  Bay  and  Delaware  river.  New  York  and  the 
coast  of  New  England  they  leave  open.  They  follow  Cap¬ 
tain  Henry’s  advice,  just  as  at  the  beginning  of  our  revolu¬ 
tionary  war  they  disfranchised  Boston  in  favor  of  Salem. 
The  spirit  of  1775  seems  to  be  extinct  in  New  England;  but 
I  hope  the  profligacy  of  British  policy  will  not  be  more 
successful  now  than  it  was  then. 

The  war  between  us  and  them  is  now  reduced  to  one  point 
— impressment — a  cause  for  which  we  should  not  have  com¬ 
menced  a  war,  but  without  an  arrangement  of  which  our 
government  now  say  they  cannot  make  peace.  If  ever  there 
was  a  just  cause  for  war  in  the  sight  of  Almighty  God,  this 
cause  is  on  our  side  just.  The  essence  of  this  cause  is  on  the 
British  side  oppression ,  on  our  side  personal  liberty.  We  are 
fighting  for  the  sailor’s  cause.  The  English  cause  is  the  press- 
gang.  It  seems  to  me  that  in  the  very  nature  of  this  cause 
we  ought  to  find  some  resources  for  maintaining  it  by  opera¬ 
tions  upon  the  mind  of  our  own  seamen  and  upon  those  of 
the  adversaries.  It  is  sometimes  customary  for  the  com¬ 
manders  of  ships  to  address  their  crews  on  going  into  action, 
and  to  inspirit  them  by  motives  drawn  from  the  cause  they 
are  called  to  support.  In  this  war  when  our  ships  go  into 
action  their  commanders  have  the  best  possible  materials  for 
cheering  their  men  to  extraordinary  exertions  of  duty. 
How  the  English  admirals  and  captains  will  acquit  them¬ 
selves  on  such  occasion  I  can  easily  conjecture.  But  I  fancy 
to  myself  a  captain  telling  them  honestly  that  they  are 


428 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

fighting  for  the  cause  of  impressment;  that  having  been 
most  of  them  impressed  themselves  in  the  face  of  every 
principle  of  freedom  of  which  their  country  boasted,  they 
must  all  be  sensible  how  just  and  how  glorious  the  right  of 
the  press-gang  is,  and  how  clear  the  right  of  practising  it 
upon  American  sailors  as  well  as  upon  themselves  must  be. 
I  think  they  will  not  very  readily  receive  such  arguments; 
no  doubt  they  will  keep  them  at  their  guns  with  others. 
But  there  may  be  times  and  occasions  upon  which  the  Eng¬ 
lish  seaman  may  be  made  to  understand  for  what  he  is  to 
fight  in  this  war,  and  when  it  may  have  its  effect  upon  the 
spirit  with  which  he  will  fight.  The  English  talk  of  the 
seduction  practised  by  us  upon  their  seamen.  There  is  a  se¬ 
duction  in  the  nature  of  this  cause  which  it  would  be  strange 
indeed  if  their  seamen  were  insensible  to  it.  I  have  heard 
that  many  of  their  seamen  taken  by  us  have  shown  a  re¬ 
luctance  at  being  exchanged,  from  an  unwillingness  to  be 
sent  back  to  be  impressed  again.  A  more  admirable  com¬ 
ment  upon  the  character  of  the  war  could  not  be  imagined. 
Prisoners  who  deem  it  a  hardship  to  be  exchanged,  with 
what  heart  can  they  fight  for  the  principle  which  is  to  rivet 
the  chains  of  their  own  servitude? 

I  have  been  reading  a  multitude  of  speculations  in  the 
English  newspapers  about  the  capture  of  their  two  frigates 
Guerriere  and  Macedonian .  They  have  settled  it  that  the 
American  forty-fours  are  line  of  battle  ships  in  disguise, 
and  that  henceforth  all  the  frigates  in  the  British  navy  are 
to  have  the  privilege  of  running  away  from  them.  This  of 
itself  is  no  despicable  result  of  the  first  half  year  of  war.  Let 
it  be  once  understood  as  a  matter  of  course  that  every  single 
frigate  in  the  British  navy  is  to  shrink  from  a  contest  with 
the  large  American  frigates,  and  even  this  will  have  its  effect 
upon  the  spirits  of  the  tars  on  both  sides.  It  differs  a  little 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


429 


from  the  time  when  the  Guerriere  went  out  with  her  name 
painted  in  capitals  on  her  fore-top  sail  in  search  of  our 
disguised  line  of  battle  ship  President . 

But  the  English  Admiralty  have  further  ordered  the  im¬ 
mediate  construction  of  seventeen  new  frigates  to  be  dis¬ 
guised  line  of  battle  ships  too.  Their  particular  destination 
is  to  be  to  fight  the  Americans.  Their  numbers  will  be  six 
to  one  against  us,  unless  we  too  taking  the  hint  from  our 
success  can  build  frigate  for  frigate,  and  meet  them  on  their 
own  terms;  in  which  case  if  our  new  ships  are  commanded, 
and  officered,  and  manned,  like  the  Constitution ,  and  United 
States ,  and  Wasp ,  I  am  persuaded  they  will  in  process  of  time 
gain  one  step  more  upon  the  maxims  of  the  British  navy, 
and  settle  it  as  a  principle  that  single  English  ships  are  not 
to  fight  Americans  of  equal  force.  Thus  much  I  believe  it 
will  be  in  their  power  to  do,  and  further  I  wish  them  never  to 
go.  I  hope  they  will  never  catch  the  insolent  affectation  of 
seeking  battle  against  superior  force — an  English  pretension 
which  has  been  so  well  chastised  in  the  fate  of  their  two  fri¬ 
gates. 

Our  navy  like  all  our  other  institutions  is  formed  upon 
the  English  model.  With  regard  to  the  navy  at  least  the 
superiority  of  that  model  to  all  others  extant  is  incontestable. 
But  in  the  British  navy  itself  there  are  a  multitude  of  abuses 
against  which  we  may  guard,  and  there  are  many  improve¬ 
ments  of  which  it  is  susceptible  and  for  which  the  field  is 
open  before  us.  Our  three  44-gunships  were  originally 
built  not  as  the  English  pretend  for  line  of  battle  ships, 
but  to  be  a  little  more  than  a  match  in  force  to  the  largest 
European  frigates,  and  the  experience,  both  of  our  partial 
war  with  France  in  1798  and  1799,  as  well  as  our  present  war 
with  England,  has  proved  the  wisdom  of  the  principle  upon 
which  they  were  constructed.  It  has  been  a  great  and  mo- 


430 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

mentous  question  among  our  statesmen  whether  we  should 
have  any  navy  or  not.  It  will  probably  still  be  a  great 
question;  but  Great  Britain  appears  determined  to  solve  all 
our  doubts  and  difficulties  upon  the  subject.  She  blockades 
our  coast  and  is  resolved  to  crush  us  instantly  upon  the 
ocean.  We  must  sink  without  a  struggle  under  her  hand, 
or  we  must  have  a  navy. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  105.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  2  February,  1813. 

Sir: 

•  ••••• 

The  war  in  its  progress  has  been  extremely  destructive 
and  distressing  to  Russia,  but  its  result  has  been  not  only 
to  deliver  her  entirely  from  that  terror  of  the  French  Power 
which  had  spread  itself  so  universally  over  the  whole  Con¬ 
tinent  of  Europe,  but  to  place  in  the  hands  of  Russia  herself 
that  predominant  influence  which  France  had  been  so  long 
and  so  perseveringly  striving  to  establish.  It  is  scarcely 
possible  but  that  henceforth  Russia  should  be  the  arbitress 
of  Europe  by  land .  Her  loss  of  human  lives  in  this  dreadful 
struggle  has  probably  been  greater  than  that  of  France. 
Her  loss  of  property  has  certainly  been  more  considerable. 
But  her  losses  have  not  been  in  the  sinews  of  her  strength. 
Those  of  France  have  been  in  the  vitals  of  her  military  power. 
The  spell  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s  name  is  not  yet  totally 
dissolved.  His  friends  yet  cherish  a  vague  and  general  hope, 
and  his  enemies  feel  an  involuntary  fear,  that  his  transcen- 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


43 1 


dental  Genius  (so  they  term  it)  will  yet  burst  forth,  chain 
down  Fortune  at  his  feet,  and  range  the  world  again  con¬ 
quering  and  to  conquer.  I  see  no  substantial  ground  for 
such  a  hope,  or  such  a  fear.  The  highest  probabilities  now 
are  that  his  fall  will  be  as  great  as  his  elevation  has  been 
extraordinary;  and  with  regard  to  his  Genius,  if  it  ever  sur¬ 
passed  that  of  other  great  generals  and  statesmen,  it  has 
most  assuredly  deserted  him  in  the  undertaking  and  in  the 
execution  of  the  Russian  war.  That  it  was  lightly,  wantonly, 
unjustly  undertaken,  I  have  the  most  thorough  conviction 
from  an  attentive  and  impartial  observation  of  its  rise  and 
progress  of  which  my  communications  from  this  place  to 
your  Department  during  that  whole  period  contain  the  re¬ 
sult.  That  in  its  execution  the  most  flagrant  and  egre¬ 
gious  blunders  or  imprudences  continually  insulted  the  in¬ 
dulgence  of  Fortune  and  produced  his  final  overthrow,  is 
equally  clear  and  far  more  notorious.  The  genius  that  suf¬ 
fered  the  most  inveterate  of  Russia’s  enemies,  the  Ottoman 
Porte,  to  conclude  a  disadvantageous  peace  with  her  at  the 
very  moment  when  he  was  invading  Poland,  released  Ad¬ 
miral  Tchitchagoff’s  army  to  force  his  right  wing  and  close 
upon  his  rear  on  one  side.  The  genius  that  drove  Sweden 
under  one  of  his  own  generals  into  the  arms  of  Russia  re¬ 
leased  another  army  from  Sweaborg  and  the  Finland  fron¬ 
tier,  with  which  Wittgenstein  forced  his  left  wing  at  Polotzk 
and  closed  upon  his  rear  on  the  other  side.  The  genius  which 
rushed  headlong  on  to  Moscow  in  September,  without  fore¬ 
seeing  or  preparing  for  the  possible  necessity  of  retreat  in 
winter;  and  the  genius  which  found  ice  and  frost  premature 
in  November  under  Polish  and  Russian  skies  is  not  that  sort 
of  genius  which,  by  the  steadiness  of  its  judgment  and  the 
immensity  of  its  resources,  redeems  from  such  overwhelm¬ 
ing  ruin  as  that  in  which  by  such  errors  as  those  involved  his 


432 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

whole  army.  That  he  may  still  maintain  his  authority  in 
France  it  would  be  presumptuous  positively  to  deny.  That 
he  may  again  collect  armies  and  win  battles  is  altogether 
possible,  and  by  errors  not  unlike  his  own  may  be  rendered 
hereafter  even  probable.  But  in  the  general  tenor  of  human 
history,  when  Fortune  has  once  turned  her  back  upon  those 
to  whom  she  has  been  most  lavish  of  her  favors,  she  never 
takes  them  to  her  own  again.  A  cast-off  favorite  must  look 
for  anything  but  kindness. 

In  the  annihilation  of  that  immense  host  which  but  half  a 
year  since  burst  upon  the  Russian  Empire  providence  has 
certainly  reserved  the  greatest  and  most  essential  agency  to 
itself.  But  in  the  conduct  of  the  sovereign,  of  the  nobility, 
of  the  citizens,  of  the  peasantry,  and  of  the  army  of  this 
nation,  under  the  heavy  trial  which  they  have  been  called 
to  endure,  it  would  be  the  highest  injustice  to  deny  that  there 
has  been  little  to  censure  and  much  to  applaud  and  admire. 
The  spirit  of  patriotism  has  burst  with  the  purest  and  most 
vivid  flame  in  every  class  of  the  community.  The  exertions 
of  the  nation  have  been  almost  unparalleled,  the  greatest 
sacrifices  have  been  made  cheerfully  and  spontaneously.  I 
wrote  you  before  the  war  began  that  it  was  anticipated  with 
some  dejection  and  despondency.  But  from  the  moment  it 
began  scarcely  a  symptom  of  that  kind  has  ever  betrayed  it¬ 
self  among  any  class  of  the  Russian  people.  In  the  most 
trying  extremity  they  have  been  calm  and  collected,  deeply 
anxious,  but  uniformly  confident  and  sanguine  in  their  hopes 
of  the  result. 

On  the  19th  of  December  the  Emperor  Alexander  left 
this  city  and  on  the  22d  arrived  at  the  headquarters  of  his 
army  at  VViina.  He  is  still  with  them  and  there  is  no  present 
expectation  of  his  return.  The  Chancellor,  Count  Romanzoff, 
has  not  yet  followed  him.  A  commercial  treaty  with  Eng* 


1 8 1 3] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


433 


land  is  talked  of  among  the  merchants,  but  is  not  even  in 
discussion  between  the  governments.  I  am  with  great 
respect,  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  18  February,  1813. 

As  I  shall  probably  not  have  an  opportunity  of  dispatch¬ 
ing  letters  for  America  after  that  of  which  I  now  avail  my¬ 
self,  at  least  before  the  expiration  of  the  present  month,  and 
as  I  am  unwilling  to  break  through  the  rule  which  I  pre¬ 
scribed  to  myself  of  writing  to  you  at  least  once  every 
winter,  I  sit  down  to  repeat  to  you  what  only  three  days 
since  I  wrote  to  my  father,  namely  that  I  have  not  seen  the 
handwriting  of  any  of  my  friends  at  Quincy  dated  later  than 
last  April.  I  have  however  written  to  them,  and  had  occa¬ 
sions  to  forward  my  letters  to  them  as  often  as  I  did  before 
the  new  wars.  As  yet  I  have  heard  of  no  new  obstacles  to 
the  passage  of  Americans,  most  of  them  that  have  gone 
from  this  country  since  last  summer  have  taken  their  course 
homeward  by  the  way  of  England;  but  as  the  British  govern¬ 
ment  grows  more  inveterate  as  the  war  advances,  I  perceive 
by  one  of  the  last  English  newspapers  received  here  that 
they  have  prohibited  the  embarkation  of  any  person  from 
their  island  to  America  without  a  special  license ,  and  I  hear 
that  they  are  taking  other  measures  of  rigor  with  the  Amer¬ 
icans  captured  by  them  since  the  war  commenced.  The 
Regent  has  also  issued  a  manifesto  in  answer  to  that  of  our 
committee  of  Congress  which  recommended  the  declaration 
of  war,  but  I  have  not  yet  seen  it.1 

The  war  against  the  United  States  appears  to  be  now  ap¬ 
proved  and  supported  by  all  parties  in  England,  for  the 

1  Annual  Register ,  1813,  330. 


434 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

original  opposition  to  the  present  Administration,  very 
rashly  and  very  unjustly,  pledged  themselves  to  join  min¬ 
isters  upon  this  point  of  their  policy,  if  the  revocation  of  the 
Orders  in  Council  should  not  satisfy  the  Americans.  And  now 
the  ministers  and  their  friends  hold  them  to  their  word. 
Some  of  their  parliamentary  leaders  are  as  wrong  headed 
and  stiff-necked  in  support  of  the  press-gang  as  the  ministry 
themselves,  and  the  others  dare  not  avow  the  disposition  to 
compromise  this  point,  because  John  Bull  among  his  whim¬ 
sies  has  taken  it  into  his  head  that  his  trident  is  at  stake 
upon  the  question,  and  they  think  he  will  look  with  an  evil 
eye  upon  any  one  who  advises  him  to  abandon  it.  Cobbett 
is  the  only  politician  among  them  who  has  boldly  and  ex¬ 
plicitly  told  this  nation  that  they  never  can  have  a  solid 
peace  with  America,  while  they  practice  impressment  on 
board  of  American  vessels  at  sea.  But  Cobbett  is  out  of 
favor  with  all  parties,  and  since  he  began  to  speak  the  lan¬ 
guage  of  truth  and  justice  and  humanity,  has  lost  all  credit 
with  his  countrymen.  As  to  the  fragments  struck  off  from 
the  ministry  by  their  internal  collisions,  such  as  Wellesley 
and  Canning,  who  form  what  was  once  called  in  America  a 
quid  party,  they  are  among  the  bitterest  of  our  enemies,  and 
having  been  themselves  the  principal  causes  of  the  war  very 
constantly  say  that  nothing  can  be  more  just  than  a  war 
with  America  now.  But  they  are  not  at  all  satisfied  with 
the  conduct  of  the  war.  The  Wellesley  gazette  (the  Times) 
abuses  the  ministry  for  not  having  blown  the  American  navy 
to  atoms,  and  Canning  abuses  them  in  Parliament  for  not 
having  ravaged  our  coast  with  fire  and  sword.  They  say  in 
answer  to  the  first,  that  they  gave  orders  to  their  admirals 
on  the  American  station  to  burn,  sink  and  destroy  all  Amer¬ 
ican  vessels  before  the  war  began,  and  that  they  have  con¬ 
stantly  had  on  those  American  stations  a  force  equal  to 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


435 


1813] 

seven  times  the  whole  American  navy.  In  answer  to  Canning 
they  had  the  grace  to  say,  not  in  Parliament  but  in  the 
Courier  their  newspaper,  that  to  ravage  our  sea  coast  with 
fire  and  sword  would  be  trespassing  a  little  upon  the  laws  of 
nations  and  that  it  would  be  spiteful.  But  notwithstanding 
this  we  may  be  assured  they  will  follow  Mr.  Canning’s  pre¬ 
scription  if  they  can. 

The  war  against  American  independence  was  for  five 
years  of  its  continuance  one  of  the  most  popular  wars  that 
the  nation  ever  waged,  and  it  was  seven  before  they  could 
be  convinced  that  they  could  not  obtain  by  war  the  object 
of  the  war.  Their  real  object  in  the  present  war  is  the  dis¬ 
memberment  of  the  American  Union.  Their  professed  ob¬ 
ject  is  the  press-gang.  The  war  for  the  press-gang  will  be 
as  popular  as  the  war  against  American  independence  was, 
until  we  can  convince  them  that  they  cannot  obtain  by  war 
the  object  of  the  war.  Were  it  possible  to  conceive  that  the 
success  of  the  war  upon  the  ocean  would  for  seven  years 
correspond  to  that  of  the  first  six  months,  my  hopes  would 
be  sanguine  that  they  would  eventually  be  completely  de¬ 
feated  in  both  their  objects  and  that  we  should  finally  suc¬ 
ceed  in  ours.  But  this  cannot  be  expected.  If  our  country 
could  expend  in  three  years  as  many  dollars  upon  naval 
force  as  they  expend  pounds  sterling  in  one,  I  should  hold 
success  for  infallible;  but  as  it  is  the  chances  are  too  un¬ 
equal.  Providence  may  interpose  in  ways  of  its  own  to 
vindicate  the  righteous  cause/  and  I  have  had  under  my 
eyes  the  last  half  year  a  signal  instance  of  such  interposition. 
The  cause  against  the  press-gang  is  righteous,  if  there  ever 
was  one  since  the  hand  of  man  was  armed  against  oppression. 
The  cause  of  the  press-gang  is  doubly  atrocious  as  a  British 
cause.  Impressment  as  practiced  upon  their  own  subjects 
and  within  their  own  territory  not  only  brands  the  nation 


436 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

with  the  mark  of  the  most  odious  despotism,  but  gives  the 
lie  to  every  pretence  of  freedom  in  their  constitution.  And 
as  if  it  were  to  show  how  far  the  absurdity  of  human  iniquity 
could  go,  the  Helots  of  Britain  are  their  sailors.  The  only 
class  of  people  subjected  to  the  most  unqualified  servi¬ 
tude,  robbed  of  every  right  of  personal  liberty,  kidnapped 
like  African  negroes,  without  resource  or  relief  in  the  tri¬ 
bunals  of  their  country,  the  outlaws  of  the  land  who  have 
no  rights  in  the  eyes  of  kings’  judges,  because  they  are  stolen 
from  their  families  and  employments  to  serve  the  king,  are 
precisely  the  class  of  people  who  maintain  with  their  blood 
the  power,  and  dignity,  and  glory,  nay,  as  their  assassins 
say,  the  existence  of  their  nation.  They  talk  of  our  prac¬ 
tising  seduction  upon  their  sailors.  The  charge  is  false  and 
ridiculous.  But  in  this  war  it  would  be  strange  indeed  if 
there  were  not  seduction  to  their  sailors  in  the  very  nature 
of  our  cause.  Our  war  is  the  sailors’  war;  it  is  surely  enough 
if  they  force  their  seamen  to  die  in  battle  for  the  press-gang. 
If  their  men  are  human  beings,  their  hearts  must  be  on 
our  side. 

The  war  as  far  as  the  British  professions  can  be  trusted  is 
now  reduced  to  this  single  point.  What  its  issue  will  be  must 
be  left  in  the  hands  of  him  who  scourges  the  vices  and  crimes 
of  nations  by  war,  and  who  has  sent  this  for  our  chastise¬ 
ment  as  well  as  for  that  of  our  enemies.  At  the  thought  of 
what  my  country  will  suffer  and  go  through  before  a  rational 
prospect  can  open  of  her  success  in  this  contest  my  heart 
would  sink  within  me,  but  for  the  reliance  which  I  place  in 
the  divine  goodness.  There  are  great  and  glorious  qualities 
in  the  human  character  which  as  they  can  unfold  themselves 
only  in  times  of  difficulty  and  danger  seem  to  make  war  from 
time  to  time  a  necessary  evil  among  men.  A  nation  long 
at  peace  seldom  fails  to  become  degraded.  Symptoms  of 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


437 


1813] 

this  spirit  of  corruption  were  very  visible  in  our  country. 
God  grant  that  in  suffering  the  unavoidable  calamities  we 
may  recover  in  all  their  vigor  the  energies  of  war!  I  am,  etc. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 
St.  Petersburg,  15  February,  1813. 

My  Dear  Sir: 

Although  the  wars  which  broke  out  in  the  course  of  one 
week  last  summer  both  in  Europe  and  America  appear  to 
have  deprived  our  friends  in  the  United  States  totally  of  the 
few  opportunities  which  they  had  before  of  wrriting  to  us,  so 
that  we  still  remain  without  a  line  from  any  of  them  bearing 
a  later  date  than  last  April,  we  have  hitherto  had  the  means 
of  communication  to  them,  particularly  since  the  approach 
of  winter,  at  least  as  frequently  as  we  ever  had  before  during 
our  residence  in  this  country,  and  I  trust  you  will  hear  di¬ 
rectly  from  us  as  often  as  before  the  war.  There  are  here  a 
number  of  Americans  who  upon  concluding  the  business 
which  brought  them  are  successively  departing  to  return 
home  and,  at  least  while  the  winter  lasts,  they  are  obliged 
to  take  the  same  course.  They  go  by  land  to  Gothenburg, 
thence  in  the  British  packets  to  England,  where  they  have 
hitherto  found  no  difficulty  in  obtaining  permission  to  land 
or  in  meeting  opportunities  to  embark  for  the  United  States. 
By  some  of  them  I  have  had  the  means  of  dispatching  my 
letters  at  least  once  every  month  since  the  close  of  the  last 
year’s  navigation,  and  I  hope  to  have  similar  occasions  to 
write  by  them  from  time  to  time  until  the  return  of  summer. 
When  that  comes  it  is  likely  there  will  be  neutral  vessels 
going  directly  from  hence  as  well  as  from  Gothenburg  to 
America. 


43  8 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

I  wish  I  could  foresee  any  probability  that  a  restoration 
of  peace  between  the  United  States  and  England  wdll  open 
once  more  the  highway  of  nations  to  our  own  vessels  to  pass 
to  and  from  this  country.  But  all  the  hopes  of  this  that  I 
had  cherished  have  been  fading  into  disappointment,  and 
the  events  of  the  war  hitherto  have  tended  so  much  to  ex¬ 
asperate  and  embitter  on  both  sides  without  disabling  either 
that  I  see  no  resource  left  in  regard  to  the  wish  for  peace 
but  resignation  to  the  will  of  heaven. 

We  are  still  ignorant  of  the  issue  of  our  presidential 
election,  which  the  British  ministry  either  believe  or  affect 
to  believe  to  be  the  test  of  peace  or  war.  It  has  even  been  as¬ 
serted  from  publications  in  American  gazettes  to  which 
I  give  not  the  least  credit,  that  the  candidate  opposed  against 
Mr.  Madison  was  agreed  upon  by  a  coalition  of  very  hetero¬ 
geneous  oppositions  upon  a  special  pledge  that,  if  elected, 
he  would  within  twenty-four  hours  after  his  installation 
suspend  hostilities  against  Britain  and  commence  a  negotia¬ 
tion  for  peace.  The  English  gazettes  have  seized  with  avidity 
this  absurd  tale,  and  circulated  it  throughout  Europe  to 
propagate  the  opinion  that  the  war  is  in  America  considered 
merely  as  Mr.  Madison’s  war,  and  that  if  his  antagonist 
should  be  elected,  the  new  President  would  rush  into  the 
arms  of  England  without  asking  a  question  of  Congress,  and 
take  just  such  a  peace  as  my  Lord  Castlereagh  should  be 
pleased  to  give  him.  That  the  chance  of  peace  will  depend 
upon  the  event  of  the  American  election  the  British  min¬ 
istry  have  explicitly  avowed  to  be  their  expectation,  and 
their  ambassador  here,  Lord  Cathcart,  some  months  since 
intimated  to  me  in  conversation  the  same  thing.  But  there 
is  a  duplicity  in  the  conduct  of  the  British  ministry  towards 
America  which  makes  it  impossible  to  judge  what  they  in¬ 
tend  from  what  they  say,  unless  by  taking  the  exact  counter- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


439 


1813] 

part  of  their  public  professions  for  their  real  intentions.  On 
the  publication  of  Captain  Henry’s  correspondence  Lord 
Liverpool  and  Lord  Castlereagh  solemnly  disavowed  having 
ever  intended  to  countenance  any  project  for  the  dismember¬ 
ment  of  the  American  Union,  though  it  was  so  strongly 
urged  on  the  face  of  Sir  James  Craig’s  instructions  to  Henry, 
and  although  Lord  Castlereagh  was  forced  to  acknowledge 
that  they  had  never  expressed  any  disapprobation  to  Sir 
James  Craig  for  having  given  those  instructions.  At  the 
same  time  when  Mr.  Whitbread  moved  in  the  House  of 
Commons  for  copies  of  Sir  James  Craig’s  correspondence, 
Lord  Castlereagh  refused  them,  and  Mr.  Whitbread  de¬ 
spaired  of  being  able  to  carry  his  motion  and  withdrew  it. 
I  have  too  much  reason  for  believing  that  even  when  they 
revoked  the  Orders  in  Council  it  was  only  because  they 
knew  the  measure  would  come  too  late  to  prevent  the  war. 
The  opposition  in  England  have  lately  charged  them  with 
having  been  taken  by  surprise  and  unprepared  by  the  Ameri¬ 
can  declaration  of  war,  and  as  the  loss  of  their  two  frigates 
has  made  the  nation  sore,  and  given  some  color  to  this  charge, 
an  elaborate  defence  of  them  against  it  has  been  published 
in  their  principal  newspaper  disclosing  the  fact  that  instruc¬ 
tions  had  been  sent  as  early  as  last  May  to  Admiral  Duck¬ 
worth  on  the  Newfoundland  station,  to  burn,  sink  and  de¬ 
stroy  all  American  vessels  on  the  slightest  aggression  by  the 
Americans.  These  instructions  the  writer  urges  must  have 
been  given  to  all  the  other  British  commanders  on  the 
American  stations  at  the  same  time  as  to  Admiral  Duck¬ 
worth.  He  sees  that  he  can  defend  his  patrons  from  the 
charge  of  negligence  only  by  bringing  down  upon  them  the 
charge  of  perfidy;  but  to  this  they  are  so  indifferent  that  he 
does  not  attempt  to  refute  or  even  to  deny  it. 

Even  in  the  present  Parliament  Mr.  Canning  has  censured 


440 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

them  in  the  House  of  Commons  for  not  having  answered  the 
American  ministers,  and  denied  the  charge  of  having  been 
implicated  in  Henry’s  mission  of  dismemberment  which  he, 
Canning,  disavows  in  the  name  of  the  whole  ministry  of 
which  he  was  then  a  member.  Very  well,  Mr.  Canning.  But 
Sir  Robert  Wilson,  an  officer  of  high  distinction  and  certainly 
no  enemy  to  the  British  ministry,  asserted  here  at  the  table 
of  an  English  gentleman  (as  I  am  informed)  that  Mr.  Per¬ 
ceval  at  the  time  of  his  death  was  determined  to  have  a  war 
with  America,  and  expected  that  the  result  of  that  war  would 
be  the  dismemberment  of  the  American  Union.  A  gentleman 
present  at  the  dinner,  which  was  shortly  after  Lord  Liver¬ 
pool’s  and  Lord  Castlereagh’s  parliamentary  disavowals, 
questioned  the  correctness  of  Sir  Robert’s  information,  upon 
which  he  replied,  sir,  my  informant  is  Mr.  Perceval;  a  very 
few  days  “  before  his  death  he  told  me  so  himself.”  With 
such  facts  in  the  face  of  such  professions  it  is  scarcely  possible 
to  indulge  a  hope  of  peace  while  the  present  British  ministers 
are  in  power,  unless  it  be  such  a  peace  which  to  the  heart  of 
an  American  feeling  for  the  honor  of  his  country  would  be 
worse  than  the  most  disastrous  war. 

The  war  in  the  north  of  Europe  is  for  the  present  at  an 
end.  The  dissolution  of  the  Emperor  Napoleon’s  army  is  so 
complete  that  the  Russians  who  have  entered  Prussia  and 
the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  advance  now  in  the  depth  of  an 
extremely  severe  winter  without  finding  an  enemy  to  oppose 
them.  They  go  as  friends  and  deliverers,  and  say  they  are 
everywhere  received  as  such  with  joy  and  triumph.  Na¬ 
poleon  has  been  now  nearly  two  months  at  Paris,  where  a 
popular  fermentation  menacing  the  whole  foundation  of 
his  government  is  said  to  be  not  very  secretly  working.  A 
peace  and  alliance  both  with  Austria  and  Prussia  is  expected 
here,  and  the  negotiations  though  not  public  are  believed  to 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


441 


1813] 

be  far  advanced.  The  Emperor  Alexander  is  with  his  army 
in  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  106.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  16  February,  1813. 

Sir: 

Some  weeks  since  there  appeared  in  the  English  news¬ 
papers  transmitted  to  this  country  several  paragraphs  as¬ 
serting  that  Mr.  Barlow  had  followed  the  Emperor  Napoleon 
to  Moscow,  and  a  member  of  the  British  Parliament,  dis¬ 
tinguished  as  much  for  his  rancor  against  the  United  States 
as  for  his  eloquence,  was  reported  to  have  stated  in  his 
place  in  the  House  of  Commons  in  terms  very  injurious  to 
the  American  government,  that  the  object  of  Mr.  Barlow’s 
journey  was  to  make  the  United  States  subservient  to  the 
views  of  France,  by  leaguing  them  with  her  in  a  treaty 
to  destroy  the  independence  of  Spain.  I  well  know  that 
these  assertions  of  Mr.  Canning  (as  reported  in  the  pub¬ 
lished  debates)  were  in  every  particular  erroneous — that  Mr. 
Barlow  was  not  gone  to  Moscow,  and  that  he  could  have 
neither  the  design  nor  authority  to  engage  the  United  States 
in  any  league  hostile  to  the  independence  of  Spain.  I  soon 
afterwards  heard,  through  the  medium  of  private  letters 
received  by  Americans  here,  that  Mr.  Barlow  had  actually 
left  Paris  to  go,  not  to  Moscow  but  to  Wilna,  and  Count 
Romanzoff  informed  me  that  he  had  been  invited,  together 
with,  two  other  foreign  Ministers  of  governments  in  alliance 
with  France,  to  go  thither  by  a  letter  from  the  Duke  of 
Bassano.  I  told  the  Count  that  it  was  impossible  for  me  to 


442 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

say  what  could  be  the  motive  upon  which  the  Duke  of 
Bassano  had  invited  Mr.  Barlow  to  Wilna,  but  I  was  per¬ 
fectly  sure  his  motive  for  complying  with  the  invitation  was 
not,  and  could  not  be,  that  ascribed  to  him  in  the  English 
gazettes  and  Parliament. 

Last  week  Count  Romanzoff  mentioned  to  me  with  many 
obliging  expressions  of  regret  that  he  had  been  informed 
that  Mr.  Barlow,  as  he  was  returning  from  Wilna  intending 
to  pursue  his  journey  by  the  way  of  Vienna,  had  been  taken 
ill  on  the  road  and  died  at  Cracow.1  He  added  that  he  had 
received  this  information  from  Prince  Kurakin,  the  late 
Ru  ssian  ambassador  in  France  who  is  now  at  Vienna.  That 
the  Prince  expressed  great  concern  at  this  event,  having 
received  many  and  continual  marks  of  kindness  and  good 
offices  from  him  while  they  had  both  resided  at  Paris;  and 
during  the  last  months  of  the  Prince’s  embassy,  from  the 
immediate  prospect  of  rupture  between  the  two  Empires 
he  had  associated  with  scarcely  any  other  person.  That  on 
the  breaking  out  of  the  war,  when  the  Prince  left  Paris,  he 
had  deposited  in  Mr.  Barlow’s  custody  the  archives  of  the 
Russian  embassy  to  be  kept  subject  to  the  future  orders 
of  this  government,  and  as  Prince  Kurakin  did  not  know  what 
disposition  Mr.  Barlow  had  made  of  them  on  his  own  de¬ 
parture  from  Paris,  nor  in  whose  care  they  might  now  be,  he 
felt  some  anxiety  for  them.  The  Count  requested  me  to 
write  to  Paris  to  ascertain  where  they  were,  and  to  give  such 
directions  for  their  further  safe-keeping  as  might  be  neces¬ 
sary. 

There  was  a  young  American  here  of  respectable  char¬ 
acter  desirous  of  going  to  Paris  by  the  way  of  Vienna,  and 
who  had  shortly  before  applied  to  me  with  a  request  if  I  had 
any  dispatches  for  either  of  those  places,  that  I  would  send 

1  Barlow  died  December  24,  1812. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


443 


1S13] 

them  by  him  so  that  he  might  have  the  advantage  of  travel¬ 
ling  with  passports  as  a  courier.  But  as  I  had  no  occasion 
to  send  at  all  to  Vienna,  and  none  of  sufficient  importance 
to  send  to  Paris  while  Mr.  Barlow  was  absent  from  that  city 
and  I  was  ignorant  where  he  might  be,  I  declined  asking  a 
courier’s  passport  for  Mr.  Delprat  (the  young  American  of 
whom  I  speak),  being  apprehensive  that  in  the  state  of  the 
relations  between  this  country  Austria  and  France  the  notor¬ 
iety  which  my  dispatching  a  courier  to  Vienna  and  Paris 
might  and  probably  would  assume,  might  at  least  occasion 
surmises  here  or  at  Paris,  and  perhaps  public  falsehoods 
in  England,  like  those  raised  upon  Mr.  Barlow’s  journey, 
which  might  have  an  operation  injurious  to  the  interests 
of  the  United  States. 

But  upon  being  informed  of  Mr.  Barlow’s  decease  and  re¬ 
quested  by  Count  Romanzoff  to  write  to  Paris  concerning 
the  archives  which  had  been  deposited  with  him,  I  had  a 
motive  sufficient  to  ask  the  courier’s  passport  for  Mr.  Del¬ 
prat;  and  as  this  event  had  left  me  the  only  accredited 
minister  of  the  United  States  in  Europe,  I  thought  it  ex¬ 
pedient  with  reference  to  our  own  public  concerns  to  ascer¬ 
tain  who  was  now  charged  with  the  affairs  of  the  United 
States  in  France,  and  to  open  a  communication  with  him. 
As  Mr.  Barlow  is  said  to  have  died  at  or  near  Cracow,  Mr. 
Delprat  by  taking  the  way  through  Vienna  may  learn  the 
particular  circumstances  of  this  unfortunate  incident,  in 
which  case  I  have  requested  him  to  give  me  information 
of  them.  Count  Romanzoff  very  readily  furnished  the  pass¬ 
port  for  Mr.  Delprat,  and  I  took  such  other  precautions  for 
obtaining  his  admission  into  Austria  and  France  as  were 
practicable  here,  and  might  prevent  any  of  those  idle  con¬ 
jectures  and  groundless  suspicions  and  malevolent  rumors, 
the  probability  of  which  had  previously  restrained  me  from 


444 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

dispatching  him  as  a  courier.  He  left  the  city  the  day  be¬ 
fore  yesterday. 

It  probably  did  not  occur  to  Mr.  Barlow  before  he  left 
Paris  that  there  was  any  necessity  for  him  to  give  me  notice 
of  his  journey,  and  to  enable  me,  if  not  to  give  explanations 
of  its  real  motives,  at  least  to  guard  against  the  effect  of 
such  commentaries  upon  it  as  were  transmitted  hither  from 
England.  The  difficulties  of  communicating  might  also  pre¬ 
vent  him  from  writing  to  me.  On  the  authority  of  your 
dispatch  of  1  July  last  I  have  denied  with  perfect  confidence 
the  truth  of  Mr.  Canning’s  assertions,  and  I  have  no  reason 
to  believe  that  they  have  obtained  any  credit  here. 

In  the  tenth  number  of  the  French  gazettes  which  I  en¬ 
close  by  this  opportunity,  you  will  find  an  article  under  the 
date  of  Vienna  mentioning  Mr.  Barlow’s  death.  Since 
the  commencement  of  the  present  year  these  gazettes  are 
published  under  the  auspices  of  the  government,  and  I 
have  thought  them  worth  sending  to  you;  particularly  as 
they  contain  the  series  of  the  Russian  Hand  Bills  with  official 
advices  from  the  armies.  They  will  dispense  me  from  send¬ 
ing  you  any  more  extracts  from  them  in  English  translations. 
The  Russian  armies  you  will  perceive  are  advancing  into 
Prussia  and  the  Duchy  of  Warsaw  without  meeting  with 
any  resistance.  They  are  said  to  be  everywhere  received 
as  friends  and  deliverers.  But  so  were  the  French  in  Poland. 
With  Prussia  and  with  Austria  there  are  negotiations  for 
a  separate  peace.  Lord  Walpole,  who  was  the  secretary 
of  the  British  embassy  here,  has  been  some  months  at 
Vienna.  Austria  has  urged  a  negotiation  for  a  general  peace, 
but  neither  England  nor  Russia  appear  inclined  at  present 
to  a  peace  with  France.  The  British  ambassador,  Lord 
Cathcart,  left  this  city  last  Friday  for  the  Emperor  Alex¬ 
ander’s  headquarters.  I  am,  etc. 


i8i31 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


445 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  27  February,  1813. 

At  length  after  another  interval  of  nearly  seven  months 
since  I  had  been  favored  with  the  sight  of  a  line  from  any  of 
my  friends  at  Quincy,  yours  of  29  July  has  come  to  hand. 
It  is  nearly  seven  months  old,  but  is  more  than  three  months 
later  than  your  previous  letter.  As  it  came  under  cover  to 
Mr.  Barlow  I  suppose  it  did  not  reach  Paris  until  after  his 
departure  from  that  city.  Thence  it  was  sent  back  to  Mr. 
Beasley,  the  agent  for  American  prisoners  of  war  in  London, 
who  transmitted  it  to  me  by  the  way  of  Gothenburg.  If  I 
am  to  remain  here  another  winter,  probably  this  will  be  the 
only  channel  through  which  you  can  write  to  me.  If,  as  I 
suppose,  cartels  will  continue  to  frequently  pass  between  the 
United  States  and  England,  you  can  inclose  letters  under 
cover  to  Mr.  Beasley,  taking  care  as  you  always  do  to  write 
nothing  which  could  furnish  a  motive  to  anyone  to  inter¬ 
cept  the  letter. 

You  will  probably  know  before  this,  or  will  very  shortly, 
learn  the  decease  of  Mr.  Barlow,  very  few  particulars  of  which 
have  as  yet  come  to  my  knowledge.  He  received  by  order 
of  the  French  Emperor  an  invitation  from  the  Duke  of 
Bassano,  his  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  to  go  to  Wilna, 
with  which  he  complied.  But  the  day  before  Napoleon 
passed  through  that  city  on  his  return  to  Paris  Mr.  Barlow 
left  it,  with  the  intention  of  returning  thither  through  Vienna. 
On  the  road,  and  before  he  has  reached  Cracow,  he  was 
seized  with  a  fever  and  inflammation  of  the  lungs  which 
stopped  him  in  the  midst  of  his  journey;  he  would  neither 
obtain  suitable  medical  attendance  nor  any  of  the  assistance 
which  were  essential  to  his  recovery  and  died,  I  believe,  at 


446 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

a  post  house,  one  or  two  stations  short  of  Cracow,  to  which 
place  his  remains  were  transported  and  there  interred.  He 
was  accompanied  by  his  nephew  1  who  immediately  after¬ 
wards  returned  through  Vienna  to  Paris.  These  are  all  the 
circumstances  of  which  I  have  been  informed.  The  English 
newspapers  have  contained  several  paragraphs  full  of  false¬ 
hood  concerning  his  journey,  which  they  pretended  was  to 
Moscow.  I  have  no  doubt  you  will  see  them  all  retailed  at 
second  hand  in  our  own  gazettes.  What  the  motive  of  the 
French  Emperor  was  for  inviting  him  to  Wilna  I  can  only 
conjecture;  but  he  had  added  one  to  the  numbers  almost 
without  number  of  the  victims  to  the  rigors  of  this  season 
and  of  that  climate. 


TO  R.  G.  BEASLEY 
St.  Petersburg,  28  February,  1813. 

Sir: 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  writing  to  you  on  the  1st  of  this 
month  by  Mr.  Lawler,  since  which  I  have  had  that  of  re¬ 
ceiving  your  favors  of  12  and  15  January,  enclosing  a  slip 
of  the  Times  with  the  English  Regent’s  manifesto,  and  also 
a  letter  from  America  which,  although  seven  months  old, 
was  the  latest  direct  communication  that  I  had  from  my 
friends  in  that  country.  I  thank  you  for  them  both  and  for 
the  information  in  your  own  letter. 

If  Mr.  Monroe’s  letter  to  Admiral  Warren  made  the  pop¬ 
ular  voice  in  England  adverse  to  the  American  war,  and 
Sir  William  Scott’s  manifesto  made  the  popular  voice,  as  the 

1  Thomas  Barlow. 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


447 


sailors  say,  chop  round  against  us,  it  is  to  be  hoped  the  next 
American  state  paper  on  the  subject  will  make  it  chop  round 
again  in  our  favor.  One  of  the  English  poets  says 

the  People’s  voice  is  odd 
It  is  and  it  is  not  the  Voice  of  God. 

It  seems  we  have  a  sample  of  both  kinds  with  regard  to  this 
war.  Such  a  volatile  popular  voice  cannot  have  much  effect 
upon  the  issue  of  the  war.  That  must  depend  upon  some¬ 
thing  a  little  more  stedfast. 

There  is  another  question  in  the  case  more  important  to 
my  mind  than  that  of  the  popular  voice  in  England:  which 
is  whose  cause  in  this  contest  is  Right ,  or  in  other  words  Just, 
The  first  of  all  questions  in  all  national  disputes  ought  ever 
to  be  on  which  side  is  Justice, 

A  writer  in  a  late  Morning  Chronicle  well  observes  that, 
however  multiplied  and  however  voluminous  the  state  papers 
on  both  sides  may  be,  the  war  hangs  upon  one  single  point; 
and  that  is  impressment.  Now  right  and  impressment  never 
formed  a  coalition.  They  are  just  as  congenial  as  Right  and 
Burglary ,  or  Right  and  Murder,  Practised  upon  their  own 
subjects  and  within  their  own  jurisdiction,  impressment  is 
a  violation  of  every  right  that  constitutes  a  difference  be¬ 
tween  British  liberty  and  Asiatic  servitude.  Practised  upon 
American  citizens  in  American  vessels  on  the  high  seas,  it  is 
piracy  of  the  most  atrocious  kind.  Such  is  the  character  of 
impressment,  and  it  is  indelible.  No  human  law  or  compact 
can  ever  make  it  just.  The  popular  voice  in  England,  if  it 
dared  to  speak,  would  say  as  I  do.  But  ministers  and  leaders 
of  opposition  who  have  been  and  may  again  be  ministers, 
and  naval  officers  from  the  admiral  to  the  midshipman  who 
practise  impressment,  and  judges  like  Sir  William  Scott, 
will  all  concur  to  stifle  this  popular  voice.  They  will  talk  of 


448 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

the  necessity  and  the  right  of  allegiance  (as  if  fhat  included 
the  right  of  impressment),  and  maritime  rights,  and  French 
invasion,  and  Bonaparte.  Ergo  they  will  wage  war  for  im¬ 
pressment  from  American  merchant  vessels  on  the  high  seas. 

If  the  British  government  and  the  British  navy  are  willing 
to  consider  American  frigates  as  a  match  for  English  line 
of  battle  ships,  I  do  not  know  that  Americans  ought  to  ob¬ 
ject  to  the  compliment.  Our  44’s  are  certainly  heavier 
frigates  than  their  38’s,  and  supposing  equal  skill  and  bravery 
and  fortune  on  both  sides  ought  to  take  them.  If  the  Eng¬ 
lish  admiralty  build  frigates  heavier  than  ours,  or  cut  down 
74’s  to  make  them  heavier  than  ours,  and  they  meet  our 
frigates,  I  suppose  they  will  generally  take  them. 

If  on  our  side  of  the  Atlantic  we  build  and  fit  out  only  four 
seventy-four-gun  ships,  and  they  are  given  to  such  men  as 
Isaac  Hull,  and  Decatur,  and  Jones,  we  may  flatter  ourselves 
that  they  will  soon  pass  for  three  deckers  in  disguise.  But 
before  the  discovery  is  made  I  trust  no  English  sixty-four 
will  go  in  search  of  one  of  them  with  her  name  painted  upon 
her  foretop-sail. 

The  preparations  making  to  carry  on  the  war  against  us 
vigorously  afford  cause  for  serious  concern  but  not  for  dis¬ 
couragement.  When  the  rulers  of  our  country  drew  the 
sword  of  the  nation  none  of  them  could  believe  that  they  had 
a  feeble  or  contemptible  foe  to  encounter.  My  heart  aches 
when  I  look  forward  to  the  sufferings  which  my  country 
must  go  through  in  this  struggle,  should  it  even  terminate 
in  our  favor.  But  the  strife  is  not  inglorious.  If  war  must 
be,  there  is  not  in  the  compass  of  human  discussion  a  cause 
upon  which  I  could  more  cheerfully  stake  all  that  is  dear  to 
man  than  the  cause  of  resistance  against  impressment. 
When  I  consider  the  disproportion  of  organized  public  force 
between  the  parties,  it  excites  a  feeling  of  deep  anxiety;  but 


i8i3] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


4-49 

I  think  of  the  cause ,  and  with  that  humble  diffidence  which 
should  accompany  all  mortal  reliance  upon  divine  power, 
I  believe  that  there  is  one  stronger  than  the  British  navy 
on  our  side. 

It  may  occasion  some  surprise  in  America  that  the  English 
opposition  and  their  gazettes  distinguish  themselves  only  by 
their  superior  inveteracy  against  us.  From  the  Wellesleys 
and  the  Cannings  indeed  no  other  was  to  have  been  expected; 
but  to  find  the  ministry  goaded  and  spurred  to  excessive  ex¬ 
ertions  against  us  by  the  very  party  which  had  been  most 
averse  to  the  war  and  still  professes  to  lament  it,  might  as¬ 
tonish  anyone  not  accustomed  to  all  the  obliquities  of  party 
spirit.  The  very  Morning  Chronicle ,  which  bewails  the  in¬ 
fatuation  which  could  make  two  nations  whose  common  in¬ 
terests,  and  principles,  and  feelings,  so  loudly  admonish 
them  both  to  be  at  peace,  yet  rushing  into  war,  is  incessantly 
stinging  the  admiralty  to  measures  which  can  only  tend  to 
increased  exasperation  and  bitterness  between  the  two  na¬ 
tions.  Mr.  Canning’s  rattling  eloquence  might  tell  the 
electors  at  Liverpool  that  vigorous  war  was  the  only  way  to 
bring  the  American  government  to  their  senses;  he  might  hurl 
his  fire  brands  at  our  seaport  towns  from  his  seat  in  the  House 
of  Commons;  we  have  too  long  known  his  temper  and  his 
principles  to  look  for  anything  in  him  but  a  vindictive  and 
remorseless  enemy.  But  to  find,  if  not  the  same  spirit,  at 
least  the  same  style  of  argument  used  by  those  who  have 
heretofore  held  forth  a  conciliatory  policy  towards  America, 
would  appear  inexplicable,  were  it  not  elucidated  by  the  ap¬ 
parent  motive  of  making  every  thing  subservient  to  the 
purpose  of  running  down  the  ministry.  N.  B.  this  paragraph 
omitted.  I  am,  etc. 


450 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  22  March,  1813. 


My  Dear  Sir: 

Towards  the  close  of  last  summer  there  arrived  here  as  a 
sort  of  semi-official  appendage  to  the  British  Embassy  an  old 
acquaintance  of  yours,  Sir  Francis  dTvernois,  who  as  you 
know  has  been  for  many  years  a  distinguished  political 
writer  in  the  French  language  and  in  the  interest  of  the 
British  government.  He  came  not,  I  believe,  with  but  very 
soon  after  the  ambassador,  Lord  Cathcart.  Just  at  the  same 
time  a  lady  of  celebrated  fame,  Madame  de  Stael,  the  daugh¬ 
ter  of  Mr.  Necker  was  also  on  a  transient  visit.  As  I  had  not 
the  honor  of  being  personally  known  to  Madame  de  Stael, 
and  as  we  had  just  received  information  of  the  American 
declaration  of  war  against  Britain,  I  had  no  expectation  of 
having  any  communication  or  intercourse  either  with  the 
ambassador  or  the  lady.  And  I  regretted  this  the  less  as  my 
whole  soul  was  at  that  period  absorbed  in  the  distressed 
situation  of  my  family,  and  in  the  sufferings  and  departure  of 
the  angel  that  was  our  child. 

Early  one  morning  I  received  a  note  from  Madame  de 
Stael,  requesting  me  to  call  at  her  lodgings  that  same  day  at 
noon,  as  she  wished  to  speak  to  me  on  a  subject  respecting 
America.  I  went  accordingly  at  the  hour  appointed,  and 
on  entering  the  lady’s  salon  found  there  a  company  of  some 
fifteen  or  twenty  persons,  not  a  soul  of  whom  I  had  ever  be¬ 
fore  seen.  An  elderly  gentleman  in  the  full  uniform  of  an 
English  general  was  seated  upon  the  sofa  and  the  lady,  whom 
I  immediately  perceived  to  be  Madame  de  Stael,  was  com¬ 
plimenting  him  with  equal  elegance  and  fluency  upon  the 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


45i 


1813] 

glories  of  his  nation,  his  countrymen,  Lord  Wellington  and 
his  own.  The  Battle  of  Salamanca  and  the  bombardment 
of  Copenhagen  were  themes  upon  which  much  was  to  be  said 
and  upon  which  she  said  much.  When  I  went  in  she  inter¬ 
mitted  her  discourse  a  moment  to  receive  me  and  offer  me  a 
seat  which  I  immediately  took,  and  for  about  half  an  hour 
had  the  opportunity  to  admire  the  brilliancy  of  her  genius 
as  it  sparkled  incessantly  in  her  conversation. 

There  was  something  a  little  too  broad  and  direct  in  the 
substance  of  the  panegyrics  which  she  pronounced  to  allow 
them  the  claim  of  refinement.  There  was  neither  disguise 
nor  veil  to  cover  their  naked  beauties,  but  they  were  ex¬ 
pressed  with  so  much  variety  and  vivacity  that  the  hearer 
had  not  time  to  examine  the  thread  of  their  texture.  Lord 
Cathcart  received  the  compliments  pointed  at  himself  with 
becoming  modesty,  those  to  his  nation  with  apparent  satis¬ 
faction,  and  those  to  the  conqueror  of  Salamanca  with  silent 
acquiescence.  The  lady  insisted  that  the  British  nation  was 
the  most  astonishing  nation  of  ancient  or  modern  times,  the 
only  preserver  of  social  order,  the  exclusive  defenders  of  the 
liberties  of  mankind;  to  which  his  Lordship  added  that  their 
glory  was  in  being  a  Moral  Nation ,  a  character  which  he  was 
sure  they  would  always  preserve.  The  glittering  sprightli¬ 
ness  of  the  lady  and  the  stately  gravity  of  the  ambassador 
were  as  well  contrasted  as  their  respective  topics  of  praise, 
and  if  my  mind  had  been  sufficiently  at  ease  to  relish  any¬ 
thing  in  the  nature  of  an  exhibition,  I  should  have  been  much 
amused  at  hearing  a  French  woman’s  celebration  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  for  generosity  towards  other  nations,  and  a  lecture  upon 
national  morality  from  the  commander  of  the  expedition 
to  Copenhagen. 

During  this  sentimental  duet  between  the  ambassador 
and  ambassadress  I  kept  my  seat  merely  an  auditor.  The 


452 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

rest  of  the  company  were  equally  silent.  Among  them  was 
an  English  naval  officer,  Admiral  Bentinck,  since  deceased. 
He  was  then  quite  the  chevalier  d’honneur  to  Madame  de 
Stael;  but  whether  the  scene  did  not  strike  him  precisely  as 
it  did  me,  or  whether  his  feelings  resulting  from  it  were  of  a 
more  serious  cast  than  mine,  the  moment  it  was  finished  and 
the  ambassador  had  taken  leave  he  drew  a  very  long  breath 
and  sighed  it  out,  as  if  relieved  from  an  oppressive  burden, 
saying  only,  “thank  God!  That’s  over!”  He  and  all  the  rest 
of  the  company  immediately  afterwards  retired  and  left  me 
tete  a  tete  with  Madame  de  Stael.  Her  subject  respecting 
America  was  to  tell  me  that  she  had  a  large  sum  in  American 
funds,  and  to  inquire  whether  I  knew  how  she  could  contrive 
to  receive  the  interest  which  she  had  hitherto  received  from 
England.  I  gave  her  such  information  as  I  possessed.  She 
had  also  some  lands  in  the  state  of  New  York  of  which  she 
wished  to  know  the  value.  I  answered  her  as  well  as  I  could, 
but  her  lands  and  her  funds  did  not  appear  to  occupy  much 
of  her  thoughts.  She  soon  asked  me  if  I  was  related  to  the 
celebrated  Mr.  A.  the  author  of  the  book  upon  government. 
I  said  I  had  the  happiness  of  being  his  son.  She  replied  that 
she  had  read  it  and  admired  it  very  much.  That  her  father, 
Mr.  Necker,  had  also  always  expressed  a  very  high  opinion 
of  it.  She  next  commenced  upon  politics  and  asked  how  it 
was  possible  that  America  should  have  declared  war  against 
England?  In  accounting  for  this  phenomenon  I  was  obliged 
to  recur  to  a  multitude  of  facts,  not  so  strongly  stamped 
with  British  generosity  or  British  morality  as  might  be  ex¬ 
pected  from  such  a  character  as  she  and  the  ambassador  had 
been  assigning  to  that  nation.  The  Orders  in  Council  and 
the  press-gang  afforded  a  sorry  commentary  upon  the  chival- 
resque  defence  of  the  liberties  of  mankind  and  no  very  in¬ 
structive  lessons  of  morality.  She  had  nothing  to  say  in  their 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


453 


justification,  but  she  thought  the  knights-errant  of  the  hu¬ 
man  race  were  to  be  allowed  special  indulgence,  and  in  con¬ 
sideration  of  their  cause  were  not  to  be  held  to  the  ordinary 
obligations  of  war  and  peace.  There  was  no  probability  that 
any  argument  of  mine  could  make  impression  upon  opinions 
thus  toned.  She  listened  however  with  as  much  complacency 
as  could  be  expected  to  what  I  said,  and  finally  asked  me 
why  I  had  not  been  to  see  her  before?  I  answered  that  her 
high  reputation  was  calculated  to  inspire  respect  no  less  than 
curiosity,  and  that  however  desirous  I  had  been  of  becoming 
personally  acquainted  with  her,  I  had  thought  I  could  not 
without  indiscretion  intrude  myself  upon  her  society.  The 
reason  appeared  to  please  her;  she  said  she  was  to  leave  the 
city  the  next  day  at  noon,  she  was  going  to  Stockholm  to 
pass  the  winter,  and  afterwards  to  England.  She  wished  to 
have  another  conversation  with  me  before  she  went  and 
asked  me  to  call  and  see  her  the  next  morning.  I  readily 
accepted  the  invitation  and  we  discussed  politics  again  two 
or  three  hours.  I  found  her  better  conversant  with  rhetoric 
than  with  logic.  She  had  much  to  say  about  social  order, 
much  about  universal  morality,  much  about  the  preservation 
of  religion ,  in  which  she  gave  me  to  understand  she  did  not 
herself  believe,  and  much  about  the  ambition  and  tyranny 
of  Bonaparte,  upon  which  she  soon  discovered  there  were  no 
difference  of  sentiment  between  us.  But  why  did  not  Amer¬ 
ica  join  in  the  holy  cause  against  this  tyrant?  First,  because 
America  had  no  means  of  making  war  against  him.  She 
could  neither  attack  him  by  sea  nor  by  land.  Secondly, 
because  it  was  a  fundamental  maxim  of  American  policy  not 
to  intermeddle  with  the  political  affairs  of  Europe.  Thirdly, 
because  it  was  altogether  unnecessary.  He  had  enemies 
enough  upon  his  hands  already.  What!  did  I  not  dread  his 
universal  monarchy?  Not  in  the  least.  I  saw  indeed  a  very 


454 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

formidable  mass  of  force  arrayed  under  him,  but  I  saw  a 
mass  of  force  at  least  as  formidable  arrayed  against  him. 
Europe  contained  about  160  millions  of  human  beings.  He 
was  wielding  the  means  of  75  millions,  and  the  means  of  85 
millions  were  wielding  against  him.  It  was  an  awful  spec¬ 
tacle  to  behold  the  shock  and  I  did  not  believe  and  never 
had  believed  that  he  would  subjugate  even  the  continent  of 
Europe.  Had  there  ever  been  any  real  danger  of  such  an 
event  it  was  past.  She  herself  saw  that  there  was  every  pros¬ 
pect  of  his  being  driven  very  shortly  out  of  Spain,  and  I  was 
equally  convinced  he  would  be  driven  out  of  Russia.  It  was 
the  very  day  of  the  battle  of  Borodino.  /Vn  accepte  V augur e , 
said  she.  Everything  that  you  say  of  him  is  very  just,  but 
I  have  particular  reasons  for  resentment  against  him.  I 
have  been  persecuted  by  him  in  the  most  shameful  manner. 
I  was  neither  suffered  to  live  any  where,  nor  to  go  where  I 
would  have  gone;  and  all  for  no  other  reason  but  because  I 
would  not  eulogize  him  in  my  writings. 

As  to  our  war  with  England  I  told  her  that  I  deeply  la¬ 
mented  it,  and  yet  cherished  the  hope  that  it  would  not  last 
long.  That  England  had  forced  it  upon  us  by  measures  as 
outrageous  upon  the  rights  of  an  independent  nation  as  tyr¬ 
annical,  as  oppressive,  as  any  that  could  be  charged  upon 
Bonaparte.  Her  pretences  were  retaliation  and  necessity. 
Retaliation  upon  America  for  the  wrongs  of  France!  and 
necessity  for  man  stealing!  We  asked  of  England  nothing 
but  our  indisputable  rights.  But  we  allowed  no  special  pre¬ 
rogatives  to  political  Quixotism.  We  did  not  consider 
Britain  at  all  as  the  champion  for  the  liberties  of  mankind, 
but  as  another  tyrant  pretending  to  exclusive  dominion  upon 
the  ocean — a  pretension  full  as  detestable,  and  I  trusted  in 
God  full  as  chimerical,  as  the  pretension  of  universal  mon¬ 
archy  upon  the  land.  Madame  de  Stael  “was  of  her  opinion 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1813] 


455 


still.”  But  on  the  point  of  impressment  she  admitted  that 
my  observations  were  reasonable.  I  have  never  yet  found 
an  European  of  any  nation  but  the  British  who  on  having 
this  question  in  its  true  statement  brought  to  a  precise  point 
had  a  syllable  to  say  for  the  English  side.  In  conclusion  I 
told  her  that  the  pretended  retaliation  of  England  had  com¬ 
pelled  her  to  resort  to  real  retaliation  upon  them,  and  that 
as  long  as  they  felt  a  necessity  to  fight  for  the  practice  of 
stealing  men  from  American  merchant  vessels  on  the  high 
seas  we  should  feel  the  necessity  of  fighting  against  it.  I 
could  only  hope  that  God  would  prosper  the  righteous 
cause. 

Madame  de  Stael  on  my  taking  leave  of  her  charged  me  if 
ever  I  should  be  again  in  any  place  where  she  should  be  at  the 
same  time  not  to  neglect  paying  her  a  visit,  which  I  very 
willingly  promised.  She  left  St.  Petersburg  the  same  day.  I 
should  ask  Sir  Francis  d’lvernois’  pardon.  I  began  this 
letter  with  him,  but  whom  can  one  help  deserting  for  Madame 
de  Stael?  I  will  return  to  Sir  Francis  by  the  next  oppor¬ 
tunity,  having  now  only  room  to  say  that  I  am,  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  25  March,  1813. 

My  last  letter  to  you,  dated  27  February,  acknowledged 
the  receipt  of  your  favor  of  29  July,  the  latest  letter  I  have 
from  America,  and  which  you  mention  in  it  was  to  be  for¬ 
warded  by  Mr.  B.  Beale,  junior. 

I  have  now  an  opportunity  to  write  by  Mr.  Plummer,1  a 
young  man  who  had  been  here  several  years  as  an  agent  of 
Col.  Thorndike.  He  himself  belongs  to  Salem,  and  as  he 


1  Ernestus  Plummer. 


4J6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

intends  returning  as  directly  as  he  can  to  Boston  he  has 
offered  personally  to  deliver  any  letters  which  I  may  wish 
to  send  to  you.  I  therefore  charge  him  with  this  and  with 
one  for  my  father,  which  I  hope  will  safely  reach  him. 

We  have  learnt  through  the  only  channel  now  open  for 
news  to  reach  us  from  America,  that  is,  the  English  news¬ 
papers,  that  Mr.  Madison  has  been  re-elected  and  that  Mr. 
Gerry  is  chosen  Vice  President.  It  may  give  you  a  sample 
of  the  degree  of  ignorance  in  which  we  live  of  American  af¬ 
fairs  to  be  informed  that  we  did  not  know  until  this  account 
of  the  votes  came  who  was  the  candidate  for  the  Vice  Presi¬ 
dent  to  be  run  with  Mr.  Madison.  We  had  heard  mention 
of  Mr.  Langdon  and  Mr.  Gerry,  and  in  the  first  instance  had 
been  told  that  Mr.  Langdon  was  the  person  fixed  upon. 
We  had  been  assured  that  the  federalists  were  to  vote  for 
Mr.  De  Witt  Clinton  as  President,  and  Mr.  Jared  Ingersoll  as 
Vice  President,  candidates  so  singularly  coupled  together,  and 
the  first  of  them  so  strange  a  name  for  a  federal  candidate, 
that  I  assure  you  it  was  long  before  I  believed  it  possible 
that  it  should  be  so,  and  for  which  even  now  I  can  account 
only  upon  the  principle  of  Shakespeare’s  Trinculo  that, 
“Misery  acquaints  a  man  with  strange  bed  fellows.”  We 
have  heard  no  reason  whatever  assigned  why  General  C. 
C.  Pinckney  and  Mr.  King,  federal  men,  and  the  federal 
candidates  at  the  two  preceding  elections,  men  so  respect¬ 
able  by  their  personal  characters,  by  their  talents,  by  their 
public  services,  have  on  this  occasion  been  totally  aban¬ 
doned  by  their  party  for  two  candidates,  entirely  new,  cer¬ 
tainly  very  respectable,  and  I  doubt  not  very  able  men,  but 
one  of  whom  has  for  five  and  twenty  years  employed  him¬ 
self  with  something  more  profitable  than  politics,  and  whose 
federalism  has  always  been  questionable,  while  the  other 
has  risen  to  power  and  importance  by  the  very  ardor  and 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


457 


1813] 

vehemence  of  his  opposition  to  federalism.  It  is  said  that 
opposition  to  the  war  with  England  is  the  connecting  prin¬ 
ciple  which  has  brought  together  parties  hitherto  hetero¬ 
geneous.  But  were  General  Pinckney  and  Mr.  King  less 
averse  to  the  British  war  than  Mr.  Clinton  and  Mr.  Ingersoll? 
Or  have  the  federalists  voted  for  those  gentlemen  upon  the 
same  basis  as  their  representatives,  and  voted  for  Mr.  Burr 
not  for  the  sake  of  choosing  him  but  for  that  of  excluding  Mr. 
Jefferson? 

We  have  indeed  had  it  repeated  over  to  satiety  here  for  the 
last  twelve  months,  both  from  the  English  periodical  journals 
and  from  private  advices  through  federal  sources,  that  the 
war  was  so  extremely  unpopular  in  the  United  States  that  it 
would  occasion  the  loss  of  Mr.  Madison’s  re-election.  But 
now  the  tables  are  so  completely  turned  that  we  hear  it  said 
Mr.  Madison  made  the  war  for  the  sole  purpose  of  securing 
his  election.  Who  shall  decide  when  doctors  disagree  with 
themselves?  The  English  journals  tell  us  that  in  the  debates 
of  Congress  Mr.  Randolph  and  Mr.  Quincy  both  charge  this 
intention  directly  upon  Mr.  Madison.  These  are  reproaches 
which  for  aught  I  know  may  gratify  party  feelings,  but 
which  appear  neither  very  politic  nor  very  liberal.  Mr.  Ran¬ 
dolph  is  represented  to  have  pleaded  very  pathetically  against 
the  war  between  the  only  two  nations  upon  earth  who  wor¬ 
shipped  the  one  only  and  true  God,  and  who  were  jointly 
engaged  in  the  endeavor  to  communicate  their  religion  to 
the  heathen  of  the  East.  Though  I  by  no  means  think  with 
Mr.  Randolph  that  Britain  and  America  are  the  only  wor¬ 
shippers  of  the  true  God,  and  perceive  nothing  like  the 
Christian  spirit  of  charity  in  the  assertion,  I  was  very  much 
gratified  to  find  him  using  this  principle  of  religion  as  a  topic 
of  argument.  For  in  the  first  place,  I  considered  it  as  evi¬ 
dence  that  Mr.  Randolph  himself  is  a  believer  in  Christianity, 


45§ 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

penetrated  with  its  truths,  and  accessible  to  its  principles. 
Secondly,  I  was  glad  to  see  religious  motives  urged  as  topics 
of  persuasion  in  that  house  by  one  of  its  most  eloquent 
speakers.  It  indicated  a  temper  in  the  hearers  as  well  as  in 
the  orator  which  ought  to  be  cherished  by  them  all,  and  which 
I  would  fondly  hope  may  eventually  contribute  to  shorten 
the  war.  And  thirdly,  it  led  to  the  hope  that  this  motive 
would  have  its  influence  upon  the  enemy  as  well  as  upon  our¬ 
selves.  If  those  upon  whom  peace  and  war  in  the  two  nations 
depend  would  on  both  sides  seriously  consider  their  duties 
as  fellow  Christians,  there  would  be  nothing  more  necessary 
to  produce  conciliation  and  peace.  But  manstealing  is  not 
a  Christian  practice,  and  when  a  government  has  brought 
itself  to  the  condition  of  waging  war  expressly  and  avowedly 
for  it,  they  may  be  very  willing  to  preach  the  Gospel  to  the 
East,  but  there  is  very  little  prospect  of  their  laying  it  to 
their  own  hearts. 

The  people  among  whom  I  reside  are  religious  to  a  very 
high  degree  and  would  be  strangely  shocked  to  hear  them¬ 
selves  excluded  from  the  class  of  worshippers  of  the  true 
God.  Their  religion  is,  indeed,  encumbered  with  innumer¬ 
able  superstitions  and  armies  of  saints  and  miraculous  relics, 
and  images,  and  trivial  formalities.  It  is  but  four  days  since 
I  saw  the  two  Empresses  and  all  the  members  of  the  Imperial 
family  now  in  the  city  prostrate  themselves  before  an  old 
picture  called  a  miraculous  image  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  by 
way  of  gratitude  for  the  taking  of  Berlin  by  the  Russian 
troops.  I  have  seen  them  seven  or  eight  times  go  through 
the  same  ceremony  within  as  many  months.  The  occurren¬ 
ces  of  the  last  year  in  the  history  of  this  country  have  been 
full  of  real  prodigies  and  they  have  been  attributed  by 
many  of  the  people  here  to  quite  as  many  prodigies  of  the 
spurious  kind.  Notwithstanding  which  there  are  no  more 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


459 


1S13] 

fervent  worshippers  of  the  true  God  than  the  Russians. 
They  are  now  in  the  midst  of  their  spring  Lent,  the  longest 
and  most  rigorous  of  the  four.  At  this  season  all  the  theatres 
are  shut.  Neither  balls  nor  assemblies  are  allowed.  In  the 
highest  ranks  of  society  those  who  keep  open  house  all  the 
rest  of  the  year  will  scarcely  receive  a  single  visitor.  Con¬ 
certs  arc  the  only  amusements  which  are  indulged  to  the 
public.  The  rule  of  fasting  in  the  first  and  last  weeks  of  this 
Lent  is  so  rigid  that  they  are  allowed  scarcely  anything  but 
bread  and  oil  and  dried  mushrooms  to  subsist  upon;  and  I 
was  told  a  few  days  since  by  a  Russian  that  the  common 
people  here  believed  murder  to  be  a  crime  for  which  atone¬ 
ment  might  be  possible,  but  that  there  would  be  none  for 
dining  upon  animal  food  in  Lent. 

The  season  is  becoming  mild  and  the  ice  of  the  River  Neva 
is  not  more  than  three  feet  thick.  On  one  month  from  this 
time  the  River  itself  will  be  open.  Oh !  that  I  could  take,  not 
the  wings  of  the  morning  and  fly  to  the  uttermost  parts  of 
the  East,  but  the  wings  of  a  fast  sailing  ship  and  swim  to  the 
nearest  parts  of  the  West.  I  foster  the  hope  of  yet  seeing  you 
and  my  father,  and  my  brother,  and  my  boys  before  the 
close  of  this  present  year.  I  have  not  yet  received  my  recall 
and  know  not  how  I  shall  get  home  if  it  comes.  But  all 
things  are  possible,  and  for  what  we  so  ardently  desire  bare 
possibility  is  a  foundation  for  hope.  Of  my  family  I  have 
nothing  now  to  say.  I  cannot  even  say  that  my  wife  or 
Charles  is  well.  They  never  I  fear  will  be  well  during  the 
winter  in  this  climate.  May  the  approach  of  summer  en¬ 
tirely  restore  them  both!  I  am,  etc. 


460 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


TO  THOMAS  BOYLSTON  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  3  April,  1813. 

•  •••••• 

I  cheerfully  acquiesced  in  the  arrangement  by  which  my 
two  sons  were  placed  at  Atkinson,  where  I  knew  they  would 
receive  every  kind  attention  that  our  excellent  Aunt  could 
show  them;  but  I  am  more  gratified  to  know  them  so  much 
nearer  to  my  father  and  mother  and  you  as  they  are  at 
Hingham.  It  is  more  than  a  year  since  the  date  of  the  last 
letter  received  from  them.  They  have  now  reached  an 
age,  George  particularly,  when  he  ought  to  write  me  by 
every  opportunity  and  I  beg  you  to  remind  him  of  this  duty. 
I  trust  he  will  be  seriously  preparing  himself  for  College, 
and  I  hope  he  will  devote  his  most  strenuous  application 
to  the  Latin  and  Greek  languages.  I  wish  he  may  have  no 
occasion  to  change  his  school  again,  unless  it  be  for  tuition 
from  myself,  until  he  enters  College.  For  a  frequent  change 
of  schools  very  much  abstracts  and  delays  the  progress  of  a 
boy  in  the  acquisition  of  classical  learning.  It  was  one  of  the 
inconveniences  in  my  own  education,  that  from  the  com¬ 
mencement  until  the  close  of  my  classical  studies  I  was  con¬ 
tinually  changing  schools  and  teachers.  In  my  case  it  was 
unavoidable  and  the  injury  resulting  from  it  on  one  side 
was  compensated  by  advantages  which  it  afforded  on  the 
other.  But  the  consequence  has  been  that  I  have  always  had 
“  small  Latin  and  less  Greek.”  And  the  little  I  have  has 
contributed  so  much  to  the  uses,  the  comforts  and  the  pleas¬ 
ures  of  my  life  that  I  have  always  lamented  the  shallowness 
of  the  streams  with  which  I  have  been  indulged  from  those 
inexhaustible  fountains  of  virtue,  elegance,  and  taste.  I 
hope  my  sons  will  be  much  more  accomplished  scholars  than 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1813] 


their  father  is  or  can  ever  be,  but  if  they  often  change  their 
schools  I  shall  not  expect  it. 

As  the  walk  from  Hingham  to  Quincy  is  now  only  five 
miles,  they  will  I  doubt  not  traverse  it  as  often  as  the  usual 
relaxations  from  their  attendance  at  the  Academy  will  admit. 
When  I  was  of  their  age  I  remember  with  what  delight  I  used 
to  walk  over  to  Grandfather’s  at  Weymouth,  which  was  then 
about  at  the  same  distance.  It  is  as  you  remark  about 
the  old  walnut  desk  and  the  spot  where  we  were  born.  There 
is  a  charm  in  the  remembrance  of  our  infancy  which  to  my 
feelings  becomes  more  vivid  the  farther  I  advance  in  years. 
Those  were  times  of  public  distress,  and  terrors,  and  suffer¬ 
ings,  still  more  than  the  present.  I  remember  the  melting 
of  the  pewter  spoons  in  our  house  into  bullets  immediately 
after  the  19th  of  April,  1775.  I  remember  the  smoke  and 
the  flames  of  Charlestown  which  I  saw  from  the  orchard  on 
Penn’s  Hill.  I  remember  the  packing  up  and  sending  away 
of  the  books  and  furniture  from  the  reach  of  Gage’s  troops, 
while  we  ourselves  were  hourly  exposed  for  many  months 
to  have  been  butchered  by  them.  All  this  has  passed  away 
like  a  troublous  dream,  and  all  this  adds  pleasure  to  every 
recollection  of  that  time.  The  same  spirit  from  the  same 
nation  has  now  kindled  against  us  another  war.  I  pray  God 
that  it  may  not  expose  the  infancy  of  our  children  to  such 
perils  as  those  which  surrounded  your  childhood  and  mine. 
But  if  it  is  the  will  of  Providence  that  it  should,  my  next 
prayer  is  that  to  them,  as  to  me,  after  the  lapse  of  forty 
years,  the  alarms  and  dangers  which  befall  them  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  their  country’s  struggle  for  her  rights  may  serve 
but  to  rivet  their  affections  to  their  country  and  her  cause, 
and  to  mingle  the  remembrance  of  evils  overcome  and  of 
deliverance  from  distress  with  all  the  first  traces  of  conscious 
existence  and  of  opening  intellect.  Complete  redemption 


462 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

from  imminent  calamity  is  among  the  sweetest  enjoyments 
of  human  life.  You  and  I  sympathize  so  generally  in  our 
sentiments  upon  political  affairs  that  even  while  separated 
at  this  distance  from  each  other  I  seldom  have  occasion  to 
ask  what  you  think  upon  any  public  concern  in  any  other 
manner  than  by  consulting  my  own  heart.  Your  remarks 
upon  the  issue  of  the  presidential  election  have  given  me  a 
fresh  example  of  the  identity  in  the  process  of  our  thoughts 
concerning  the  same  event.  I  rejoice  at  Mr.  Madison’s 
reelection  and  at  Mr.  Gerry’s  election,  because  it  has  proved 
the  spirit  of  the  nation  to  be  still  determined  in  support 
of  their  rights.  They  have  trials  to  go  through  in  its  progress 
which  give  me  already  many  a  bitter  pang  of  anticipation, 
and  among  the  keenest  of  them  is  that  of  witnessing  our  own 
section  of  the  Union  at  heart  in  the  enemy’s  quarters.  If 
our  people  were  united,  I  should  neither  have  a  doubt  of  our 
ultimate  success  nor  consider  the  war  itself  as  seriously  for¬ 
midable.  On  the  question  of  impressment,  the  only  hinge 
upon  which  the  war  now  turns,  all  the  parties  in  England 
have  combined  against  us.  They  have,  therefore,  besides 
all  their  other  advantages  that  of  united  counsels  against  us, 
while  ours  are  fearfully  divided  in  opposing  them.  They 
have  in  short  everything  against  us  but  a  righteous  cause. 
It  is  for  the  practice  of  manstealing  from  our  ships  upon  the 
ocean  that  the  nations  are  to  be  drenched  in  blood.  Is  it 
possible  that  a  righteous  providence  should  smile  upon  such  a 
cause?  Is  it  possible  that  our  country  should  submit  to  a 
peace  stipulating  formally  or  tacitly  to  endure  the  contin¬ 
uance  of  such  an  indignity?  It  is  now  for  the  God  of  Battles 
to  decide  and  to  him  only  must  it  be  left. 

The  continent  of  Europe  is  just  commencing  the  progress 
of  a  counter  revolution,  the  end  of  which  it  is  yet  impossible 
to  foresee.  The  frosts  of  Russia  and  Poland  have  struck  at 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ..DAMS 


463 


the  roofs  of  Napoleon’s  laurels  and  of  his  power.  In  Sep¬ 
tember  he  entered  Moscow  as  a  conqueror,  and  in  March  his 
enemy  took  possession  of  his  “good  city”  of  Hamburg. 
All  Germany  is  in  combustion.  Prussia  has  deserted  her 
banners,  and  rallies  all  the  remnants  of  her  force  under  the 
standard  of  Alexander.  Denmark  has  implored  peace  of 
England,  her  despoiler,  and  has  been  rejected.  Austria 
negotiates  and  dissembles,  and  aims  probably  to  join  at 
last  the  new  coalition  against  her  ancient  foe;  and  France  has 
the  most  imminent  prospect  of  being  reduced  at  least  to  her 
ante-revolutionary  dimensions,  and  perhaps  to  the  restora¬ 
tion  of  the  Bourbons.  Nothing  less  than  this  is  now  intended, 
and  between  this  design  and  its  accomplishment  there  is  now 
nothing  but  the  life  and  the  genius  of  Napoleon  to  inter¬ 
pose.  For  his  fortune  has  deserted  him,  and  of  his  genius 
independent  of  his  fortune  I  have  never  entertained  a  very 
exalted  opinion.  Caesar  was  once  in  perhaps  as  great  a 
strait  as  he  now  is  and  extricated  himself  from  it.  But  to 
extricate  himself  he  must  possess  greater  resources  of  genius 
than  were  ever  employed  by  Caesar,  and  I  do  not  yet  believe 
that  he  has  them  to  display.  Yours  affectionately 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  7  April,  1813. 

I  know  not  whether  it  was  generosity,  or  any  other  virtue, 
or  merely  a  disposition  to  receive  the  postage,  that  induced 
the  transmission  of  your  favor  of  30  December  to  Mr.  Wil¬ 
liams,  at  London;  for  by  him  it  was  kindly  forwarded  to  me, 
and  on  the  first  day  of  this  month  to  my  inexpressible  joy 
came  to  hand.  It  was  but  so  short  a  time  before  that  I  had 
received  your  letter  of  29  July,  and  excepting  that,  not  a  line 


464 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

from  Quincy  later  than  April  of  the  last  year.  This  last 
letter  had  apparently  been  opened,  although  the  impression 
of  your  seal  upon  the  wax  was  restored  —  a  circumstance 
which  indicates  that  it  was  done  in  England,  where  they  still 
affect  the  appearance  of  not  breaking  seals  at  the  Post  Office. 
On  this  continent  they  are  less  scrupulous  about  forms. 
When  they  open  letters  they  break  the  seals,  and  do  not  take 
the  trouble  of  restoring  them.  They  send  them  open  to  their 
address.  It  reminds  me  of  an  anecdote  I  have  lately  met 
with  of  Prince  Kaunitz  when  he  was  Prime  Minister  of  the 
Empress  Maria  Theresa.  One  of  his  clerks  whose  business 
it  was  to  copy  the  opened  letters  coming  to  foreign  ministers 
at  Vienna,  in  the  hurry  of  reclosing  a  dispatch  to  one  of  the 
envoys,  sent  him  his  copy  instead  of  the  original.  The  en¬ 
voy  went  to  Prince  Kaunitz,  showed  him  the  copy  that  he 
had  received,  and  complained  that  the  original  was  withheld 
from  him.  The  Prince  immediately  sent  for  the  clerk,  se¬ 
verely  reprimanded  him  in  the  envoy’s  presence  for  his 
blunders,  and  directed  him  to  bring  instantaneously  the 
original  dispatch.  The  clerk  brought  it  accordingly,  and  the 
Prince  gave  it  to  the  envoy  with  many  apologies  for  the 
trouble  occasioned  him  by  the  clerk’s  mistake,  and  assur¬ 
ances  of  his  hope  that  it  would  never  occur  again. 

In  the  present  state  of  the  relations  between  us  and  Britain 
I  have  nothing  to  say,  if  they  open  letters  to  me  or  from  me 
which  they  get  fairly  into  their  hands.  But  I  should  think 
it  more  creditable  to  them  if  they  did  not  attempt  the  im¬ 
position  of  restoring  the  inscription  of  the  seals. 

Next  to  the  delight  which  it  gave  me,  to  know  that  my 
father  and  you  and  my  boys  were  all  in  good  health  (which 
may  God  Almighty  preserve),  was  that  of  being  informed 
that  my  children  were  so  much  nearer  to  you  than  at  Atkin¬ 
son.  I  know  how  kindly  my  dear  Aunt  would  attend  to 


i8i3] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


465 


them,  but  my  father,  and  you,  and  my  brother,  nobody  could 
supply  your  places  for  the  progress  of  their  education,  and 
the  thought  that  they  could  have  the  opportunity  of  seeing 
you  at  most  only  two  or  three  times  in  a  year  was  an  afflic¬ 
tion  to  me  which  their  residence  at  Hingham  will  relieve. 
Should  it  be  my  destiny  to  stay  much  longer  in  Europe  I 
wish  them  to  be  sent  to  me.  I  hope  in  a  few  months  to  know 
upon  what  I  am  to  depend.  My  constant  wish  has  been  to 
return  to  the  United  States  the  present  year,  and  I  have 
long  since  written  both  to  the  President  and  the  Secretary 
of  State.  There  are  however  circumstances,  known  I  trust 
to  them  ere  this,  and  probably  to  you,  which  place  it  alto¬ 
gether  at  the  President’s  determination  whether  I  shall  have 
either  occupation  or  motive  for  remaining  here  some  time 
longer.  The  communications  transmitted  to  our  govern¬ 
ment  from  hence  last  October,  I  presume  will  be  no  secret 
in  America,  whatever  the  result  of  them  may  be.  If  they 
are  received,  as  it  is  my  wish  they  may  be,  the  measures 
adopted  in  consequence  of  them  may  make  it  my  duty,  as  it 
will  be  my  inclination,  to  postpone  my  return  home  for  a 
season.  If  they  are  viewed  in  a  different  light,  I  shall  have 
stronger  reasons  than  ever  for  wishing  myself  as  speedily  as 
possible  in  my  native  country,  in  the  bosom  of  my  family, 
and  devoted  entirely  and  exclusively  to  the  support  of  my 
family  and  the  education  of  my  children.  Should  I  receive 
the  President’s  permission  to  return  this  year,  I  suppose  it 
will  be  possible  for  me  to  return  by  the  way  of  England.  I 
should  indeed  be  obliged  to  ask  it  as  a  favor  of  the  British 
government,  which  would  not  be  very  pleasant  to  my  feel¬ 
ings.  There  has  been  one  instance  of  the  same  kind  since 
our  residence  here.  Count  Stedingk  who  had  been  the  Swed¬ 
ish  ambassador  here  returned  home  by  water  in  July,  1811, 
while  Sweden  and  England  were  at  war.  The  British  ad- 


466 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

miral  in  the  Baltic  gave  without  hesitation  a  special  permis¬ 
sion  to  pass  without  annoyance  to  the  vessel  which  came  for 
him,  and  in  which  he  returned.  There  is  more  bitterness  and 
inveteracy  in  their  war  with  America  than  in  that  against 
Sweden,  for  they  have  wronged  America  too  much  to  for¬ 
give  her,  and  Sweden  had  declared  war  against  them  without 
provocation.  Yet  I  do  not  expect  they  would  deny  me  what 
they  so  readily  granted  to  Count  Stedingk. 

Of  peace,  unless  eventually  produced  by  a  course  and 
through  a  channel  at  which  I  have  already  hinted,  I  now 
utterly  despair.  Our  new  74^  and  frigates  will  only  protract 
and  obstruct  every  prospect  of  peace.  The  prodigies  per¬ 
formed  by  our  apology  for  a  navy  (to  call  it  a  navy  is  ridicu¬ 
lous)  have  had  the  same  effect,  and  so  have  our  disgraces 
in  Canada.  There  is  a  national  spirit  among  the  British 
which  such  successes  and  such  defeats  grasp  at  with  equal 
eagerness  to  unite  all  parties  against  us.  We  are  a  more  vir¬ 
tuous  and  less  vicious  people  than  the  British;  but  of  that 
national  spirit  which  is  a  political  virtue  of  the  highest  order, 
we  have  much  less  than  they.  Under  our  present  adminis¬ 
tration  I  have  no  fear  that  we  shall  subscribe  to  a  disgrace¬ 
ful  and  degrading  peace,  and  from  the  temper  of  the  British 
government  at  this  time  there  is  little  expectation  of  any 
disposition  in  them  for  any  other. 

The  conflagration  of  Moscow,  and  the  sufferings  of  the 
Ru  ssian  Empire  under  the  formidable  invasion  of  the  last 
summer,  were  awful  visitations  of  Heaven,  but  they  have 
been  succeeded  by  prosperity  and  successes  without  ex¬ 
ample  in  modern  history.  The  iron  crown  of  Napoleon,  and 
his  Imperial  Crown  too,  will  henceforth  be  but  crowns  of 
thorns  to  him.  His  violence  and  injustice  are  recoiling  upon 
his  own  head.  Russia,  Poland,  Prussia,  all  the  north  of 
Germany  are  delivered  from  his  power,  and  the  cities  of 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


467 


1813] 

Lubeck  and  Hamburg  which  have  been  formally  annexed 
to  the  French  Empire  are  already  in  possession  of  the  Rus¬ 
sians.  His  internal  government  is  convulsed  even  at  Paris, 
and  the  pretensions  of  the  House  of  Bourbon  are  again  ad¬ 
vanced,  under  the  patronage  of  the  British  government,  and 
perhaps  of  Russia.  The  situation  of  France  has  never  been 
so  precarious  and  in  such  imminent  danger  since  the  Duke  of 
Brunswick’s  invasion  of  Champagne  in  1792;  and  instead  of 
universal  monarchy,  or  even  the  preponderancy  of  power  in 
Europe,  she  has  now  the  prospect  before  her  of  being  called 
again  to  contend  for  her  ancient  boundaries.  Whether  the 
happiness  of  mankind  or  the  peace  of  the  world  will  gain 
anything  by  this  new  revolution  in  the  affairs  of  Europe  is 
yet  among  the  secrets  of  Providence.  That  Russia  should 
maintain,  and  that  Germany  should  recover  their  independ¬ 
ence,  and  that  Spain,  Portugal,  and  Italy  should  have  the 
same  good  fortune  in  the  south  is  undeniably  desirable;  but 
when  ambition  is  controlled  only  by  ambition,  and  one 
boundless  lust  of  domination  is  only  exchanged  for  another, 
humanity  gains  very  little  by  the  substitution.  At  present 
Russia  is  the  arbitress  of  Europe.  Of  her  wisdom  and  moder¬ 
ation  I  am  not  inclined  to  doubt.  She  has  gloriously  stood 
the  trial  of  adversity,  which  was  severe  but  short.  She  has 
now  the  stronger  test  of  prosperity  to  endure.  The  character 
of  her  sovereign  promises  much  for  the  relief  of  our  species. 
I  trust  he  will  not  catch  the  infection  of  passions  which  would 
only  prolong  the  scenes  of  horror  and  devastation  that  have 
so  long  been  desolating  Europe. 

I  learn  with  much  pleasure  that  Colonel  Smith  is  to  be  a 
member  of  the  present  Congress,  though  I  should  prefer  see¬ 
ing  him  in  the  field.  I  sicken  at  the  name  of  Canada.  Will 
bitter  experience  teach  us  wisdom?  God  grant  that  it  may! 
and  bless  the  country  and  the  parents  of  your  affectionate  son. 


468 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


JAMES  MONROE  TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

Washington,  April  10,  1813. 

Dear  Sir: 

Since  writing  the  letter  enclosed  to  Mrs.  Adams,  I  have  con¬ 
ferred  with  the  President  on  the  subject  of  your  son’s  return,  and 
am  authorized  to  state  to  you  that  in  case  of  peace  with  Great 
Britain,  the  mission  to  London  will  be  offered  to  him.  The  conduct 
of  your  son,  it  gives  me  pleasure  to  state,  has  obtained  the  entire 
approbation  of  the  President.  It  is  hoped  that  it  will  suit  his 
convenience  to  take  part  in  the  negotiation  for  peace  should  Great 
Britain  accept  the  mediation  of  Russia,  as  is  presumed,  and  in 
forming  a  commercial  treaty  with  both  those  powers,  as  is  contem¬ 
plated.  His  knowledge  of  the  subject  in  relation  to  both,  makes 
it  of  great  importance  that  his  country  should  have  the  advantage 
of  his  services  in  those  important  transactions.  In  regard  to  his 
personal  views,  and  to  those  of  Mrs.  Adams  and  yourself,  respect¬ 
ing  his  making  a  visit  home,  whenever  desired,  the  utmost  facility 
will  be  given  in  the  power  of  the  government.  .  .  . 

James  Monroe. 


JAMES  MONROE  TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

Washington,  April  19,  1813. 

Dear  Sir: 

The  arrangement  for  the  negotiations  at  St.  Petersburg  being 
completed,  I  have  the  pleasure  to  apprize  you  of  it,  as  there 
will  still  be  time  to  enable  you  to  write  to  your  son  by  the  vessel 
which  takes  his  colleagues  there.  The  occasion  was  thought  to 
be  of  that  high  importance  to  require  according  to  the  usage  of 
our  government  a  special  mission  of  three.  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr. 
Bayard  are  the  other  two.  Two  commissions  are  prepared  for 
treating  with  Great  Britain,  one  for  peace,  under  the  mediation 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


469 


1813] 

of  Russia;  the  other  for  commerce.  In  these  the  order  is  Mr.  Gal¬ 
latin,  your  son  and  Mr.  Bayard.  Another  commission  is  given 
them  to  form  a  treaty  of  commerce  with  Russia,  at  the  head  of 
which  your  son  is  placed.  The  commissioners  to  treat  with  Eng¬ 
land,  contemplating  negotiations  which  might  be  carried  on  at 
Stockholm  or  elsewhere,  as  well  as  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  Mr.  Gal¬ 
latin  being  a  member  of  the  administration,  it  was  thought  cor¬ 
rect  to  give  him  the  priority.  The  same  reason  did  not  apply  to 
a  negotiation  with  Russia,  where  your  son  was  already  accredited. 
They  are  all  envoys  extraordinary  and  plenipotentiary.  They 
are  also  all  allowed  an  outfit,  upon  the  principle,  that  they  must  be 
presented  in  a  distinguished  manner  to  the  court,  and  be  drawn 
much  into  society  of  the  first  rank  and  greatest  expense.  In  truth 
my  own  sad  experience  has  proved,  that  if  we  allow  our  ministers 
abroad  all  that  the  law  permits  in  every  case,  we  shall  not  put 
them  at  their  ease  there,  and  certainly  not  recompense  them  for 
their  services  and  suffering.  .  .  .  James  Monroe. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  19  April,  1813. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  intended  in  my  last  letter  to  have  mentioned  to  you  the 
circumstances  which  procured  me  somewhat  unexpectedly 
the  pleasure  of  an  acquaintance  with  Sir  Francis  dTvernois, 
when  the  more  singular  incident  which  introduced  me  to 
that  of  Madame  de  Stael  crossed  my  purpose  and  engrossed 
the  letter  to  itself.  I  now  return  to  Sir  Francis. 

Lord  Cathcart  on  his  arrival  here  sent  me  the  usual  card 
of  notice  from  ambassador  to  ministers  of  the  second  order, 
informing  me  that  he  had  presented  to  the  Emperor  his 
credentials  as  Ambassador  Extraordinary  from  his  Britannic 
Majesty.  This  was  a  politeness  which  I  had  not  expected, 


470 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

and  which  I  made  no  hesitation  to  return  by  paying  him  a 
formal  visit  of  etiquette  in  person.  I  had  already  met  him, 
as  I  told  you,  before  at  Madame  de  StaePs.  He  received  me 
with  all  proper  courtesy  and  expressed  his  hopes  that  our 
war  would  be  stopped  at  the  threshold — hopes  in  which  I 
warmly  and  sincerely  concurred,  but  which  by  the  will  of 
Heaven  have  been  disappointed.  He  professed  a  great  re¬ 
gard  for  America,  and  alluded  to  his  particular  and  personal 
motives  for  attachment  to  that  country  of  which  I  under¬ 
stood  his  lady  is  a  native.  He  returned  my  visit,  but  it  hap¬ 
pened  to  be  at  a  moment  when  my  child  was  at  the  last  ex¬ 
tremity,  and  I  could  not  receive  him.  Since  then,  and  until 
he  left  the  city  to  join  the  Emperor  Alexander  at  his  head¬ 
quarters,  I  did  not  repeat  my  visit,  and  only  occasionally 
saw  him  in  the  other  places,  when  we  talked  on  such  topics  as 
Swift  says  he  and  Harley  were  used  to  discuss  on  the  road 
to  Windsor. 

Sir  Francis  d’lvernois  was  not  formally  connected  with 
the  embassy.  He  was  engaged  upon  a  mission  of  his  own, 
and  I  presume  was  collecting  materials  for  a  new  pamphlet 
against  Napoleon.  On  his  first  arrival  he  sent  me  his  card 
and  I  sent  him  mine.  Some  time  afterwards  I  heard  he  had 
expressed  a  desire  to  make  my  acquaintance  having,  as  he 
said,  had  the  pleasure  of  yours  when  you  were  in  England. 
A  common  friend  invited  me  to  dine  with  him  for  the  particu¬ 
lar  purpose  of  bringing  us  to  meet,  but  Sir  Francis  was  seized 
with  a  fever,  which  confined  him  to  his  apartments  on  the 
day  of  the  dinner,  and  I  thus  missed  the  opportunity. 

Some  months  afterwards,  on  occasion  of  a  Te  Deum  at 
Court,  I  met  him  there  and  he  was  introduced  to  me.  He 
immediately  mentioned  to  me  his  ancient  acquaintance  with 
you,  and  added  that  he  had  at  a  later  period  been  in  corre¬ 
spondence  with  you.  One  thing  which  appeared  to  have 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


47i 


left  an  impression  upon  his  mind,  more  lasting  than  from 
so  slight  an  incident  might  have  been  expected,  was  that  in 
your  defence  of  the  American  Constitutions  you  had  styled 
him  Doctor  d’lvernois.  He  told  me  that  he  believed  Doctor 
Price  had  been  the  occasion  of  the  mistake.  That  he  re¬ 
membered  having  once  dined  with  you  at  his  house,  and 
that  Doctor  Price  had  several  times  at  table  spoken  to  him 
as  Doctor  d’lvernois,  a  title  to  which  he  had  no  pretension. 
Sir  Francis,  having  since  that  time  received  the  honor  of 
knighthood  from  his  Britannic  Majesty,  appears  not  to  con¬ 
sider  the  Doctorate  as  a  title  of  honor.  Shenstone’s  school¬ 
mistress  challenged  and  held  right  dear  the  additions  of 
“Goody,  good  woman,  gossip  ne  Aunt  and  Dame”.  But 
that  was  because 

No  flattery  did  corrupt  her  truth 
No  pompous  title  did  debauch  her  ear. 

Sir  Francis  told  me  that  he  was  on  the  point  of  departure; 
that  he  was  going  to  make  a  tour  through  Silesia,  and  if  the 
Russian  armies  should  open  the  passage  for  him,  into  Switzer¬ 
land.  He  said  he  had  heard  of  some  letters  of  mine  con¬ 
cerning  Silesia,  and  asked  me  if  I  knew  where  he  could  pro¬ 
cure  them.  I  had  picked  up  here  one  copy  of  the  French 
translation  of  them  which  I  sent  Sir  Francis  requesting  his 
acceptance  of  it,  observing  in  the  note  that,  though  a  Repub¬ 
lican ,  I  was  happy  to  have  a  sort  of  hereditary  title  to  his 
friendship.  He  paid  me  a  visit  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  and 
in  return  for  my  present  gave  me  two  publications  of  his 
own — one  called  Les  trois  offrandes  a  Bonaparte,  and  the 
other  Napoleon  Administrateur  et  Financier — but  he  seemed 
to  have  taken  my  calling  myself  a  Republican  something 
as  he  had  felt  your  styling  him  a  doctor.  He  said  with  a 
good  natured  smile  that  by  the  expression  though  a  Republi - 


472 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

can  as  applied  to  myself  there  was  a  lurking  epigram  upon 
him  as  being  no  longer  a  Republican.  I  assured  him  that 
there  was  nothing  epigrammatic  at  all  in  my  intention, 
nothing  but  an  antithesis  between  my  own  Republicanism 
and  my  hereditary  claim  to  his  good  graces.  He  replied  that 
as  a  Genevan  he  had  been  a  Republican  also,  and  if  Geneva 
still  existed  as  a  Republic,  he  should  be  so  still.  But  as  an 
Englishman,  which  he  must  now  consider  himself,  he  was 
not  a  Republican,  nor  could  with  propriety  be  so,  to  which 
I  very  readily  assented.  We  had  then  a  long  and  not  un¬ 
animated  conversation  upon  politics,  upon  the  state  of  af¬ 
fairs  between  United  States  and  Great  Britain,  in  which  I 
immediately  perceived,  what  I  had  no  reason  to  doubt  of 
before,  that  we  agreed  only  in  one  point,  in  most  profoundly 
lamenting  the  war.  With  regard  to  its  causes  we  totally 
differed  upon  the  facts,  and  with  regard  to  its  consequences 
upon  the  speculations.  He  thought  the  war  would  be  short, 
and  that  we  should  come  to  the  British  terms.  He  thought 
we  should  have  done  more  wisely  to  join  in  the  war  against 
France  and  taken  care  to  be  in  at  the  death  of  Napoleon. 
Longe  alia  mihi  est  mens.  I  had  no  passion  for  Napoleon 
hunting  and  told  him,  as  I  had  told  Madame  de  Stael,  that 
I  thought  he  had  hunters  enough  at  his  heels  already.  I 
had  no  ambition  to  see  him  receive  the  coup  de  pied  de  Vane 
from  America. 

Sir  Francis  was  very  strenuous  in  the  persuasion  that  the 
present  ministry  were  reluctant  at  this  war  with  America. 
He  had  heard  of  the  assertion  made  by  Sir  Robert  Wilson  at 
a  gentleman’s  table  in  this  city,  which  I  have  mentioned  to 
you  in  a  former  letter.  Sir  Francis  told  me  that  he  did  not 
believe  that  Mr.  Perceval  had  ever  said  anything  like  it  to 
Sir  Robert  Wilson;  that  Sir  Robert  was  by  no  means  one  of 
Mr.  Perceval’s  intimate  friends  as  he  himself  had  been. 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


473 


That  he  knew  Mr.  Perceval’s  sentiments  as  he  knew  his  own. 
That  Mr.  Perceval  had  not  been  three  minutes  from  him 
when  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  Bellingham.  That  Mr.  Perce¬ 
val  would  have  adhered  to  the  Orders  in  Council,  though  at 
the  cost  of  a  war  with  America.  But  he  neither  desired,  in¬ 
tended,  nor  expected  that  war,  and  would  very  sincerely 
have  lamented  it.  I  mention  this  circumstance  in  candor, 
because  it  goes  at  least  some  way  to  invalidate  the  testimony 
of  Sir  R.  Wilson  which  was,  as  reported  to  me,  expressed  in 
very  strong  terms.  Mr.  Whitbread  however  very  directly 
charged  Mr.  Perceval  in  open  Parliament  with  the  intention 
of  going  to  war  with  America,  and  there  Mr.  Perceval  did 
not  disclaim  it.  I  mentioned  this  to  Sir  Francis,  but  he 
thought  an  imputation  from  the  opposition  was  no  proof  of 
a  minister’s  intention,  though  he  might  see  fit  to  leave  it 
uncontradicted. 

Sir  Francis  left  the  city  before  I  had  an  opportunity  of 
returning  his  visit.  There  is  every  prospect  that  he  will 
have  the  means  of  pursuing  his  journey  into  Switzerland 
without  molestation. 

Madame  de  Stael  is  at  Stockholm  and  has  become  an  im¬ 
portant  political  personage  there,  in  high  favor  with  the 
Crown  Prince,  whose  chivalresque  virtues  she  has  been 
celebrating  in  a  pamphlet  against  the  continental  system 
and  the  doctrine  that  free  ships  make  free  goods.  She  ex¬ 
patiates  on  the  advantage  which  the  acquisition  of  Norway 
would  be  to  Sweden,  because  she  says  “ce  n’est  le  tout  de 
s’aggrandir,  il  vaut  mieux  savoir  s’arrondir.  ”  An  axiom  well 
suited  to  the  conception  of  a  lady-politician.  I  am,  etc. 


474 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


TO  JOHN  SPEYER 

St.  Petersburg,  20  April,  1813. 

Sir: 

I  have  received  your  favor  of  30th  March,  and  the  slips 
from  the  Times  inclosed  in  it  containing  the  news  from  Amer¬ 
ica.  I  lament  sincerely  the  differences  which  you  mention 
to  have  arisen  between  Mr.  T.  Barlow  and  Mr.  Warden,1  nor 
can  I  easily  imagine  what  occasion  there  could  be  for  them. 
Still  less  am  I  qualified,  without  more  information  of  the 
facts  to  express,  or  even  to  form,  a  decisive  opinion  upon 
the  merits  of  the  respective  claims  and  allegations  of  the 
two  gentlemen.  I  suppose  the  seal,  cypher,  and  archives 
of  the  legation  properly  to  remain  in  the  custody  of  Mr. 
Barlow;  but  as  he  has  no  authority  even  from  his  uncle  to 
act  as  charge  d’affaires,  I  do  not  see  that  the  French  govern¬ 
ment  could  recognize  him  in  that  capacity.  It  appears 
equally  clear  that  Mr.  Warden  can  have  no  authority  to 
exercise  any  other  functions  than  those  of  the  consular 
office.  The  acknowledgment  of  the  French  government  can 
only  be  coextensive  with  the  powers  given  him  by  his  own. 
It  can  confer  no  new  authority  upon  him.  It  can  neither 
make  him  a  minister  nor  a  charge  d’affaires.  I  believe  Mr. 
Forbes  to  be  right  in  sending  to  Mr.  Barlow  the  letters  that 
he  may  receive  for  the  legation.  Whether  Mr.  Barlow  will 
be  authorized  to  open  them  I  know  not,  and  it  must  be 
for  his  own  consideration.  Mr.  Warden  without  some  fur¬ 
ther  authority  I  presume  would  not.  My  own  impression 
is  that  neither  of  them  has  any  regular  power  to  transact 
any  business  properly  belonging  to  the  legation.  Either  of 

1  David  Bailie  Warden  (1778-1845),  appointed  United  States  consul  at  Paris 
March  3,  1811,  a  position  he  held  for  many  years. 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


475 


them  will  be  justified  in  taking  such  measures  concerning 
the  public  interests  as  necessity  may  impose  and  as  their 
particular  situations  will  admit.  For  this  purpose  the  only 
essential  point  between  them  was  harmony,  and  I  grieve 
to  learn  that  this  is  precisely  the  point  that  has  failed. 

I  suppose  the  important  events  occurring  in  Germany 
will  be  known  at  Stockholm  sooner  than  here.  On  the  other 
hand  it  is  probable  that  the  intercourse  between  this  country 
and  England  by  the  mails  will  henceforth  no  longer  be 
through  Sweden.  The  regular  posts  between  this  city  and 
Hamburg  are  already  restored.  I  am,  etc. 

COMMISSION  FOR  TREATY  OF  COMMERCE 

By  JAMES  MADISON, — President  of  the  United  States  of 

America, 

To  all  whom  these  presents  shall  concern:  Greeting. 

Know  Ye,  That  for  the  purpose  of  confirming  and  improving 
the  amicable  and  beneficial  relations  between  the  United  States 
and  His  Imperial  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  all  the  Russias,  and  re¬ 
posing  special  Trust  and  confidence  in  the  Integrity,  Prudence 
and  Ability  of  John  Q.  Adams,  Minister  Plenipotentiary  of  the 
United  States  at  the  Court  of  His  said  Imperial  Majesty,  of  Al¬ 
bert  Gallatin,  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  of  the  United  States, 
and  of  James  A.  Bayard,  a  Senator  of  the  United  States,  I  have 
appointed  them  jointly  and  severally  Envoys  Extraordinary 
and  Ministers  Plenipotentiary  of  the  United  States  of  America 
to  the  Court  of  His  said  Imperial  Majesty;  with  full  and  all  manner 
of  power  and  authority,  for  and  in  the  name  of  the  United  States 
to  meet  and  confer  with  a  Minister  or  Ministers  of  His  said  Im¬ 
perial  Majesty,  being  furnished  with  the  like  power  and  authority, 
and  with  him  or  them  to  agree,  treat,  consult  and  negotiate  of 
and  concerning  the  general  commerce  between  the  United  States 
and  Russia,  and  of  all  matters  and  subjects  connected  therewith, 
which  may  be  interesting  to  the  two  nations;  and  to  conclude  and 


476 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

sign  a  Treaty  or  Treaties,  Convention  or  Conventions,  touching 
the  premises;  transmitting  the  same  to  the  President  of  the  United 
States  for  his  ratification,  by  and  with  the  advice  and  consent  of 
the  Senate  of  the  United  States. 

In  Testimony  Whereof,  I  have  caused  the  seal  of  the  United 
States  to  be  hereunto  affixed. 

Given  under  my  hand  at  the  City  of  Washington  the  Twenty 
Second  day  of  April  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  one  thousand  Eight 
hundred  and  Thirteen,  and  of  the  Independence  of  the  United 
States  the  Thirty  Seventh. 

James  Madison. 

By  the  President, 

Jas.  Monroe,  Secretary  of  State . 


JAMES  MONROE  TO  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 

Department  of  State,  April  26th,  1813. 

Sir: 

I  have  had  the  honor  to  receive  your  letter  of  the  17th  October 
last,  with  the  regular  series  which  preceded. 

The  offer  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia  of  his  mediation  with  Eng¬ 
land,  communicated  in  your  last  letters,  received  at  the  close  of 
the  session  of  Congress,  and  confirmed  by  Mr.  Daschkoff  at  the 
same  time,  was  immediately  accepted  by  the  President,  and  the 
measures  necessary  to  give  it  effect  adopted  without  delay.1 
Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  have  been  associated  with  you,  in 
a  joint  commission,  to  negotiate  and  conclude  a  treaty  of  peace 
with  Great  Britain;  and  in  two  other  Commissions  to  accomplish 
objects  for  which  the  occasion  was  deemed  favorable,  that  of  one 
being  to  form  a  treaty  of  commerce  with  Great  Britain,  and  of 
the  other,  a  treaty  of  commerce  with  Russia.  Instructions  for 
these  several  objects  are  prepared,  and  it  is  expected  that  these 
gentlemen  will  sail  in  less  than  a  week  from  this  date  from  Phila- 
1  See  Life  and  Correspondence  of  Rufus  King ,  V.  318,  338. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


477 


1813] 

delphia  in  a  vessel  which  will  be  protected  by  passports  from  Mr. 
Daschkoff,  and  the  British  admiral  in  the  Chesapeake.  Mr.  Harris 
is  appointed  secretary  of  the  mission. 

The  President  has  been  induced  thus  to  give  effect  to  the  media¬ 
tion  of  Russia,  so  far  as  depended  on  him,  without  waiting  for  the 
decision  of  the  British  government,  from  a  sincere  desire  to  avail 
himself  of  every  fair  opportunity  to  conclude  peace  on  just  and  rea¬ 
sonable  conditions;  to  manifest  his  respect  for  the  Emperor  per¬ 
sonally,  and  to  avoid  any  delay  which  might  otherwise  result 
from  our  distance  from  the  theatre  of  the  proposed  negotiations. 
You  will  be  able  to  do  justice  to  the  motives  of  the  President  in 
this  transaction,  by  giving  the  proper  explanations  where  they 
may  be  requisite.  He  is  sensible  that  this  proceeding  may  not  be 
strictly  regular,  and  in  case  Great  Britain  should  decline  the  media¬ 
tion,  that  it  may  be  exposed  to  the  appearance  of  having  been 
premature;  but  he  has  thought  it  better  to  waive  every  punctilious 
consideration  rather  than  be  accessory  to  a  delay,  which,  if  the 
result  of  the  mediation  should  correspond  with  the  friendly  views 
of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  would  be  a  subject  of  regret  to  all 
parties. 

I  am  instructed  by  the  President  to  communicate  to  you  his 
approbation  of  your  conduct  in  the  mission  to  Russia,  and  to  state 
particularly,  that  he  has  derived  much  useful  information  from 
your  correspondence,  and  seen  with  great  interest  the  good  effect 
of  the  judgment,  with  which  you  managed  our  concerns,  and  con¬ 
ciliated  the  favorable  disposition  of  that  power  towards  the 
United  States.  He  is  very  desirous  that  you  should  act  in  the 
negotiations  in  which  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  are  associated 
with  you;  having  full  confidence,  from  your  experience  and  knowl¬ 
edge  of  the  subjects  on  which  you  will  have  to  treat,  that  the 
public  would  derive  material  advantage  from  your  services.  .  .  . 

The  President  having  it  in  contemplation  to  avail  the  public 
of  your  services  in  England,  should  peace  take  place,  and  you  be 
disposed  to  accept  the  mission,  has  instructed  me  to  apprize  you 
of  it,  that  you  may  take  the  same  into  consideration,  and  make 


478 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

such  arrangements  as  may  be  best  adapted  to  such  an  event. 
Should  a  treaty  be  formed,  it  must  be  ratified  by  both  governments 
before  they  could  interchange  ministers.  You  can  yourself  suffi¬ 
ciently  calculate  the  extent  of  this  period.  At  whatever  time  you 
may  leave  Russia  Mr.  Harris  may  be  charged  with  the  affairs  of 
the  United  States  until  further  provision  is  made.  I  have  the 
honor  to  be,  etc.  Jas.  Monroe. 


TO  R.  G.  BEASLEY 

St.  Petersburg,  29  April,  1813. 

Sir: 

Since  I  had  the  pleasure  of  last  writing  you,  which  was  on 
the  28th  of  February,  I  have  received  your  favor  of  23  March. 
As  the  intercourse  with  England  will  henceforth  be  open  by 
the  way  of  Hamburg  I  shall  perhaps  often  avail  myself  of 
your  obliging  permission  to  enclose  letters  to  you  to  be  for¬ 
warded  to  the  United  States,  oflfering  you  my  thanks  for 
your  attention  to  those  sent  by  Mr.  Lawler  and  for  your 
very  kind  offers  of  service. 

I  took  the  liberty  in  my  last  letter  to  give  you  freely  my 
own  individual  opinion  upon  the  subject  of  impressment. 
You  observe  that  you  think  the  law  professed  in  America 
for  the  exclusion  of  foreign  seamen  goes  too  far.1  If  all  our 
countrymen  thought  and  felt  as  I  do  on  the  question,  I  should 
not  only  say  that  this  law  goes  too  far,  but  that  any  com¬ 
pliance  whatever  on  our  part  would  do  the  same.  Setting 
aside  the  physical  force  which  the  British  so  loudly  and  un¬ 
fortunately  so  truly  boast  of  having  to  maintain  their  in¬ 
justice,  and  I  doubt  whether  the  annals  of  mankind  can  ex¬ 
hibit  an  instance  of  a  practice  in  its  own  nature  so  outrageous 

1  Act  of  March  3,  1813. 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


479 


advanced  by  a  nation  as  a  claim  of  right.  Impressment, 
wherever  practised,  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  crime 
of  manstealing.  By  the  universal  law  of  Europe  if  the 
officers  of  one  sovereign  are  caught  levying  men  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  another,  he  is  hung  like  a  common  highway 
robber.  If  the  same  rule  has  not  been  long  settled  for  the 
same  act  done  at  sea,  it  is  because  until  this  practice  was 
commenced  against  us  and  against  us  alone  by  the  British, 
the  thing  was  unexampled  among  civilized  nations.  The 
fault  of  the  American  government,  a  fault  which  nothing  but 
the  excessive  disproportion  of  naval  force  between  us  and 
our  adversary  can  excuse  to  the  American  nation,  has  all 
along  been  of  complying  too  much  with  the  absurd  and 
iniquitous  pretensions  of  the  British  on  this  point. 

This  is  the  opinion  with  which  I  shall  live  and  die.  If 
all  the  people  of  America,  therefore,  were  of  my  sentiment, 
the  last  drop  of  American  blood  and  the  last  dollar  of  Ameri¬ 
can  property  should  be  staked,  rather  than  flinch  an  hair’s 
breadth  from  our  whole  ground  in  this  quarrel.  It  is  pure 
unmingled  tyranny  that  constitutes  the  whole  British  claim, 
and  we  cannot  allow  the  minutest  particle  of  it  without 
becoming  accessary  to  it.  A  law  to  exclude  British  mariners 
from  our  naval  service,  public  or  private,  must  carry  marks 
of  injustice  and  illiberality;  viewed  in  reference  to  the  persons 
who  would  be  thus  excluded,  it  is  a  species  of  interdict  neither 
generous,  humane  nor  just.  I  am  sure  if  our  posterity  shall 
possess  any  sense  of  national  self  respect,  they  will  ask  why 
their  fathers  sullied  their  statute  book  with  such  a  sort  of 
outlawry  against  a  class  of  useful  and  meritorious  foreigners, 
whose  only  offence  from  the  nature  of  the  thing  must  con¬ 
sist  in  their  partiality  for  our  service?  The  only  apology 
that  can  be  made  for  us  in  answer  to  this  question  will  be, 
that  it  was  a  sacrifice  to  Moloch — that  the  British  nation, 


480 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

with  at  least  a  force  one  hundred  times  greater  than  ours 
on  the  ocean,  was  waging  a  bloody  and  merciless  war  against 
us,  for  the  pretended  right  of  stealing  their  subjects  from  our 
ships  on  the  high  seas.  That  in  order  to  prevail  upon  them 
merely  to  forbear  stealing  our  own  native  citizens  under  the 
pretense  of  taking  theirs,  we  submitted  to  the  degradation 
of  refusing  to  all  foreign  mariners  the  common  rights  of 
national  hospitality;  that  like  hunted  civet  cats  we  tore  off 
with  our  own  teeth  the  parts  for  which  we  were  hunted,  and 
flung  them  from  us  to  satiate  the  fury  or  to  slacken  the  pur¬ 
suit  of  our  hunters.  How  far  this  plan  will  serve  for  our  jus¬ 
tification  I  shall  not  undertake  to  say.1  Bitterly  do  I  be- 

1  Monroe  on  the  subject  of  impressment  in  the  negotiations  under  the  Emperor’s 
mediation,  gave  it  as  his  candid  opinion  that  “if  we  do  not  secure, in  a  clear  and  dis¬ 
tinct  manner,  the  forbearance  of  the  British  practice,  in  consideration  of  the  ex¬ 
clusion  of  British  seamen  from  our  service,  that  it  were  infinitely  better  that  nothing 
should  be  done.”  No  arrangement  by  understanding  would  suffice.  “It  would  be 
deplorable  indeed  if  we  did  all  we  could  and  received  in  return  nothing  but  the  in¬ 
formal  promise  of  the  British  commissioners  or  government  to  do  what  it  is  other¬ 
wise  their  duty  to  do.  I  believe  such  an  arrangement  would  not  only  ruin  the  pres¬ 
ent  Administration,  but  the  Republican  party,  and  even  the  cause.”  Monroe  to 
Gallatin,  May  6,  1813.  Writings  of  James  Monroe ,  V.  256. 

“  I  have  conversed  with  Mr.  Bayard  on  the  subject  of  the  instructions,  which 
he  had  not  received  till  yesterday.  He  expressed  his  apprehensions  that  we  would 
fail,  and  his  regret  that  we  had  not  more  discretion  on  the  subject  of  impressments. 
He  appeared  desirous  that  we  had  been  permitted  to  have  on  that  subject  an  in¬ 
formal  understanding  with  Great  Britain,  which  he  thought  would  have  been  as 
efficient  in  practice  as  a  solemn  article,  and  by  saving  the  pride  of  Great  Britain 
could  not  have  failed  to  insure  success.”  Gallatin  to  Monroe,  May  2,  1813,  in  Writ¬ 
ings  of  Gallatin,  I.  540.  “As  the  contemplated  arrangements  on  the  subject  of 
impressment  will  be  reciprocal  in  form;  as  what  Great  Britain  may  deem  a  con¬ 
cession  will  be  balanced  by  a  concession  on  the  part  of  the  United  States;  as  the 
question  of  right  can  be  put  out  of  view  in  stipulating  a  course  of  practice;  and  as 
the  stipulation  will  be  in  a  treaty  limited  for  a  fixed  term  of  years,  it  is  not  presum¬ 
able  that  any  motive  or  scruple,  much  less  any  serious  difficulty,  will  be  opposed 
to  an  article  in  the  usual  form  providing  for  the  subject.  The  President,  being 
desirous  that  no  unessential  consideration  should  embarrass  your  negotiation  or 
endanger  its  result,  intends  that  in  providing  against  the  practice  of  impressment 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


481 


1813] 

wail  that  while  the  whole  ruling  part  of  the  British  nation  is 
united  against  us  in  as  iniquitous  a  cause  as  ever  stained  the 
infamous  record  of  human  wars,  we  are  divided  and  dis¬ 
tracted  in  a  cause  as  righteous  as  ever  was  sealed  wdth  the 
blood  of  martyrdom.  Our  weakness  and  our  divisions  may 
excuse  compliances  objectionable  in  themselves,  but  indis¬ 
pensable  to  obtain  the  blessing  of  peace. 

From  the  disposition  which  you  say  prevails  at  present 
among  the  English  to  chastise  our  temerity  it  is  not  prob¬ 
able  that  even  our  compliances  will  attain  their  object.  The 
disposition  to  chastise  us  has  been  the  constant  spirit  of 
English  power  from  the  time  that  James  the  first  chastised 
the  founder  of  Virginia,  Sir  Walter  Ralegh,  and  the  puritan 
founders  of  New  England  down  to  this  hour.  Charles  the 
first  chastised  Pym,  Hampden,  and  Oliver  Cromwell,  by  an 
Order  in  Council  when  they  were  embarked  to  go  to  America, 
prohibiting  their  departure  and  forcing  them  to  remain  in 
England.  The  Rump  Parliament,  St.  John,  and  Cromwell 
chastised  the  American  colonies  by  the  invention  of  the 
Navigation  Act.  And  so  delightsome  was  this  mode  of  chas¬ 
tisement  to  the  English  spirit  that  Charles  the  Second  after 
the  Restoration  adopted  the  witty  device  of  the  Rump, 
which  laid  the  just  foundation  of  American  Independence, 
and  which  has  been  ever  since  one  of  the  darlings  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  nation.  George  Grenville,  “the  stupendous  calculator,” 
chastised  us  with  the  stamp  act,  and  how  we  were  chastised 

from  American  vessels  you  should  exercise  an  entire  discretion  as  to  the  mode  and 
shape  of  the  provision,  taking  care  only  that  it  be  such  as  by  fair  construction  will 
bind  the  faith  of  the  British  government  to  an  effective  discontinuance  of  the  prac¬ 
tice  in  question.  This  practice  being  essentially  a  cause  of  war,  and  the  primary 
object  of  your  negotiation,  a  treaty  of  peace,  leaving  it  in  silence  and  trusting  to 
a  mere  understanding  liable  to  doubts  and  different  explanations,  would  not  be 
that  security  which  the  United  States  have  a  right  to  expect.”  Monroe  to  Gallatin , 
May  5,  1813.  Ib.,  540. 


482 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

by  the  Lords  North,  and  Sandwich,  and  Stormont,  and  the 
Generals  Burgoyne,  Clinton,  and  Cornwallis,  is  known  to  all 
mankind.  If  Lord  Castlereagh  goes  out  and  Mr.  Canning 
comes  in,  as  you  anticipate,  we  shall  have  the  chastising 
spirit  in  all  its  vigor .  Mr.  Canning  wishes  to  chastise  us 
out  of  mere  humanity,  precisely  as  Catherine  of  Medicis 
chastised  the  Protestants  at  the  St.  Bartholomew.  It  is 
strange  to  observe,  as  the  proverb  says,  how  “  great  wits 
jump  together,”  and  how  exactly  similar  the  humanity  of 
Mr.  Canning  is  to  the  humanity  of  that  famous  Princess. 
In  the  recurrence  of  memory  to  times  past  I  have  the  con¬ 
solation  to  remark  that  in  spite  of  all  these  chastisements  we 
have  lived,  and  thrived,  and  prospered,  until  we  get  beyond 
the  reach  of  chastisers  and  disarmed  their  humanity .  I  trust 
in  God  we  shall  do  so  again. 

The  family  quarrel  and  the  Catholic  question  may  serve 
to  amuse  the  leisure  moments  of  the  public.  With  regard 
to  the  first  the  parties  have  made  an  appeal  to  the  public 
and  therefore  the  public  are  authorized  to  form  and  express 
an  opinion  in  the  case.  The  question  is  between  high  treason 
and  subornation  of  perjury — peccadillos  which  are  apt  to 
catch  small  offenders  in  the  cobweb  of  the  law  but  which  in 
this  instance  will  not  even  forfeit  character.  The  Catholics 
will  undoubtedly  gain  their  cause.  The  existence  of  the  na¬ 
tion,  or  of  the  constitution,  or  of  the  church  indeed,  depends 
upon  the  perpetuation  of  their  disabilities,  just  as  it  did  upon 
the  Orders  in  Council,  just  as  it  does  upon  impressment. 
Nevertheless  the  disabilities  will  be  removed  and  who  would 
have  thought  it?  the  nation  and  the  constitution  and  the 
church  will  go  on  as  before. 

You  have  now  the  news  from  Germany  sooner  than  we 
have  it  here.  How  formidable  the  French  army  in  the  north 
will  be  next  summer  I  hardly  know,  but  I  believe  more 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


483 


formidable  armies  will  be  brought  against  them.  France 
will  not  be  suffered  to  rise  from  the  blow  which  has  thrown 
her  prostrate;  the  second  stroke  is  ready  to  receive  her 
as  she  makes  the  attempt,  and  it  will  probably  prepare  her 
to  receive  the  law  and  the  lawgiver  from  the  hands  of  her 
enemies.  Such  at  least  is  the  undoubting  opinion  here  and 
the  symptoms  of  the  times  give  it  much  countenance. 

I  am  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  i  May,  1813. 

Every  day  that  passes  gives  me  occasion  more  and  more  to 
lament  this  unfortunate  war  with  which  it  has  pleased  heaven 
to  visit  us.  If  it  could  have  been  avoided,  we  should  now 
have  had  a  free  commercial  intercourse  with  all  the  north  of 
Europe,  at  least  to  Bremen  inclusively,  and  in  a  few  months 
more  with  Holland.  Besides  the  advantages  which  our 
country  would  have  derived  from  this  I  should  have  had  con¬ 
tinual  opportunities  of  hearing  from  my  dear  friends  in 
America,  and  of  writing  to  them;  and  what  would  have  been 
yet  more  agreeable  to  me  had  our  peace  been  preserved, 
there  would  have  been  no  other  than  the  natural  obstacles 
to  prevent  my  return  to  them  and  to  my  country.  As  it 
is,  the  only  means  I  have  of  communicating  with  America 
is  by  the  way  of  England.  How  precarious  that  is  you  can 
easily  judge,  for  it  depends  upon  the  forbearance  of  the 
British  government  to  stop  individual  travellers  who  go  to 
England,  there  to  embark  for  America  in  cartels.  Of  these 
there  has  been  a  succession  at  short  intervals  through  the 
winter,  by  everyone  of  whom  I  have  written,  to  you.  I  now 
write  by  an  American  who  is  going  to  Hamburg  and  thence 


4§4 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[i8n 

to  England.  I  inclose  the  letter  as  I  have  done  once  or  twice 
before  to  R.  G .  Beasley ,  Esqr.,  agent  for  American  prisoners 
of  war ,  London.  If  it  should  be  our  destiny  to  remain  here 
another  winter  I  would  recommend  it  to  you  to  inclose 
letters  for  us  under  cover  to  him,  and  to  send  them  by  the 
cartels.  He  informs  me  that  by  the  regulations  all  the  letters 
sent  by  the  cartels  must  be  open,  except  his.  So  that  by 
transmitting  them  under  cover  to  him  they  will  be  less  ex¬ 
posed  to  perusal  on  their  way. 

I  say  if  it  should  be  my  destiny  to  remain  here  another 
winter,  because  I  have  got  no  orders  from  our  government 
that  indicate  what  we  are  to  expect.  This  uncertainty  can¬ 
not  however  much  longer  continue.  I  have  already  learnt 
from  English  newspapers  the  arrival  at  New  York  of  the 
Freeling  cartel  in  which  Mr.  Harris  was  a  passenger.  What¬ 
ever  the  President  may  determine  concerning  the  dispatches 
of  which  he  was  the  bearer,  it  will  at  least  be  decisive  with 
regard  to  our  prospects  for  the  present  year.  That  we  should 
stay  here  is  the  least  probable  as  well  as  the  least  desirable 
of  the  alternatives  that  I  can  anticipate.  After  an  expe¬ 
rience  of  four  successive  Russian  winters,  I  believe  there  is 
no  person  accustomed  to  milder  climates  who  would  not  be 
desirous  of  an  opportunity  to  assure  himself  once  more  that 
in  the  changes  of  the  seasons  there  is  such  a  thing  as  summer. 
We  have  formed  no  social  attachments  that  can  make  us 
much  regret  the  country,  and  I  have  no  employment  here 
which  can  even  afford  me  the  consolation  of  being  useful 
to  my  own. 

On  the  continent  of  Europe  the  year  upon  which  we  have 
entered  promises  to  be  as  eventful  and  threatens  to  be  as 
sanguinary  as  its  last  predecessor.  But  the  scene  of  action 
and  the  cause  are  totally  changed.  The  dream  of  universal 
monarchy  in  France,  which  may  have  tickled  the  imagination 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


485 


of  the  Corsican,  and  which  has  so  hideously  haunted  the 
fancies  of  his  enemies,  is  forever  past.  France  will  not  soon 
again  appear  in  the  character  of  an  invader.  She  is  herself 
invaded.  The  Hanseatic  cities  are  already  lost.  Holland 
in  a  few  months,  perhaps  in  a  few  weeks,  will  share  the  same 
fate.  Prussia  from  the  most  subservient  of  her  allies  has 
become  the  most  exasperated  of  her  enemies.  Denmark 
has  deserted  her  and  is  before  this  numbered  with  her  foes. 
Austria  will  in  all  probability  very  soon  join  the  same  side. 
A  Swedish,  Russian,  and  British  force,  commanded  by  a 
French  general,  is  destined  to  recover  Hanover  and  to  re¬ 
store  Holland  to  the  House  of  Orange;  while  at  the  same  time 
Louis  18  has  issued  a  declaration  claiming  anew  the  throne 
of  France  as  his  inheritance.  To  oppose  all  this  Napoleon 
has  little  but  the  resources  of  a  genius  great  only  by  success, 
and  the  remnants  of  a  shattered  military  reputation.  It 
is  rumored  that  he  is  collecting  a  large  army  upon  the  Rhine; 
but  his  troops  will  be  mostly  raw  and  inexperienced  and  all 
of  them  disheartened.  His  present  disasters  are  so  entirely 
imputable  to  himself  that  it  can  scarcely  be  said  fortune  has 
abandoned  him.  There  is  so  little  in  his  personal  character 
that  can  take  hold  of  the  affections  of  mankind,  that  his 
destruction,  which  is  as  certain  as  any  human  event  that  can 
be  foretold,  will  leave  no  sympathizing  feelings  behind.  But 
what  will  be  the  fortunes  of  France  it  is  not  so  easy  to  fore¬ 
see.  If  she  takes  back  the  Bourbons,  she  must  take  them 
from  the  hands  of  her  enemies;  and  with  the  Bourbons  she 
must  take  conditions  the  most  humiliating  to  her  pride, 
and  at  the  price  of  sacrifices  the  most  fatal  to  her  course. 
This  is  a  point  of  view  by  no  means  grateful  to  contemplation, 
but  which  cannot  be  overlooked.  Louis  18  in  his  declaration 
has  promised  to  abolish  the  laws  of  conscription — a  promise 
certainly  well  suited  to  the  purposes  of  England,  but  which, 


486 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

if  accomplished,  will  make  the  Bourbons  themselves  when 
restored  the  mere  puppets  of  foreign  powers  and  France 
alternately  a  prey  to  all  her  neighbors. 

The  reflection  of  the  present  state  of  things  upon  our  own 
concerns  is  not  auspicious.  In  the  spring  tide  of  success  which 
has  flowed  with  such  an  impetuous  torrent  in  favor  of  the 
English  almost  from  the  moment  of  our  declaration  of  war, 
they  have  been  gathering  spirit  and  inveteracy  and  unanim¬ 
ity,  so  that  now  the  language  of  all  their  parties  is  that  we 
must  be  chastised  into  submission.  The  loss  of  three  frigates 
and  of  more  than  five  hundred  merchant  vessels  in  six  months 
has  only  stimulated  them  to  revenge,  and  our  shameful 
failures  in  Canada  have  made  them  perfectly  secure  in  the 
only  quarter  where  they  could  have  any  reason  to  fear  us. 
They  have  blockaded  all  our  ports  from  the  Mississippi  to 
New  York  inclusively,  and  the  rest  I  suppose  will  soon 
follow.  I  hope  our  country  will  prove  herself  equal  to  the 
trial  that  awaits  her.  Peace  is  not  to  be  expected. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  5  June,  1813. 


You  have  observed  in  several  of  your  letters  that  many 
things  have  been  occurring  in  our  country  which  I  ought  to 
know,  but  which  could  not  with  prudence  be  communicated 
to  me.  Of  public  affairs  I  know  scarcely  anything  but  what 
the  editors  of  the  London  newspapers  think  proper  to  ex¬ 
tract  from  those  they  receive  from  America.  The  New  Eng¬ 
land  votes  at  the  Presidential  election  (Vermont  excepted) 


i8i31 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


487 


have  given  me  a  sufficient  indication  of  the  temper  prevail¬ 
ing  in  that  part  of  the  country.  The  federalists  in  abandon¬ 
ing  the  standard  of  their  former  candidates,  Pinckney  and 
King,  and  ranging  themselves  under  the  banners  of  Mr. 
Clinton,  have  at  least  shown  that  they  are  not  chargeable 
with  undue  attachment  to  men A  Measures  and  not  men 
has  been  sometimes  a  favorite  maxim  among  Republicans. 
By  accepting  Mr.  Clinton  for  their  leader  the  federalists 
have  illustrated  their  principles  more  unequivocally  than  in 
any  of  their  earlier  proceedings.  But  the  objects  of  party 
controversy  are  so  perpetually  changing  in  America  that 
consistency  is  no  more  to  be  expected  in  adherence  to  men 
than  to  measures.  As  the  rallying  word  of  this  new  party 
is  peace ,  an  object  so  desirable  in  itself,  and  so  congenial  to 
the  spirit  of  the  people  in  America  that  have  a  fair  prospect 
of  rising  in  popularity.  Mr.  Clinton  has  very  recently  de¬ 
clared  himself  as  explicitly  and  in  as  strong  terms  as  could 
be  desired  on  the  subject  of  the  Union .  This  has  for  the 
last  nine  or  ten  years  been  the  livid  spot  of  New  England 
federalism.  I  have  not  heard  of  anything  on  his  part  that 
indicated  or  implied  any  dereliction  of  his  principles.  I 
hope  therefore  that  he  will  never  countenance  the  project  of 
separation.  We  have  nothing  else  to  dread. 

The  exploits  of  our  heroes  upon  the  ocean  have  not  only 
saved  our  national  character  from  sinking  in  the  eyes  of 
Europe,  but  have  exerted  universal  astonishment  on  this 
continent  and  a  perfect  frenzy  of  resentment  in  England. 
Our  disasters  by  land  would  have  made  us  the  scorn  and 
derision  of  mankind,  if  the  naval  victories  had  not  redeemed 
our  fame.  Hitherto  we  have  rather  gained  than  lost  in  the 
estimation  of  the  world  by  those  vicissitudes  of  war;  but 

1  De  Witt  Clinton  and  Jared  Ingersoll  were  the  Federalist  candidates  against 
James  Madison  and  Elbridge  Gerry. 


488 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

upon  the  water  the  contest  is  too  unequal.  The  day  of  mis¬ 
fortunes  must  come,  and  if  we  continue  the  burlesque  upon 
war  which  we  have  so  often  been  exhibiting  before  Canada, 
our  consideration  will  be  irretrievably  lost.  Every  allow¬ 
ance  is  made  for  our  ignorance  and  inexperience,  but  these 
excuses  cannot  always  be  admitted.  The  year  of  novitiate 
is  nearly  past,  and  if  we  are  ever  to  form  soldiers,  it  is  time 
to  show  it  by  some  other  token  than  surprises  and  surrenders. 
It  is  there  after  all  that  we  can  alone  expect  ever  to  make 
any  impression  upon  our  enemy.  Our  frigate  warfare  must 
be  nearly  if  not  quite  at  an  end.  Our  privateering  has  had 
its  harvest.  If  we  can  build  and  equip  line  of  battle  ships 
and  frigates  in  numbers  sufficient  to  form  a  squadron,  we 
may  give  our  Lady  Macbeth  mother  a  new  demonstration 
of  the  legitimacy  of  our  descent  from  herself;  but  years  must 
pass  before  this  will  be  practicable,  and  in  the  meantime  she 
will  fill  the  blank  of  our  history  with  fire  and  blood,  and, 
what  is  worse  than  both,  with  shame,  unless  we  show  her 
other  generals  and  other  warriors  than  we  have  yet  sent  to 
bluster  with  proclamations  and  capitulate  to  half  their 
numbers. 

The  events  of  the  last  year  in  the  north  of  Europe  have 
materially  changed  the  face  of  the  world,  and  have  probably 
produced  a  great  approximation  towards  a  European  peace, 
though  its  symptoms  are  yet  scarcely  perceptible.  The  last 
military  season  began  by  presenting  the  aspect  of  France 
with  all  Germany  and  Italy  invading  Russia.  The  season 
has  commenced  by  showing  Russia  with  almost  all  Germany, 
Sweden,  Denmark,  and  England,  invading  France.  France 
to  the  astonishment  of  the  world,  and  I  confess  to  mine, 
has  risen  like  Antaeus  from  her  fall.  Napoleon  instead  of 
sinking  under  his  calamities  has  already  returned  to  the 
field,  less  powerful  but  perhaps  not  less  formidable  than  be- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


489 


1813] 

fore.  The  first  effect  of  his  appearance  was  a  battle  1  which 
his  adversaries  have  determined  as  a  victory,  for  it  was  cel¬ 
ebrated  here  by  the  usual  appendage  of  triumph,  a  Te  Deum. 
But  after  this  victory  they  retreated.  The  storm  that  has 
been  haltring  over  his  head  is  at  this  moment  bursting  upon 
him  in  all  its  fury,  and  the  chances  are  of  excessive  odds  that 
he  will  perish  in  it.  The  fate  of  France  is  involved  in  that  of 
his  person.  There  appears  scarcely  a  possibility  that  he 
should  escape  the  forces  that  are  now  brought  to  bear  against 
him;  if  he  should,  he  will  be  entitled  beyond  all  controversy 
to  the  title  of  a  great  man.  He  had  never  before  stood  the 
trial  of  adversity,  but  it  has  now  come  with  a  severity  pro¬ 
portioned  to  the  greatness  of  his  fortune. 

Another  favorite  of  the  fickle  Goddess  has  been  just  called 
in  the  midst  of  a  triumphant  march  to  pay  the  debt  of  nature. 
The  commander  in  chief  of  the  Russian  armies,  Prince 
Kutuzoff  Smolensky  died  on  the  28th  of  April,  four  days 
before  the  battle  of  Liitzen.  He  was  appointed  to  the  com¬ 
mand  in  August  last,  while  Napoleon  was  in  the  midst  of 
his  victorious  march  to  Moscow.  He  did  not  succeed  in 
saving  the  metropolis;  but  as  the  misfortunes  of  the  French 
Emperor  commenced  immediately  afterwards,  the  Russian 
Field  Marshal  has  had  the  honors  of  victory  over  him,  in¬ 
debted  for  them  more  to  famine  and  frost  than  to  any  very 
signal  display  of  genius  or  of  skill.  He  died  at  Bunzlau  in 
Silesia,  and  his  remains  have  been  transmitted  to  this  place. 
While  his  body  lay  there  in  the  coffin  and  exposed  to  public 
view  a  lady  took  an  opportunity  to  slip  a  crown  of  laurel 
round  his  brow.  A  silent  tribute  to  his  fame,  but  for  delicacy 
of  sentiment  and  pathos  of  expression  worth  an  hundred  vol¬ 
umes  of  personal  eulogy.  The  Emperor  Alexander,  also,  in 

1  Of  Gross-Gorschen,  (more  usually  known  as  the  battle  of  Liitzen),  fought 
May  3. 


490 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

a  letter  to  the  Prince’s  widow,  has  done  honor  to  his  General 
and  to  himself.  I  am  etc. 


TO  JOHN  SPEYER 

St.  Petersburg,  24  June,  1813. 

Sir: 

•  •••••• 

I  expect  hourly  the  arrival  of  Messrs.  Gallatin  and  Bay¬ 
ard,  but  I  believe  the  opinion  given  by  you  Mr.  Hanztow 
will  be  verified.  The  English  ministerial  papers  show  that 
the  ministry  were  never  so  remote  from  all  ideas  of  peace  as 
at  this  time,  and  there  never  was  a  time  when  they  were  so 
little  molested  by  opposition.  The  nation  as  well  as  the 
government  are  in  a  state  of  what  Cobbett  calls  exacerbation . 
It  is  not  yet  clear  that  their  magnificent  plans  of  restorations 
and  counter-revolutions  in  Germany,  Holland,  and  France, 
will  fail.  Monsieur  and  the  Duke  d’Angouleme,  and  the 
Prince  of  Orange,  a  general  in  the  Austrian  service,  and  the 
Duke  of  Cumberland,  may  have  resources  and  expedients 
for  final  success  which  have  not  yet  been  brought  into  opera¬ 
tion.  The  system  has  not  had  time  to  unfold  itself  in  all  its 
grandeur,  still  less  can  the  partial  events  of  a  few  weeks  lead 
sanguine  tempers  to  despair  of  its  ultimate  success.  Paper 
money  and  Mr.  Pitt’s  sinking  fund  give  facilities  of  great 
liberality  from  the  public  coffers;  and  if  England  will  but 
bleed  her  purse  freely,  she  may  still  bleed  the  continent  for 
the  liberties  of  mankind  for  aught  I  know  four  or  five  years 
longer.  While  the  exacerbation  lasts  we  must  not  soothe 
ourselves  with  hopes  of  peace.  If  England  can  make  her 
own  terms  of  peace  in  Europe,  she  will  not  be  willing  to  take 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


491 


1813] 

terms  of  peace  from  America.  She  cannot  at  present  expect 
to  dictate  them  to  us. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  1 13.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  26  June,  1813. 

Sir: 

•  •••••• 

A  few  days  after  I  received  from  a  friend  the  National  In¬ 
telligencer  of  15  April,  containing  an  editorial  paragraph  con¬ 
cerning  the  appointment  of  those  gentlemen,1  which  I  com¬ 
municated  to  the  Count  on  the  22d.  I  observed  to  him  that 
however  the  British  government  might  think  proper  to  act 
on  this  occasion,  that  of  the  United  States  would  at  least 
have  manifested  in  a  signal  manner  at  once  its  earnest  and 
constant  desire  for  a  just  and  honorable  peace,  and  its  sense 
of  the  motives  which  had  induced  the  Emperor’s  offer.  That 
the  President  could  not  have  adopted  a  measure  better 
adapted  to  do  honor  to  His  Majesty’s  proposal,  than  by  the 
appointment  of  two  persons  among  the  most  distinguished 
of  our  citizens  to  cooperate  on  the  part  of  the  United  States 
in  accomplishing  the  Emperor’s  friendly  and  benevolent 
purpose,  and  that  if  it  should  eventually  fail  of  being  success¬ 
ful,  at  least  the  true  and  only  source  of  its  failure  would  be 
known.2 

The  Count  said  he  was  persuaded  the  Emperor  would  view 

1  Gallatin  and  Bayard. 

2  See  Madison’s  special  message  to  Congress,  May  25,  1813,  in  Writings  of  Madi¬ 
son  (Hunt),  VIII.  244. 


492 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

in  the  same  light  the  proceeding  of  the  American  govern¬ 
ment,  and  he  regretted  very  sincerely  that  there  appeared  a 
reluctance  in  the  British  government  to  accept  the  Emperor’s 
offer.  That  he  had  received  since  he  saw  me  last  dispatches 
from  Count  Lieven.  That  the  British  minister  in  terms  of 
much  politeness  had  intimated  to  him  that  there  was  no 
sovereign  whose  mediation  they  should  more  readily  accept 
than  that  of  the  Emperor,  but  that  their  differences  with 
the  United  States  were  of  a  nature  involving  the  principles 
of  the  internal  government  of  the  British  nation ,  and  which  it 
was  thought  were  not  susceptible  of  being  committed  to  the 
discussion  of  any  mediation.1  The  Count  added  that  it 
would  remain  to  be  considered  whether  after  this,  and  after 
the  solemn  step  taken  by  the  government  of  the  United 
States,  it  would  be  advisable  to  renew  the  offer  to  the  British 
ministry,  and  give  them  an  opportunity  for  a  reconsideration. 
It  was  possible  that  further  reflection  might  lead  to  a  differ¬ 
ent  resolution;  and  he  should  submit  the  question  to  the  Em¬ 
peror’s  determination.  Different  circumstances  furnished 
other  materials  for  deliberations,  and  we  have,  said  the 
Count,  in  our  own  affairs  an  example  of  a  sudden  and  unex¬ 
pected  turn  of  occurrences  and  prospects.  He  alluded  to  the 
armistice  concluded  between  the  Emperor  of  Russia  and 
King  of  Prussia  on  one  part,  and  the  Emperor  Napoleon  on 
the  other,  on  the  5th  of  this  month,  and  which  is  to  continue 
until  the  20th  of  July.  2 

This  event,  sudden  and  unexpected  indeed,  does  not  ap¬ 
pear  to  me  calculated  to  make  the  British  government  more 
ready  to  accept  the  Emperor’s  mediation  for  a  pacific  nego¬ 
tiation  with  the  United  States.  Its  tendency,  so  far  as  it 
leads  to  the  prospect  of  a  continental  peace,  is  rather  to  im- 

1  See  Alexander  Baring  to  Gallatin ,  July  22,  1813,  in  Writings  of  Gallatin,  I.  546. 

2  The  armistice  of  Plaswitz,  agreed  to  June  4,  after  the  battle  of  Bautzen. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


493 


1813] 

pair  the  harmony  between  Britain  and  Russia  herself.  It 
has  occasioned  here  so  much  astonishment  that  the  very  mo¬ 
tive  for  it  is  yet  problematical. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 


No.  1 14.  [James  Monore] 

St.  Petersburg,  14  July,  1813. 

Sir: 

On  the  2nd  instant  Mr.  Pflug  arrived  here  by  land  from 
Gothenburg  with  dispatches  from  Mr.  Daschkoff  to  this 
government.1  He  brought  me  a  letter  from  Messieurs  Gal¬ 
latin  and  Bayard,  dated  21  June,  Gothenburg  Roads,  in¬ 
forming  me  of  their  appointment  together  with  me  by  the 
President  as  envoys  extraordinary  and  ministers  plenipo¬ 
tentiary  to  negotiate  a  peace  with  Great  Britain  under  the 
mediation  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  of  their  progress  thus 
far,  and  of  their  intention  to  proceed  as  speedily  as  possible 
to  St.  Petersburg.  Mr.  Pflug  tells  me  that  they  were  to  sail 
from  Gothenburg  the  same  day  that  he  left  it  and  that  their 
letter  to  me  was  dated.  I  have  been  from  this  arrival  in 
hourly  expectation  of  theirs. 

I  must  solicit  the  favor  of  you,  sir,  to  make  my  warm  and 
sincere  acknowledgments  acceptable  to  the  President  for  the 
honor  done  me  by  this  new  appointment,  to  which  I  am  the 


1  “It  appeared  to  me  improper  to  give  Mr.  Pflug  any  American  character  or  ap¬ 
pearance;  concealment  of  his  being  employed  to  carry  the  Russian  despatches 
being,  as  I  thought,  forbidden  by  the  law  of  nations.”  Gallatin  to  Monrot,  May  8, 
1813.  Writings  of  Gallatin,  I.  545. 


494 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

more  sensible  from  the  highly  respectable  and  distinguished 
characters  of  the  gentlemen  with  whom  he  was  pleased  to 
connect  me  in  the  mission.  I  have  only  to  add  the  most 
ardent  wish  that  its  result  may  prove  satisfactory  to  him  and 
propitious  to  our  country.1 

Since  I  had  the  honor  of  writing  you  last  none  of  the  in¬ 
formation  from  England  has  tended  to  encourage  the  be¬ 
lief  that  on  further  consideration  they  will  ultimately  accept 
the  mediation  of  the  Emperor.  On  the  contrary,  my  own 
information  from  private  sources,  and  that  of  all  the  Amer¬ 
ican  and  English  here  from  their  correspondents,  concurs  to 
show  that  the  British  government  have  been  both  surprised 
and  mortified  by  the  Emperor’s  offer  of  mediation.  The  pre¬ 
tension  upon  which  alone  they  now  continue  the  war  is  so 
far  from  being  as  they  have  asserted,  an  ancient  right,  that 
they  never  did  dare  and  dare  not  now  advance  it  against 
any  one  European  Power.  It  has  been  so  uniformly  and 
invariably  the  policy  of  the  United  States  to  keep  themselves 
aloof  from  all  the  political  combinations  of  Europe,  that  the 
British  government  seems  to  have  taken  it  for  granted  that 
their  controversies  with  us  might  always  be  managed  upon 
principles  not  applicable  to  their  intercourse  with  other 
powers,  and  that  what  they  might  be  compelled  to  submit 
to  as  law  of  nations  with  the  rest  of  Europe,  they  might 
break  through  with  impunity  in  their  relations  with  America. 
They  do  not  appear  at  all  to  have  foreseen  that  their  most 
powerful  and  closest  European  allies  would  ever  take  any 
concern  in  a  contest  upon  the  question  of  impressment,  and 
as  a  motive  for  declining  the  Russian  mediation  they  have 
alleged  that  it  was  a  dispute  involving  principles  of  internal 

1  Five  days  after  this  letter  was  written  the  Senate  rejected  the  nomination  of 
Gallatin  by  a  vote  of  eighteen  to  seventeen,  but  confirmed  Adams  and  Bayard. 
See  Writings  of  Madison  (Hunt),  VIII.  252. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


495 


1813] 

administration,  as  if  the  United  States  were  a  mere  appen 
dage  to  the  British  dominions. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  19  July,  1813. 

Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  reached  Gothenburg  Roads 
on  the  20  June.  A  Russian  gentleman,  who  had  come  as 
passenger  in  the  same  vessel  with  them  and  then  proceeded 
by  land  to  this  place,  brought  me  a  letter  from  them  dated 
21  June,  and  arrived  here  eighteen  days  since.  They  wrote 
me  that  they  intended  to  proceed  as  speedily  as  possible 
upon  their  voyage,  that  they  had  letters  for  me  from  my 
family  as  well  as  dispatches,  which  they  kept  in  the  expecta¬ 
tion  that  they  might  arrive  here  as  soon  as  the  traveller  by 
land.  From  that  day  to  this  an  almost  uninterrupted  series 
of  east  winds  has  prevailed  here  in  the  Baltic  and  the  North 
Sea,  so  that  I  am  still  waiting  for  their  arrival. 

I  cannot  say  it  is  now  entirely  without  impatience,  as  it 
is  from  the  dispatches  which  they  bring  that  I  am  to  ascer¬ 
tain  whether  I  have  the  prospect  of  returning  to  my  country 
and  friends  this  season,  or  am  to  be  detained  another  winter 
in  Russia. 

The  appointment  of  this  new  mission,  and  the  solemnity 
given  to  it  by  the  selection  of  the  persons  associated  in  it 
(I  need  not  use  with  you  the  affectation  of  excepting  the  one 
who  was  already  here),  may  come  as  an  additional  proof 
of  the  earnestness  and  sincerity  with  which  the  American 
government  wishes  for  the  restoration  of  peace,  and  of  the 
readiness  with  which  they  avail  themselves  of  every  just  and 
honorable  expedient  for  obtaining  it.  The  disposition  of  our 


496 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

enemy  appears  to  be  very  different.  All  the  accounts  from 
England  lead  to  the  belief  that  the  British  ministry  will 
ultimately  reject  the  mediation  of  Russia,  and  that  this 
pacific  overture  will  not  be  more  successful  than  those  which 
preceded  it. 

There  are  many  circumstances  which  indicate  a  probability 
that  an  effort  is  now  making  to  effect  a  general  peace  in 
Europe.  In  the  course  of  the  last  winter  after  the  tremen¬ 
dous  catastrophe  of  the  immense  army  that  had  invaded 
Russia,  Austria  offered  her  mediation  to  all  the  belligerent 
powers,  and  from  having  been  an  auxiliary  to  France  as¬ 
sumed  a  neutral  position.  The  mediation  was  immediately 
accepted  by  France.  It  was  not  positively  rejected  by  the 
others,  but  was  treated  as  subordinate  to  another  negotiation 
to  draw  Austria  into  the  new  coalition  against  France. 
Whether  Austria  had  really  promised  to  join  the  coalition, 
or  had  only  held  out  flattering  hopes  which  the  sanguine 
temper  of  the  time  had  received  as  promises,  certain  it  is 
that  England,  Russia,  Prussia,  and  Sweden,  did  in  the  month 
of  April  expect  with  undoubting  confidence  the  cooperation 
of  Austria  to  dissolve  the  Confederation  of  the  Rhine,  to 
recover  Hanover  and  Holland,  and  to  circumscribe  France 
within  her  ancient  boundaries,  if  not  even  to  restore  the 
House  of  Bourbon.  The  battle  of  Liitzen  was  claimed  by 
both  parties  as  a  victory,  and  was  here  celebrated  as  such  by 
a  Te  Deum.  But  in  its  consequences  it  was  the  most  im¬ 
portant  victory  ever  won  by  Bonaparte,  for  it  proved  to  all 
Europe  that  France  was  still  able  to  cope  with  her  enemies, 
and  even  to  make  head  against  them.  A  second  battle 
three  weeks  after  had  a  similar  and  more  unequivocal 
result.  Between  the  first  and  second  battles  Napoleon  had 
proposed  that  a  Congress  should  be  assembled  at  Prague  in 
Bohemia,  to  which  all  the  powers  at  war,  including  the  United 


i8i3] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


497 


States  of  America,  should  be  invited  to  send  plenipotentiaries 
for  the  purpose  of  concluding  a  general  peace,  and  he  offered 
to  stipulate  an  armistice  during  the  negotiation.  After  the 
second  battle  Russia  and  Prussia,  with  the  concurrence  of 
Austria,  accepted  the  proposition  for  an  armistice,  limited 
however  to  the  term  of  six  weeks,  probably  with  a  view  to 
receive  the  answer  from  England  whether  she  should  choose 
to  be  represented  at  the  congress  or  not.  This  armistice 
is  on  the  point  of  expiring,  but  it  is  said  to  have  been  pro¬ 
longed  for  six  weeks  more.  In  the  meantime  Napoleon  has 
quartered  his  army  upon  the  territory  of  his  enemy  in  Silesia, 
is  levying  a  contribution  upon  Hamburg  of  about  ten  mil¬ 
lions  of  dollars,  is  doubly  fortifying  all  his  positions  upon  the 
Elbe,  and  receiving  continual  reinforcements  to  be  prepared 
for  renewing  an  offensive  campaign.  He  has  made  sure  of 
the  aid  and  support  of  Denmark  and  Saxony,  and  strongly 
confirmed  Austria  in  her  propensities  to  neutrality.  If  the 
war  should  be  renewed,  his  prospects,  though  infinitely  be¬ 
low  those  with  which  he  invaded  Russia  last  summer,  will 
be  far  above  those  with  which  he  entered  upon  the  present 
campaign  in  April.  If  the  Congress  should  meet,  he  will  not 
have  it  in  his  power  to  give  the  law  to  Europe;  but  the  peace 
must  be  the  effect  of  reciprocal  and  important  concessions. 

There  has  nothing  occurred  since  the  commencement  of 
the  French  Revolution  which  has  occasioned  such  astonish¬ 
ment  throughout  Europe  as  this  state  of  things.  There  are 
many  examples  in  history  of  the  extraordinary  defeat  and 
annihilation  of  immensely  powerful  armies.  But  the  reap¬ 
pearance  of  a  second  overpowering  host  within  five  months 
after  the  dissolution  of  the  first  is,  I  believe,  without  a 
parallel.  .  .  . 


498 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  1 16.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  9  August,  1813. 

Sir: 

•  •••••• 

In  renewing  my  warmest  acknowledgments  for  the  appro¬ 
bation  which  the  President  has  been  pleased  to  express  of  my 
conduct  in  the  mission  to  this  country,  and  for  the  further 
tokens  of  his  confidence  which  he  has  seen  fit  on  this  occasion 
to  bestow,  as  well  as  for  those  which  he  had  contemplated 
in  the  event  of  a  successful  termination  to  the  present  ex¬ 
traordinary  mission,  I  can  only  add  my  earnest  desire  to  de¬ 
serve  the  continuance  of  his  good  opinion,  and  my  readiness 
to  discharge  to  the  best  of  my  ability  the  duties  of  any  station 
in  which  he  may  deem  it  expedient  to  require  my  coopera¬ 
tion  in  the  public  service.  The  prospects  with  regard  to  the 
issue  of  the  extraordinary  mission  are  not  flattering.  The 
late  successes  of  the  British  in  Spain  and  the  renewal  of  the 
war  in  the  north  of  Europe,  now  considered  as  certain,  leave 
no  probability  that  the  British  government  will  consent 
to  treat  under  this  mediation.  The  contingency  therefore 
upon  which  the  President  had  thought  of  assigning  to  me  a 
new  destination  in  Europe  is  not  likely  to  occur.  And  having 
received  no  letter  of  recall  from  this  post  I  propose  to  remain 
here  until  I  shall  be  further  honored  with  his  commands. 
Whether  it  will  be  possible  for  my  colleagues  to  return  to  the 
United  States  during  the  present  season  is  yet  uncertain, 
and  must  remain  so  until  we  shall  have  received  answers 
to  the  communications  we  have  made  to  this  government. 
Circumstances  may  occur  upon  which  I  shall  determine  to 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


499 


1813] 

return  with  them,  without  waiting  for  a  letter  of  recall  or 
of  leave  to  the  Emperor.  In  comparing  the  instructions  to 
the  joint  mission  with  those  to  myself  particularly  I  have  in¬ 
ferred  that  I  may  avail  myself  of  this  opportunity  to  return 
home  without  taking  leave,  if  I  think  proper.  But  on  the 
other  hand  being  instructed  to  remain  charged  with  the 
ordinary  mission  to  this  court,  and  thinking  it  probable  that 
the  situation  of  the  north  of  Europe  the  ensuing  winter  will 
at  all  events  be  such  as  to  render  the  presence  of  a  person 
fully  charged  with  the  mission  here  expedient,  I  have  con¬ 
cluded  to  stay  unless  some  incident  which  I  do  not  now  an¬ 
ticipate  should  arise,  changing  the  aspect  of  things  and  de¬ 
ciding  me  to  return.  In  either  case  I  shall  pay  due  attention 
to  the  several  objects  recommended  to  my  care  in  the  sepa¬ 
rate  instructions. 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  10  August,  1813. 

•  •••••• 

The  mission  upon  which  my  colleagues  have  taken  the 
trouble  of  coming  to  this  country  has  the  prospect  of  termi¬ 
nating  like  ail  the  former  efforts  of  the  American  government 
for  the  restoration  of  peace.  I  have  this  day  a  letter  from  a 
correspondent  who  says  that,  if  Justice  in  person  should  offer 
her  mediation  between  America  and  Britain,  the  British 
government  would  refuse  it,  and  this  is  the  most  obvious 
and  natural  way  of  accounting  for  this  aversion  to  the  media¬ 
tion  of  the  Emperor  Alexander.  There  is,  I  believe,  no  dan¬ 
ger  that  the  popularity  of  my  colleagues  will  suffer,  either 
by  the  imputation  of  having  sacrificed  essential  rights,  or  of 


500 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


(1813 

having  obstinately  insisted  upon  untenable  claims.  Neither 
do  I  apprehend  any  danger  of  divisions,  jealousies,  or  al¬ 
tercations  between  the  commissioners.  I  thank  you  very 
sincerely  for  your  seasonable  hint  on  this  subject.  I  hope 
and  trust  that  we  should  all  have  been  deeply  penetrated 
with  the  importance  of  cordial  harmony  among  ourselves, 
had  we  been  placed  in  situations  where  diversities  of  opinion 
and  of  sentiment  might  have  arisen.  But  we  are  not  likely 
to  be  called  upon  for  the  exercise  of  the  virtues  of  mutual 
concession  or  forbearance.  According  to  all  appearance 
we  shall  not  have  the  opportunity  even  of  treating.  We  have 
as  yet  no  definitive  answer,  but  the  disinclination  of  the 
British  Regent  to  any  mediation  of  the  quarrel  with  America 
has  been  manifested  with  so  much  notoriety,  that  I  presume 
it  is  by  this  time  as  well  known  in  America  as  here. 

There  has  been  in  the  middle  of  the  summer  an  attempt  to 
assemble  a  congress  for  a  general  pacification  in  Europe. 
The  Emperor  Napoleon  has  officially  announced  to  the  world 
that  it  was  proposed  by  him,  that  the  Congress  should  as¬ 
semble  at  Prague.  That  there  should  be  ministers  from  all 
the  belligerent  European  powers  and  from  the  United  States 
of  America.  He  also  asserted  that  Austria  concurred  entirely 
in  these  views.  And  he  offered  to  stipulate  for  an  armistice 
while  the  congress  should  be  held.  An  armistice  was  actually 
concluded  between  him  and  the  Emperor  Alexander  and 
King  of  Prussia.  But  it  was  only  for  six  weeks,  though  it 
has  since  been  continued  three  weeks  longer,  and  terminates 
this  day,  with  six  days’  notice  before  the  renewal  of  hostili¬ 
ties.  In  the  meantime  a  sort  of  preliminary  congress  of 
ministers  from  Austria,  Russia,  Prussia,  and  France,  has 
been  held  at  Prague  to  see  if  they  could  agree  upon  a  basis 
for  a  general  negotiation.  But  it  is  said  Austria  has  been 
improving  the  same  time  to  conclude  an  alliance  offensive 


i8i3] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


5oi 


and  defensive  against  France  with  Russia,  and  that  the 
allies  have  now  five  hundred  thousand  men  ready  for  action 
upon  the  renewal  of  hostilities.  The  universal  opinion  here 
is  that  the  war  will  recommence,  if  between  France  and 
Austria  it  has  not  already  begun.  The  late  English  victory 
in  Spain  has  contributed  much  to  settle  the  wavering  of 
Austria,  which  between  her  ostensible  character  of  mediator, 
and  her  notorious  propensities  to  join  in  the  war,  has  ex¬ 
hibited  a  system  of  policy  not  altogether  free  from  the 
imputation  of  duplicity. 

It  is  scarcely  possible  that  the  campaign  now  about  to 
commence  should  be  long.  Great  events  will  follow  in  very 
rapid  succession.  If  the  forces  allied  against  France  should 
act  in  concert  and  with  operations  well  combined,  the 
Rhine  may  yet  be  the  boundary  for  the  ensuing  winter.  It 
will  be  difficult  to  pursue  the  system  of  defeating  the  French 
armies  by  always  retreating  before  them,  which  has  hitherto 
been  practised  since  the  commencement  of  the  Russian  war. 
Napoleon  must  be  victorious  again,  or  he  must  sink,  and  the 
fate  of  France  is  bound  up  in  his  fortune.  Should  he  win 
one  or  two  battles,  I  think  the  negotiation  for  a  general 
peace  will  be  resumed.  Should  he  lose  them,  his  career  must 
close  and  France  will  be  at  the  mercy  of  the  coalition.  I 


502 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


TO  BENJAMIN  WATERHOUSE 


Dear  Sir: 


St.  Petersburg,  ii  August,  1813. 


We  have  just  now  received  very  late  accounts  and  news¬ 
papers  from  America  brought  by  a  vessel  arrived  at  Gothen¬ 
burg  from  New  York,  on  board  of  which  General  Moreau 
came  as  a  passenger.  The  General  has  not  been  here,  but 
was  to  proceed  immediately  to  the  Emperor  Alexander’s  head¬ 
quarters,  which  are  in  Silesia.  He  will  probably  find  ample 
occasion  for  the  exercise  of  his  talents. 

The  Boston  Patriot  of  24  April  did  not  reach  me  with 
your  letter.  I  do  not  recollect  having  seen  a  number  of 
that  paper  since  the  one  which  contained  the  disclosures  of 
Captain  John  Henry.  From  that  time  I  have  neither  seen 
nor  heard  much  of  Boston  politics,  and  what  I  have  heard 
of  them  has  not  raised  my  opinion  of  the  wisdom  and  virtue 
of  those  who  lead  them.  Whenever  the  spirit  of  faction  is 
substituted  for  the  spirit  of  patriotism,  a  counterfeit  for  a 
genuine  coin,  it  will  always  be  attended  by  a  multitude  of 
other  counterfeits  of  virtue. 

The  spirit  of  faction  has  ruled  without  control  in  Boston 
several  years.  It  has  now  got  possession  of  the  state  and 
almost  all  New  England.  Its  natural  and  very  consistent 
effort  is  to  prostrate  the  nation  at  the  feet  of  a  foreign  enemy, 
for  the  sake  of  obtaining  a  triumph  over  a  rival  party.  It  is 
one  of  the  inconveniences  and  misfortunes  to  which  all 
free  governments,  and  especially  all  republics,  are  liable, 
and  it  is  vain  to  quarrel  with  the  condition  of  our  nature. 
I  lament  the  weakness  which  our  internal  divisions  spread 
over  the  nation;  but  I  trust  that  our  cause  will  ultimately 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


5°3 


1813] 

prove  successful,  and  that  the  day  will  come  when  no  legis¬ 
lature  or  governor  in  the  United  States  will  inquire  how 
many  victims  to  the  most  degrading  as  well  as  the  most  op¬ 
pressive  foreign  thraldom  must  be  abandoned  to  the  tyrants 
of  the  ocean,  before  their  country  shall  assert  her  rights  of 
independence  and  perform  her  duty  of  protecting  them  by 
war. 

The  governors  of  Massachusetts  and  Connecticut  it 
seems  refused  to  order  out  the  quotas  of  militia  of  those 
states  because  they  were  not  actually  invaded.  But  they 
will  probably  not  always  have  this  reason,  whether  good  or 
bad,  for  withholding  the  aid  of  their  states  from  the  general 
defence  of  their  country.  The  British  government  has 
shown  a  disposition  to  tamper  with  this  spirit  of  disaffection 
to  the  Union,  and  to  deal  more  mercifully  with  the  states 
which  sympathize  most  with  them.  But  I  doubt  whether 
this  forbearance  will  be  of  long  duration.  The  bitterness  of 
their  malice  against  the  Yankees  will  prove  too  powerful 
for  their  insidious  policy;  their  hatred  will  yet  get  the  better 
of  their  cunning. 

I  have  had  for  some  weeks  a  strong  hope  that  a  negotia¬ 
tion  for  a  general  peace  in  Europe  was  about  to  take  place, 
and  that  it  would  contribute  to  make  our  particular  peace 
more  easily  attainable;  but  the  course  of  events  has  alto¬ 
gether  disappointed  this  hope.  An  armistice  of  nearly  three 
months  in  the  north  of  Europe,  instead  of  leading  to  peace,  is 
only  a  prelude  to  a  blaze  of  war  more  universal  over  the  face 
of  Europe  than  ever.  At  this  moment  the  storm  is  on  the 
eve  of  bursting,  and  where  its  ravages  will  end  is  only  known 
to  him  who  stills  the  raging  of  the  sea  and  calms  the  tumults 
of  the  people.  In  all  the  calamities  of  the  times  I  dwell 
with  confidence  in  this  conclusion,  that  what  he  wills  is  for 
the  best,  and  that  whatever  may  be  defective  in  the  re- 


504 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

tributive  justice  of  this  world  events  will  be  duly  compen¬ 
sated  in  another.  I  remain  etc. 


TO  WILLIAM  PLUMER 

St.  Petersburg,  13  August,  1813. 

Dear  Sir: 

A  year,  a  most  eventful  year  in  both  hemispheres,  is  on 
the  point  of  expiring  since  the  date  of  your  favor  of  19 
August,  1812,  which  was  delivered  to  me  very  recently  by 
our  old  brother  Senator,  Mr.  Bayard,  who  has  now  become 
one  of  my  colleagues  in  a  mission  extraordinary  to  Russia. 

The  object  of  this  mission  was  the  restoration  of  peace 
between  the  United  States  and  Britain.  In  the  month  of 
September  last,  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  moved  by  his  friend¬ 
ship  for  both  those  powers,  and  by  the  interest  of  his  own 
nation  which  were  suffering  in  consequence  of  the  war  that 
had  arisen  between  them,  conceived  the  idea  of  offering  his 
mediation  between  them.  I  have  every  reason  for  supposing 
that  this  idea  was  the  suggestion  of  his  own  mind  and  origi¬ 
nated  entirely  with  himself.  I  state  this  to  you,  because  I 
have  seen  intimations  in  English  newspapers  that  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  the  United  States  had  solicited  the  Emperor  of 
Russia’s  mediation,  which  party  spirit  in  our  country  be¬ 
lieves  or  pretends  to  believe  that  our  government  is  system¬ 
atically  bent  upon  the  war,  and  has  no  desire  whatever  for 
the  restoration  of  peace.  Party  spirit  I  know  is  very  capable 
of  contending  for  both  these  pretences  at  once.  I  have  seen 
it  most  eloquently  demonstrated  in  the  same  papers,  that 
eternal  inextinguishable  war  with  Britain  is  the  master 
passion,  the  very  Aaron’s  serpent  of  Mr.  Madison’s  breast, 
and  also  that  he  is  heartily  tired  and  sick  of  the  war,  and 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


505 


1813] 

ready  to  catch  at  any  straw  to  get  out  of  it.  Certain  it  is 
that  he  did  not  ask  for  the  mediation  of  Russia,  but  that  it 
was  offered  spontaneously  by  the  Emperor  of  Russia  himself. 
He  was  then  and  still  is  engaged  in  a  war  with  France, 
in  which  he  is  the  ally  of  England.  The  United  States,  as 
being  at  war  with  England,  have  a  common  cause  with 
France.  Yet  the  government  of  the  United  States  imme¬ 
diately  accepted  the  mediation  of  Russia,  while  the  ally  of 
Russia  shows  the  utmost  reluctance  to  accept,  if  not  a  posi¬ 
tive  determination  to  reject  it. 

The  attachments  of  the  American  people  to  peace  are  so 
strong  that  I  believe  it  would  be  impossible  for  them  to  be 
unanimous  in  a  war  for  any  cause  whatever.  The  present 
is  essentially  a  war  for  the  independence  of  the  nation.  For 
no  nation  can  be  independent  which  suffers  her  citizens  to 
be  stolen  from  her  at  the  discretion  of  the  naval  or  military 
officers  of  another.  I  have  seen  that  the  legislature  of  Mas¬ 
sachusetts  had  been  making  inquiries  how  many  citizens  of 
the  United  States  had  been  impressed  by  the  British.  I 
should  be  glad  to  know  how  many  of  their  native  fellow 
citizens  the  legislature  of  Massachusetts  would  think  it 
reasonable  annually  to  abandon  to  a  slavery,  more  de¬ 
grading  and  more  cruel  than  that  of  Algiers  or  of  the  West 
Indies,  before  they  should  consider  the  duty  of  protection 
to  commerce.  I  read  in  the  Constitution  of  Massachusetts 
that  “the  body  politic  is  a  social  compact  by  which  the 
whole  people  covenants  with  each  citizen  and  each  citizen 
with  the  whole  people .”  Governor  Strong  and  the  majority 
of  the  Massachusetts  legislature  allow  great  weight  to  the 
British  king’s  argument,  that  he  has  a  right  to  impress  his 
subjects,  because  he  has  a  right  to  their  allegiance.  But  what 
other  foundation  has  the  right  of  a  sovereign  to  allegiance 
than  the  duty  of  protection?  The  right  and  the  duty  are 


5°6 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

reciprocal,  and  the  state  is  under  a  perfect  obligation  to 
protect  every  one  of  its  citizens,  as  much  as  it  has  a  right  to 
claim  their  allegiance.  The  state  by  the  social  compact  is 
bound  to  protect  every  one  of  its  citizens,  and  the  inquiry  how 
many  of  them  a  foreign  nation  may  be  allowed  to  rob  with 
impunity  is  itself  a  humiliation  to  which  I  blush  to  see  that 
the  legislature  of  my  native  state  could  descend.  I  remember 
that  during  the  war  of  our  Revolution  it  was  a  fashionable 
argument  on  the  British  side  to  say,  that  the  Yankees  were 
in  rebellion  to  save  three  pence  a  pound  in  the  cost  of  their 
tea.  But  the  legislatures  of  Massachusetts  of  that  day 
never  instituted  an  inquiry  how  much  the  people  of  America 
would  have  to  pay  by  submitting  to  the  tax.  It  was  “for 
a  principle,”  as  one  of  our  poets  said  at  that  time,  that  “the 
Nation  bled.”  It  was  a  high  minded  war  of  a  nation  con¬ 
tending  for  its  rights,  and  not  basely  casting  up  the  farthings 
and  pence  which  they  might  have  to  pay  of  impost  upon 
glass  and  oil  and  painters’  colors.  The  principle  for  which 
we  are  now  struggling  is  of  a  higher  and  more  sacred  nature 
than  any  question  about  mere  taxation  can  involve.  It  is 
the  principle  of  personal  liberty  and  of  every  social  right. 
The  question  is  not  how  many  of  our  children  we  shall  sacri¬ 
fice  without  resistance  to  the  Minotaur  of  the  ocean,  but 
whether  our  children  shall  have  any  security  to  protect  them 
from  being  devoured  by  him.  If  in  such  a  war  we  have  not 
been  able  to  unite,  it  is  evident  that  nothing  can  unite  us 
for  the  purpose  of  war.  As  to  the  project  of  separating  the 
states,  I  apprehend  it  less  than  I  have  done  heretofore, 
though  the  preservation  of  the  Union  may  eventually  cost 

us  a  civil  war.  Y 

»  ,  / 

What  the  issue  of  that  with  which  we  are  now  afflicted  will 
be  is  in  the  hand  of  providence.  A  career  of  success  has  at¬ 
tended  the  British  government  from  the  time  when  the  war 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


507 


1813] 

began,  which  could  not  have  been  expected  by  any  one,  and 
which  they  were  far  from  expecting  themselves.  How  long 
it  is  to  continue,  and  how  far  it  is  to  extend,  is  not  at  this 
moment  easy  to  foresee.  The  exertions  however  which 
they  are  now  making  are  too  violent  to  be  capable  of  lasting 
long.  Their  expenditures  for  the  present  year  amount  to 
little  less  than  130  millions  sterling.  Their  paper  progresses 
in  depreciation,  gold  is  at  £5.8  sterling  an  ounce  (its  standard 
value  is  £3.17.10^),  and  dollars  pass  for  6  shillings  and  10 
pence  each.  This  is  a  depreciation  of  50  per  cent  and  at  the 
same  time  they  have  enacted  by  law  that  there  is  no  depreci¬ 
ation  at  all. 

The  war  upon  the  continent  of  Europe  has  subsided  for  a 
few  weeks  by  an  armistice,  but  it  is  only  to  break  out  with 
new  and  more  aggravated  fury.  In  less  than  a  week  the 
hostilities  are  to  recommence,  and  the  fate  of  Europe  is 
again  to  be  committed  to  the  wager  of  battle.  It  is  said 
there  are  nearly  a  million  of  men  arrayed  in  arms  against  one 
another  in  Germany.  Half  the  number  will  suffice  to  fatten 
the  region  kites  before  the  close  of  the  year.  The  negotia¬ 
tions  now  broken  off  may  possibly  be  resumed  during  the 
winter;  but  even  then,  unless  something  should  occur  to 
make  the  balance  preponderate  on  one  side  or  the  other  more 
than  it  now  does,  the  furies  will  not  yet  be  satiated  with 
blood.  I  believe  we  must  not  expect  a  peace  for  ourselves 
until  the  general  peace  shall  be  made  in  Europe.  I  am,  etc.1 

1  At  the  request  of  Count  Romanzoff  an  “inofficial  note”  on  the  controversy 
between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain  was  prepared  by  Gallatin  and  sub¬ 
mitted  August  2/14,  1813.  An  English  translation  by  Adams  is  in  Writings  of 
Gallatin,  I.  552.  See  Adams,  Memoirs,  August  10,  19,  26,  1813. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


TO  THE  COMTE  DE  ROMANZOFF 
Monsieur  le  Comte: 

Ayant  communique  au  Sieur  Robert  Fulton  la  lettre  que 
Votre  Excellence  m’a  fait  Fhonneur  de  m’ecrire  en  date  du 
6  Novembre  dernier  au  sujet  du  privilege  que  j’avais  sollicite 
en  sa  faveur  pour  la  construction  des  chaloupes  de  son  in¬ 
vention  en  Russie,  et  contenant  la  decision  que  Sa  Majeste 
L’Empereur  avait  daigne  lui  accorder,  je  viens  recemment 
de  recevoir  sa  response  a  ma  lettre.  II  m’ecrit  qu’il  accepte 
avec  reconnaissance  le  privilege  pour  les  rivieres  et  les  eaux 
navigables  de  la  Russie  generalement,  et  qu’il  se  conformera 
aux  conditions  que  S.  M.  L’Empereur  a  trouve  bon  d’y 
prescrire.  II  m’a  en  meme  temps  charge  du  soin  d’obtenir 
l’edit  en  forme  par  lequel  le  privilege  lui  sera  assure  ses 
engagements  actuels  ne  permettant  pas  son  absence  per- 
sonnellement  des  Etats  Unis. 

II  se  propose  de  faire  faire  toute  la  partie  mecanique  pour  la 
premiere  chaloupe  a  une  fabrique  qu’il  a  deja  etablie  pres 
de  New  York,  ce  qui  fera  d’autant  plus  necessaire  qu’il 
n’aurait  pas  le  moyen  de  la  faire  faire  ici,  et  ensuite  d’envoyer 
ici  son  ingeniur  en  chef  avec  les  fonds  pour  faire  construite 
la  chaloupe  pour  naviguer  entre  St.  Petersbourg  et  Cron- 
stadt.  II  ne  doute  pas  qu’il  pouvera  la  faire  achever  dans  le 
courant  de  Fan  1815. 

Son  associe,  le  Sieur  Livingston,  etant  mort  depuis  la  lettre 
que  j’eus  Fhonneur  d’addresser  a  Votre  Excellence  sur  ce 
sujet,  Monsieur  Fulton  sollicite  l’edit  en  son  nom  seul  a  lieu 
ses  heritiers,  executeurs  testamentaires  ou  ayant  causes. 

Je  dois  ajouter  en  explication  ulterieure  de  motif  qui 
prive  Monsieur  Fulton  de  l’avantage  de  venir  en  personne 
presenter  sa  requete  que  dans  la  situation  actuelle  des 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


509 


£tats  Unis  la  navigation  interieure  etant  devenue  d’autant 
plus  importante  que  celle  de  la  Cote  est  sujette  a  des  ob¬ 
structions  extraordinaires  Monsieur  Fulton  est  maintenant 
employe  a  la  construction  de  treize  des  chaloupes  de  son 
invention  a  la  fois  destines  a  naviguer  sur  differentes  rivieres 
dans  les  Etats  Unis. 

Ce  qui  j’aurai  done  encore  a  solliciter  de  Votre  Excellence 
en  faveur  de  M.  Fulton  sera  de  savoir  si  d’apres  les  formes 
et  les  usages  du  gouvernement  il  me  serait  possible  d’obtenir 
Pedit  pour  le  privilege  au  nom  de  M.  Fulton  et  sans  que  sa 
presence  soit  exige.  II  s’entend  que  je  me  chargerai  de  tous 
les  frais  pour  Pexpedition  de  Pedit  dans  les  bureaux  ou 
autres  d’usage  en  pareils  cas,  Je  crois  qu’il  ne  peut  etre 
necessaire  d’assurer  Votre  Excellence  qu’en  m’offrant  a 
ceci  je  n’y  ai  d’interet  ou  de  motifs  personnels  que  ceux 
d’obliger  mon  compatriote  Monsieur  Fulton,  d’encourager 
le  progres  des  arts,  et  s’il  m’est  permis  de  le  dire  de  contribuer 
a  Pintroduction  dans  cet  vaste  Empire  d’une  invention  qui 
si  Pevenement  repond  a  mes  veeux  ainsi  qu’a  Pexperience 
de  ma  patrie  sera  pour  le  commerce  des  sujets  de  S.  M. 
Imperiale  d’une  tres  grande  utilite  publique. 

J’ai  Phonneur  d’etre  avec  la  plus  haute  consideration, 
Monsieur  le  Comte,  Votre  tres  humble  et  tres  obeissant 
Serviteur. 

St.  Petersbourg  le  7.  (19)  Aout,  1813. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


5io 


[1813 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  11 7.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  28th  August,  1813. 

Sir: 

•  •••••• 

You  will  learn  by  the  dispatches  of  the  joint  mission  1 
that  this  government  has  determined  to  renew  the  proposal  of 
the  mediation  to  the  British  ministry.  The  proposal  to  take 
this  step  was  suggested  to  the  Emperor  by  Count  Romanzoff 
in  a  dispatch  sent  before  the  arrival  of  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr. 
Bayard.  You  will  have  found  it  indicated  in  my  No.  113 
26  June.  In  answer  to  that  dispatch  the  Emperor  approved 
of  the  Count’s  idea  and  ordered  him  to  proceed  according 
to  his  own  views.  By  a  conversation  which  I  lately  had  with 
the  Count  I  conclude  that  the  intimations  given  by  the 
British  minister  to  Count  Lieven,  the  report  of  which  was 
received  by  the  Chancellor  between  the  15th  and  22nd  of 
June,  were  merely  inofficial  and  verbal,  for  he  expressly 
told  me  that  the  British  government  had  not  refused  the 
mediation,  and  that  there  had  been  no  official  communica¬ 
tion  from  them  on  the  subject  since  that  in  answer  to  the 
first  proposal  of  the  mediation;  it  was  made  early  last  winter 
and  merely  expressed  doubts  whether  a  mediation  could  be 
successful  owing  to  certain  new  pretensions  which  they 
alleged  the  American  government  had  advanced.  The 
aversion  of  the  British  government  to  any  mediation  be¬ 
tween  them  and  the  United  States  lies  deeper  than  they 
will  be  ready  to  avow.  You  will  have  other  evidence  of  it 
besides  the  official  answers  to  the  Russian  proposals.  The 

1  The  first,  dated  17/29  August,  is  in  Writings  of  Gallatin ,  I.  569. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1813] 


5ii 


Chancellor  asked  me  in  the  recent  conversation  to  which 
I  allude  (it  was  on  the  19th  instant)  whether,  if  England 
should  propose  to  transfer  our  negotiation  from  this  place 
to  London,  we  should  have  an y  objection  to  going  there.  I 
said  that  was  a  question  which  I  could  not  answer  without 
consulting  my  colleagues.  That  I  could  express  only  my 
individual  opinion.  There  were  two  alternatives  upon  which 
England  might  propose  that  we  should  go  to  London.  One 
was  to  treat  more  conveniently,  but  still  under  the  Emperor’s 
mediation;  the  other,  to  treat  directly  and  without  mediation. 
As  to  the  first  I  supposed  our  powers  would  authorize  us  to 
go,  and  the  only  objection  I  saw  to  it  was  that  we  must 
thereby  lose  the  benefit  of  his,  Count  RomanzofPs,  friendly 
assistance  and  conciliatory  disposition.  But  to  go  for  the 
purpose  of  treating  without  mediation  we  had  no  powers. 
He  said  that  his  only  object  was  to  anticipate  what  might 
be  proposed  by  England,  and  to  have  an  answer  ready,  if 
such  a  proposition  should  come  from  her.  It  had  occurred 
to  him  that  we  might  have  separate  and  other  powers  to 
treat  directly  and  without  any  mediation.  I  said  we  had 
none  to  treat  for  peace.  That  the  extraordinary  mission  was 
sent  on  the  proposition  made  by  the  Emperor.  His  media¬ 
tion  was  accepted  with  the  same  frankness  as  it  had  been 
offered.  The  President  of  the  United  States  probably  con¬ 
sidered  that  it  would  not  be  very  respectful  to  the  Emperor 
to  suppose  that  his  mediation  would  be  rejected  by  his  ally, 
engaged  with  him  in  a  common  cause,  or  to  furnish  us  with 
powers  to  treat  on  such  a  contingency.  To  have  sent  us 
with  powers  to  treat  without  the  mediation  might,  besides, 
have  had  the  appearance  of  suing  for  peace,  and  have 
been  so  taken  by  the  British  government.  This  was  an  at¬ 
titude  which,  sincerely  as  the  American  government  desired 
peace,  neither  the  condition  of  their  affairs  could  require, 


512 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

nor  the  spirit  of  their  nation  would  brook.  The  Count  re¬ 
plied,  then  he  could  only  insist  upon  having  the  negotiation 
here,  and  he  had  great  hopes  the  British  government  upon 
reconsideration  would  not  only  accept  the  mediation,  but 
eventually  be  perfectly  satisfied  that  the  affair  had  taken  this 
direction. 

Lord  Walpole  has  arrived  on  the  continent  and  has  been 
to  the  Emperor’s  headquarters.  He  is  daily  expected  here 
where  he  is  to  reside  as  secretary  of  the  embassy  and  minis¬ 
ter  plenipotentiary  during  the  ambassador’s  absence.  It 
is  not  improbable  that  the  views  of  the  British  government 
concerning  our  mission  may  be  further  disclosed  through 
him. 

I  am,  etc 


TO  JOHN  ADAMS 
St.  Petersburg,  3  September,  1813. 

Dear  Sir: 

This  day  thirty  years  ago  you  signed  a  definitive  treaty  of 
peace  between  the  United  States  of  America  and  Great 
Britain,  and  here  am  I  authorized  together  with  two  others 
of  our  fellow  citizens  to  perform  the  same  service,  but  with 
little  prospect  of  a  like  successful  issue.  The  British  govern¬ 
ment  shows  great  disinclination  to  treat  with  the  United 
States  under  a  mediation.  They  have  not  yet  formally 
rejected  that  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  and  since  the  arrival 
of  our  two  envoys  this  government  has  renewed  the  pro¬ 
posal,  to  which  an  evasive  answer  had  been  in  the  first 
instance  returned.  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  are  waiting 
for  the  ultimate  answer  from  England;  they  will  probably 
be  under  the  necessity  of  passing  from  London  before  the 


i8i3]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  513 

1st  of  November,  and  by  that  time  the  waters  will  be  locked 
up  until  June. 

Inofficial  and  indirect  hints  have  been  communicated  to 
us  that  the  British  government  are  willing  to  treat  with  us 
directly,  and  without  the  intervention  of  a  mediator.  But 
for  this  we  must  be  invested  with  new  powers;  for  our  govern¬ 
ment  had  so  little  expectation  that  England  would  spurn  the 
good  offices  of  her  close  ally  that  no  provision  was  made  for 
the  contingency. 

The  English  ministerial  gazettes  have  avowed  as  one 
objection  to  the  Russian  mediation,  that  Russia  must  be 
supposed  to  be  partial  in  favor  of  the  principles  of  the  armed 
neutrality.  But  a  peace  between  America  and  Britain 
may  be  made  without  reference  to  any  of  the  principles  of 
the  armed  neutrality.  Another  and  more  decisive  objection 
they  allege  is,  that  England  ought  never  to  submit  the  dis¬ 
cussion  of  her  maritime  rights  to  any  mediation. 

The  reasoning  has  from  other  sources  been  presented  to 
us  in  a  different  form.  We  have  been  told  that  as  the  only 
point  between  the  two  nations  upon  which  the  war  now 
hinges  is  impressment,  it  is  a  question  concerning  the  relative 
rights  and  duties  of  sovereign  and  subject.  That  it  is  a 
question  which  never  can  arise  between  any  two  nations 
besides  England  and  America.  That  it  is  a  sort  of  family 
quarrel  with  which  other  nations  can  have  no  concern,  and 
in  which  their  interference  can  be  productive  of  no  good 
result.  That  the  tendency  of  a  mediation  would  be  to  com¬ 
plicate  the  controversy,  to  entangle  it  in  the  snarl  of  general 
European  politics,  and  to  make  it  an  engine  for  French 
intrigue  to  work  upon,  to  scatter  abroad  still  more  abund¬ 
antly  than  ever  the  seeds  of  discord  and  confusion. 

The  controversy  as  between  the  two  nations  does  not  in¬ 
volve  any  question  of  the  relative  rights  and  duties  of  sover- 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


5H 


[1813 


eign  and  subject.  Admitting  the  British  king’s  right  to 
impress  his  subjects  in  all  the  extent  he  can  claim,  the  ques¬ 
tion  remains  whether  he  can  exercise  the  right  out  of  his 
own  jurisdiction.  This  question  does  not  touch  the  right 
either  of  sovereign  or  subject,  and  this  is  precisely  the  ques¬ 
tion  between  Britain  and  America.  It  is  a  question,  there¬ 
fore,  which  in  point  of  principle  concerns  all  other  nations  as 
much  as  it  does  the  two  belligerents.  It  is  whether  the 
British  king  can  inforce  the  municipal  law  of  England  on 
board  of  the  ships  of  all  other  nations  in  the  jurisdiction 
which  is  common  to  them  all.  That  it  is  exclusively  a  con¬ 
test  between  the  United  States  and  England  is  directly  at 
variance  with  the  pretence  so  often  and  so  loudly  urged,  that 
impressment  from  foreign  ships  on  the  high  seas  has  been 
practised  by  immemorial  usage.  It  is  indeed  true  that  no 
such  immemorial  usage  ever  existed,  and  that  as  American 
ships  were  the  only  foreign  vessels  on  board  of  which  the 
British  officers  did  impress,  it  is  not  likely  ever  to  be  a  specific 
cause  of  war  between  any  other  two  nations.  But  the 
correct  inference  from  this  would  be,  that  it  is  a  subject  pe¬ 
culiarly  suitable  for  a  mediation,  the  mediator  having  no  in¬ 
terest  of  his  own  to  bias  him  on  either  side,  and  both  parties 
being  therefore  more  sure  of  his  impartiality.  Even  if  it 
were  true  that  the  rights  of  sovereign  and  subject  were  im¬ 
plicated  in  the  contest,  how  would  they  be  implicated? 
Britain  fights  for  the  right  of  the  sovereign,  and  America 
for  the  duty  of  the  sovereign.  Britain  fights  for  the  claim 
to  the  service  of  the  subject,  and  America  for  the  claim  of 
the  subject  to  protection.  In  referring  the  question  to  the 
mediation  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  were  it  possible  to 
suppose  him  susceptible  of  a  bias  which  way  would  it  be? 
Could  the  most  absolute  sovereign  in  Europe  be  supposed 
to  favor  any  claim  of  the  subject  to  exemption  from  the  duty 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


SIS 


1813] 

of  service?  If  we  disputed  the  British  king’s  right  to  the 
service  of  his  subjects,  we  might  now  naturally  object  to  the 
mediation  of  any  sovereign,  because  it  would  be  a  question 
upon  which  the  partialities  of  all  sovereigns  must  be  against 
us;  and  least  of  all  could  we  have  reason  to  expect  favor  from 
the  autocrat  of  Russia,  within  whose  dominions  Magna 
Carta  and  the  Habeas  Corpus  act  have  no  force.  But 
England  could  have  no  occasion  for  distributing  a  mediation, 
of  which  she  must  know  that  the  whole  interest  of  the  medi¬ 
ator  would  be  on  her  side. 

The  fear  of  complicating  the  maritime  question  between 
Britain  and  America  with  the  general  politics  of  Europe  is 
just  and  rational  on  the  part  of  England.  But  it  ought  to 
operate  upon  her  as  a  warning  to  her  to  settle  her  differ¬ 
ences  with  America  upon  liberal  principles.  The  dread 
of  French  intrigue  by  the  mediation  of  a  prince  at  deadly 
war  with  France  can  have  no  foundation.  No  nation  ever 
more  steadily  and  more  earnestly  pursued  any  one  course 
of  policy  than  America  has  sought  to  avoid  all  entanglement 
with  European  politics;  but  if  England  will  persist  in  having 
a  war  with  America,  she  must  not  expect  that  America  will 
always  be  willing  to  fight  her  single  handed.  She  will 
eventually  find  it  for  her  interest  to  make  a  common  cause 
with  the  enemies  of  England  wherever  they  are  to  be  found, 
and  how  far  that  may  make  her  subservient  to  the  views 
of  France,  she  will  consider  for  herself  without  asking  the 
advice  of  England. 

There  are  probably  other  motives  besides  those  that  are 
acknowledged  which  indispose  the  British  government  to 
the  mediation,  and  which  must  protract  the  war,  if  they  do 
not  ultimately  defeat  the  negotiation  for  peace.  The  war 
on  the  European  continent  has  again  broken  out,  and  the 
coalition  against  France  is  more  formidable  than  it  ever  has 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


been  since  the  year  1793.  On  the  south  she  is  already  con¬ 
tending  for  her  own  frontiers.  In  the  north  Russia,  Austria, 
Sweden,  Prussia,  and  a  great  part  of  Germany  are  combined 
against  her.  Two  of  her  most  famous  generals  are  in  the 
field  under  the  banners  of  her  enemies,  and  a  third  at  the 
moment  when  hostilities  were  renewed  deserted  to  them. 
There  is  no  doubt  but  at  this  moment  a  battle  has  already 
been  fought  upon  which  the  issue  of  the  campaign  will 
depend,  and  in  that  the  destinies  of  the  European  world 
are  involved.  The  symptoms  of  weakness  and  of  rottenness 
in  the  French  force  are  so  great  and  so  numerous,  that  ac¬ 
cording  to  every  rational  anticipation  she  must  sink  in  the 
struggle.  The  coalesced  powers  have  not  yet  declared  their 
views  on  the  terms  upon  which  they  would  agree  to  a  peace. 
I  am  etc. 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  1 18.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  8  September,  1813. 

Sir: 

•  •••••• 

It  is  a  circumstance  to  be  regretted  and  which  appears  to 
be  not  undeserving  of  the  attention  of  the  government  that 
all  the  accounts  relative  to  American  affairs  published 
on  the  continent  of  Europe  come  through  the  medium  of 
English  gazettes.  In  the  present  situation  of  things  the 
public  opinion  in  Europe  inclines  but  too  much  of  itself 
in  favor  of  England,  upon  whose  financial  resources  the 
great  struggle  of  the  present  moment  so  essentially  de¬ 
pends.  What  representations  of  American  concerns  the 


i8i31  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  517 

French  public  journals  may  contain  I  am  not  informed, 
but  I  apprehend  even  they  are  for  the  most  part  copied  from 
the  English  papers.  The  misrepresentations  of  the  English 
accounts  are  spread  all  over  Europe  and  there  is  much  in¬ 
dustry  used  in  the  circulation  of  them.  Translations  of  the 
British  Regent’s  declaration  of  9  January,  1813,  were  sent 
from  the  foreign  office,  and  were  published  here  in  the  Rus¬ 
sian,  German  and  French  languages  in  the  gazettes  which 
have  an  official  sanction.  In  the  German  and  Russian 
gazette  they  were  even  introduced  by  a  remark  that  this 
declaration  contained  a  correct  statement  of  the  origin  of 
the  differences  between  the  United  States  and  Great  Britain. 
I  thought  it  my  duty  to  take  notice  of  this  to  the  Chancellor, 
and  as  a  demonstration  how  incorrect  the  view  of  the  subject 
in  the  British  declaration  was,  I  requested  of  him  to  permit 
the  publication  in  the  same  papers  of  the  President’s  message 
and  the  report  of  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Relations  upon 
which  the  declaration  of  war  was  founded.  He  promised 
me  that  they  should  be  published  in  the  translations  that 
I  should  furnish.  I  accordingly  procured  French,  German 
and  Russian  translations  of  those  papers  to  be  made,  and 
they  were  to  have  been  published  just  at  the  time  when  the 
account  came  of  the  appointment  of  the  extraordinary  mis¬ 
sion  to  negotiate  under  the  Emperor’s  mediation.  As  the 
Chancellor  then  suggested  a  wish  that  the  publication  might 
be  postponed  I  consented  to  it  under  his  renewed  promise 
that  it  should  only  be  postponed.  I  believe  those  two 
most  important  documents  have  not  been  published  any¬ 
where  on  this  continent,  while  the  Regent’s  declaration  has 
been  circulated  and  distributed  probably  in  every  language 
of  Europe. 


5i8 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


TO  R.  G.  BEASLEY 

St.  Petersburg,  9  September,  1813. 

Sir: 

I  had  the  pleasure  of  writing  you  on  the  31st  of  last  month 
by  the  opportunity  of  a  Russian  courier;  since  then  I  have 
received  your  favor  of  13  August  enclosing  Cobbett’s  re¬ 
marks  on  the  question  concerning  naturalized  citizens  taken 
prisoners. 

The  spirit  of  the  Courier  is  probably  higher  toned  than  the 
British  ministers  will  countenance  by  their  practice.  Dur¬ 
ing  the  War  of  our  Revolution  the  ministry  and  even  Parlia¬ 
ment  actually  did  on  the  principle  of  allegiance  what  the 
Courier  now  threatens  us  with.  While  they  treated  us  as 
public  enemies  on  the  field  and  on  the  ocean,  they  actually 
passed  laws  to  punish  us  as  traitors  and  pirates  when  taken 
prisoners.  On  this  principle  they  kept  Mr.  Laurens  in  the 
Tower  as  a  state  prisoner.  It  was  on  this  principle  that  they 
attempted  to  palliate  the  numberless  acts  of  barbarity  which 
they  indulged  themselves  in  against  it  during  the  whole 
course  of  that  war.  Rebels,  they  said,  were  not  entitled  to 
the  benefits  of  the  law  of  nations.  They  get  nothing  by  it 
now  but  a  renewal  of  the  same  disgrace  if  they  adopt  the 
advice  of  the  Courier .  Cobbett’s  observations  on  the  sub¬ 
ject  are  judicious  and  remarkably  moderate.  But  as  his 
opinions  are  likely  to  have  very  little  weight,  they  will 
do  well  to  consult  those  of  one  whose  voice  and  pen  were 
as  unavailing  then  as  those  of  Cobbett  are  now,  but  of  whom 
they  are  now  used  to  speak  and  think  with  reverence.  I 
mean  Edmund  Burke.  His  letter  to  the  sheriffs  of  Bristol 
contains  views  of  this  question  which  British  statesmen 
might  now  consult  with  great  advantage  to  themselves. 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


5i9 


1813] 

The  application  of  the  principle  of  allegiance  was  then  uni¬ 
versal  to  all  the  Americans;  it  can  now  be  applied  only  to 
our  naturalized  citizens,  and  to  them  cannot  be  applied 
without  the  grossest  inconsistency  and  inhumanity. 

Cobbett  has  mentioned  the  case  of  Prince  Eugene,  but 
there  are  two  instances  now  which  would  have  been  more 
signally  applicable  to  his  argument — the  Crown  Prince  of 
Sweden  and  General  Moreau.  It  is  possible  that  lawyers 
may  adduce  distinctions  absolving  those  two  officers  from 
the  duties  of  allegiance  to  the  present  Ruler  of  France ,  and 
warranting  them  in  the  act  of  commanding  armies  against 
those  of  France.  But  these  distinctions  could  only  operate 
as  exceptions  to  the  general  principle  of  allegiance,  and  the 
exception  which  would  justify  Moreau,  would  equally 
justify  many  of  the  naturalized  American  citizens  who  may 
be  taken  in  arms  against  Britain.  It  is  admitted  even  by 
the  common  lawyers  that  allegiance  may  be  alienated  by  the 
consent  of  the  sovereign  to  whom  it  is  due,  and  upon  every 
principle  of  justice  banishment  must  be  considered  as  alien¬ 
ating  the  right  of  allegiance.  When  the  sovereign,  whether 
by  way  of  commutation  for  other  punishment,  or  from  what¬ 
ever  motive,  compels  his  subject  to  depart  from  his  terri¬ 
tories  and  go  into  those  of  another  state,  he  forces  him  to 
change  his  allegiance,  and  makes  him  amenable  to  the  laws 
of  his  new  sovereign.  Most  of  the  Irish  exiles  are  substanti¬ 
ally,  if  not  formally,  in  this  predicament.  To  claim  from 
them  the  duties  of  allegiance  after  having  cast  them  out  from 
all  the  rights  of  protection,  would  be  neither  just,  nor  con¬ 
sistent,  nor  even  common  law. 

It  is  the  misfortune  of  America  to  present  to  great  num¬ 
bers  of  British  subjects  a  country  more  capable  of  making 
them  happy  than  that  in  which  they  were  born.  The  adopted 
parent  is  more  kind  and  affectionate  than  the  natural  mother. 


520 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

America  uses  no  blandishment  to  entice  away  the  children 
of  other  nations.  She  naturalizes  no  seamen,  merely  for  serv¬ 
ing  two  years  on  board  her  ships.  There  is  not  a  country  in 
Europe  whose  conditions  of  naturalization  are  so  rigorous 
as  those  of  the  United  States.  But  Britain  is  now  waging 
against  us  this  cruel  war,  because  her  subjects  prefer  America 
for  their  country  rather  than  her  their  native  land.  Cobbett 
has  touched  lightly  upon  this  topic,  but  I  believe  it  is  the 
deepest  root  of  the  war. 

I  can  give  you  no  news  from  this  quarter.  We  are  in 
expectation  of  the  ultimate  answer  from  England,  but  are 
uncertain  whether  it  will  arrive  in  time  or  be  of  a  nature  to 
admit  the  return  of  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  to  the 
United  States  the  present  year.  I  am,  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  21  September,  1813. 

This  day  two  months  have  elapsed  since  Mr.  Gallatin  and 
Mr.  Bayard  arrived  and  delivered  to  me  your  favors  of  5 
and  23  April.  Nothing  later  from  you  has  yet  come  to  hand. 
Very  shortly  after  their  arrival  the  ship  Hannibal ,  belonging 
to  Mr.  Astor,  of  New  York,  arrived  at  Gothenburg.  This 
vessel  was  furnished  with  a  British  license  with  a  permis¬ 
sion  even  to  bring  a  cargo  and  to  carry  one  back  in  return, 
all  in  consideration  of  a  passenger  whom  she  conveyed  to 
Europe.  The  passenger  was  General  Moreau.  She  sailed 
from  New  York  the  22nd  of  June,  and  he  landed  at  Gothen¬ 
burg  the  25  July.  One  of  his  fellow  passengers  who  had  a 
special  charge  to  accompany  him,  wrote  a  letter  to  a  friend 
here,  which  I  have  heard  read,  expressing  an  opinion  that 
the  voyage  had  been  so  short  and  prosperous  by  the  particular 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


521 


smiles  of  Providence  upon  the  purpose  for  which  he  came. 
From  Gothenburg  General  Moreau  crossed  the  Baltic  and 
landed  at  Stralsund,  where  he  had  an  affecting  interview 
with  the  Crown  Prince  of  Sweden,  another  French  general 
now  commanding  an  army  against  France.  General  Moreau 
then  proceeded  to  the  Emperor  Alexander’s  headquarters, 
and  arrived  at  Prague  precisely  at  the  moment  when  the 
two  Emperors  of  Russia  and  of  Austria  were  meeting  to 
commence  the  campaign  of  the  new  coalition  against  Na¬ 
poleon.  This  was  the  15th  of  August.  The  16th  was  the 
day  upon  which  the  armistice  was  terminated,  and  on  the 
loth  the  Austrian  declaration  of  war  against  France  had  been 
delivered  to  the  French  ambassador  at  Prague.  On  the  17th 
hostilities  were  to  commence.  General  Moreau  entered  the 
Russian  service,  and  was  appointed  first  aid-de-camp  gen¬ 
eral  to  the  Emperor  Alexander.  On  the  22d  he  wrote  from 
the  Emperor’s  headquarters  a  letter  which  I  have  read.1  It 
said  that  he  had  come  to  fight  against  Bonaparte,  and  that 
he  should  do  it  without  the  slightest  repugnance.  That  if 
he  contributed  to  the  overthrow  of  Bonaparte,  he  should 
have  the  thanks  of  France  as  well  as  of  the  rest  of  Europe. 
That  if  the  coalition  had  destroyed  Robespierre,  France 
would  have  thanked  them  for  it.  That  the  banner  is  of 
little  consequence  when  a  man  succeeds.  Three  days  after¬ 
wards  the  allied  Austrian,  Russian,  and  Prussian  main 
army  invaded  Saxony  from  Bohemia,  and  on  the  26th  of 
August  they  were  at  the  gates  of  Dresden.  On  the  27th 
Napoleon  with  100,000  men  went  out  from  Dresden  and 
gave  them  battle.  A  cannon  ball  took  both  the  feet  of 
General  Moreau  from  under  him,  and  shattered  both  his 
legs  so  that  on  the  same  day  he  was  obliged  to  undergo  the 
amputation  of  them  both.  The  movement  of  the  armies 
1  To  Gallatin,  printed  in  Writings  of  Gallatin,  I.  562. 


522 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

made  it  necessary  to  remove  him  in  this  condition  to  Top- 
litz,  where  he  died  on  the  2nd  of  this  month,  greatly  regretted 
by  the  sovereign  to  whom  his  services  had  just  been  devoted, 
and  at  whose  side  he  fell. 

He  was  in  arms  against  his  native  country.  Although  I 
do  not  subscribe  to  the  British  doctrine  of  unalienable  al¬ 
legiance  in  the  extent  to  which  they  wish  to  drive  it  in  their 
disputes  and  wars  with  us,  I  do  consider  that  very  great 
and  weighty  causes  are  essential  to  justify  a  man  for  bearing 
arms  against  his  native  country.  That  there  were  causes 
sufficient  for  his  justification  is,  to  say  the  least,  extremely 
questionable.  He  probably  was  not  formally  bound  in  alle¬ 
giance  to  Napoleon,  and  might  perhaps  have  cause  of  com¬ 
plaint  against  his  native  country.  But  from  the  time  of  his 
first  participation  in  the  intrigues  to  restore  the  Bourbons 
in  1795,  and  his  accusation  of  Pichegru,  with  whom  he  had 
been  concerned  in  them,  I  have  always  considered  him  as  a 
man  who  thought  success  the  only  standard  of  virtue.  This 
is  always  the  maxim  of  wavering  unsteady  characters. 
It  is  a  principle  in  itself  so  loose  and  unsettled  that  it  almost 
always  finishes  by  betraying  those  who  confide  in  it.  Moreau 
has  often  been  heard  to  declare  that  he  would  never  take 
up  arms  against  France.  He  had  declined  proposals  pre¬ 
viously  made  to  him,  when  the  prospect  of  success  was  not  so 
bright.  With  the  change  of  his  country’s  fortune  his  aver¬ 
sion  to  fight  against  her  disappears.  He  comes  five  thousand 
miles  to  join  the  standard  of  her  enemies,  and  one  of  the 
first  cannon  balls  that  is  fired  sends  him  to  his  account,  a 
memorable  warning  to  others  not  to  judge  of  the  moral 
merit  of  the  banner  by  success.  Eight  days  after  he  was  dead 
a  long  and  elaborate  article  in  the  gazette  of  this  city  as¬ 
sured  the  world  that  Providence  had  preserved  the  life  of 
Moreau  through  thousands  of  dangers  in  battles,  through 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


S23 


1813] 

conspiracies,  amidst  plagues,  and  over  oceans,  to  make  him 
the  instrument  of  some  great  and  extraordinary  purpose 
of  beneficence  to  mankind. 

Providence  did  not  intend  to  make  him  any  longer  the 
instrument  of  any  purpose,  either  merciful  or  afflictive. 
But  it  has  manifested  in  the  most  unequivocal  manner  the 
intention  of  turning  the  tide  of  success.  If  success  were 
the  standard  of  excellence,  what  mortal  since  the  creation 
of  the  world  had  for  a  compass  of  twenty  years  such  signal 
proofs  of  the  favor  of  Providence  as  Napoleon.  He  too 
fancied  himself  more  than  mortal.  Pie  dreamt  that  he  was 
the  dispenser  of  destiny  to  mankind.  It  would  seem  that 
even  yet  he  has  not  awaked  from  his  dream.  He  left  one 
immense  army  to  fatten  the  region  kites  of  Russia,  and  an¬ 
other  is  now  perishing  under  his  hands  by  the  sword  of  his 
enemies  and  by  famine.  All  Europe  is  now  conjured  against 
him.  His  inflexible  spirit  has  bid  defiance  to  Austria  in 

addition  to  all  those  he  had  before.  But  his  means  of  resist- 

* 

ance  are  sinking  under  him,  and  since  the  renewal  of  the  war 
he  has  been  defeated  in  almost  every  quarter.  His  armies 
are  disheartened.  He  is  surrounded  with  disaffection  and 
treachery.  His  enemies  are  flushed  with  success,  embittered 
by  the  remembrance  of  former  losses,  and  struggling  with 
desperation  for  their  own  existence.  “What  is  it  (says  the 
son  of  Sirach)  “if  one  be  highly  famed?  yet  it  is  known  that 
he  is  but  a  man;  neither  may  he  contend  with  him  that  is 
mightier  than  he.” 

Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  are  still  here,  waiting  for  a 
definitive  answer  from  England  whether  the  British  govern¬ 
ment  will  treat  under  the  Russian  mediation  or  not.  In  the 
meantime  the  accounts  from  America  leave  them  in  suspense, 
and  under  an  uncertainty  whether  the  Senate  have  confirmed 
the  nominations  to  this  commission.  The  news  which  we 


524 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

receive  respecting  the  progress  of  the  war  is  less  favorable 
than  we  had  anticipated,  and  we  hear  of  the  opposition 
from  Massachusetts  in  all  its  vehemence.  I  approve  much 
of  your  principle  never  to  despond,  and  hope  for  an  improving 
futurity.  By  the  blessings  of  God  we  are  in  tolerable  health. 
Charles  goes  regularly  to  school  and  improves  in  his  writing 
as  fast  as  I  can  expect. 

Remember  me  dutifully  to  my  father  and  affection¬ 
ately  to  my  children.  I  have  lately  written  to  them  all,  and 
hope  to  have  the  opportunity  of  writing  soon  again;  until 
which  I  remain  as  ever  affectionately  yours. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  14  October,  1813. 

I  have  just  this  moment  returned  from  attending  the 
funeral  obsequies  of  the  late  General  Moreau,  which  have 
been  solemnized  with  suitable  splendor  at  the  Roman  Catho¬ 
lic  church  of  this  city.  He  died  at  Toplitz  on  the  2nd  of 
September,  of  the  wounds  he  had  received  before  Dresden 
the  27th  of  August.  His  body  was  sent  here  by  order  of  the 
Emperor  Alexander,  and  has  been  buried  with  all  the  honors 
to  which  he  was  entitled  by  his  merits  and  by  falling  in  the 
Emperor’s  service,  and  at  his  side.  The  church  service  was 
performed  by  the  Archbishop  of  Mohileff,  the  Roman 
Catholic  Metropolitan  of  the  Empire,  and  a  funeral  sermon 
was  preached  in  the  French  language  by  Father  Mosevil, 
professor  of  Philosophy  at  the  Jesuit  College  in  this  city. 
His  text  was  from  the  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  Chap.  9,  v.  13: 
“For  what  man  is  he  that  can  know  the  counsel  of  God? 
or  who  can  think  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is?” — a  text 
certainly  well  chosen  though  from  an  Apocryphal  book.  The 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


525 


orator’s  task  was  not  without  its  delicacy  and  its  difficulty. 
His  duty  was  to  pronounce  a  panegyric,  and  all  the  titles 
of  his  hero  to  glory  were  acquired  in  contending  against  the 
cause  for  which  he  finally  lost  his  life.  There  were  no  serv¬ 
ices  to  the  Russian  Empire  to  speak  of,  for  the  first  day  of  his 
active  service  had  terminated  his  career.  From  the  narrow 
and  dangerous  pass  the  preacher  extricated  himself  as 
successfully  as  the  general  had  extricated  his  army  in  his 
celebrated  retreat,  by  expatiating  upon  the  inscrutable 
counsels  of  God,  and  by  transferring  his  encomium  from  the 
general  to  the  Emperor,  whose  magnanimity  considered  not 
less  services  intended  than  services  performed,  and  who 
manifested  his  sense  of  the  exploits  which  would  have  been 
achieved,  had  the  Hero  not  been  arrested  in  his  career  by  a 
premature  death. 

I  have  not  had  the  pleasure  of  receiving  a  line  from  you 
since  I  wrote  you  last.  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  will 
probably  be  obliged  to  pass  the  winter  here,  for  we  have  no 
final  answer  yet  from  England,  and  when  it  comes  the  Gulf 
of  Finland  will  be  no  longer  navigable.  They  intend  how¬ 
ever  to  send  the  ship  to  Gothenburg,  and  if  on  the  receipt 
of  the  answer  from  the  British  government  there  should  be 
nothing  left  for  them  but  to  return  home,  they  will  go  through 
Sweden  by  land,  and  may  embark  from  Gothenburg  in  the 
winter,  or  at  least  in  the  spring,  two  or  three  months  earlier 
than  they  could  go  from  this  place.1 

The  progress  of  the  war  in  Germany  has  been  since  the  re¬ 
commencement  of  hostilities  so  favorable  to  the  allies,  and 
so  much  against  the  French,  that  the  campaign  of  1813  has 
every  prospect  of  terminating  as  disastrously  to  the  Emperor 
Napoleon  as  that  of  1812.  The  Emperor  Alexander  has  had 

1  A  letter  from  the  Commissioners  to  the  Secretary  of  State,  October  3/ 15,  1813, 
is  in  Writings  of  Gallatin ,  I.  587. 


526 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

a  silver  medal  struck  to  commemorate  the  campaign  of 
1812.  On  one  side  is  the  eye  of  Providence  inclosed  within 
a  triangle,  and  on  the  other  the  inscription  in  Russian  “not 
unto  us,  not  unto  us”;  it  is  to  be  distributed  to  every  officer 
and  soldier  who  served  during  that  campaign,  and  to  be 
worn  suspended  by  a  blue  ribbon  at  the  button  hole,  without 
distinction  of  ranks,  from  the  Field  Marshal  to  the  common 
soldier. 


TO  BENJAMIN  WATERHOUSE 


Dear  Sir: 


St.  Petersburg,  24  October,  1813. 


•  •••••• 

I  am  not  displeased  to  hear  that  Ohio,  Kentucky,  Indiana 
and  Louisiana  are  rapidly  peopling  with  Yankees.  I  con¬ 
sider  them  as  an  excellent  race  of  people,  and  as  far  as  I  am 
able  to  judge  I  believe  that  their  moral  and  political  char¬ 
acter  far  from  degenerating  improves  by  emigration.  I  have 
always  felt  on  that  account  a  sort  of  predilection  for  those 
rising  western  states,  and  have  seen  with  no  small  astonish¬ 
ment  the  prejudices  harbored  against  them  by  the  New 
England  junto-federalists.  There  is  not  upon  this  globe 
of  earth  a  spectacle  exhibited  by  man  so  interesting  to  my 
mind  or  so  consolatory  to  my  heart  as  this  metamorphosis 
of  howling  deserts  into  cultivated  fields  and  populous  villages 
which  is  yearly,  daily,  hourly,  going  on  by  the  hands  chiefly 
of  New  England  men  in  our  western  states  and  territories. 
If  New  England  loses  her  influence  in  the  councils  of  the 
Union  it  will  not  be  owing  to  any  diminution  of  her  popu¬ 
lation  occasioned  by  these  emigrations;  it  will  be  from  the 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


527 


1813] 

partial,  sectarian,  or  as  Hamilton  called  it  clannish ,  spirit 
which  makes  so  many  of  her  political  leaders  jealous  and 
envious  of  the  west  and  of  the  south.  This  spirit  is  in  its 
nature  narrow  and  contracted,  and  it  always  works  by  means 
like  itself.  Its  natural  tendency  is  to  excite  and  provoke 
a  counteracting  spirit  of  the  same  character,  and  it  has 
actually  produced  that  effect  in  our  country.  It  has  com¬ 
bined  the  southern  and  western  parts  of  the  United  States, 
not  in  a  league  but  in  a  concert  of  political  views  adverse  to 
those  of  New  England.  The  fame  of  all  the  great  legisla¬ 
tors  of  antiquity  is  founded  upon  their  contrivances  to 
strengthen  and  multiply  the  principles  of  attraction  in  civil 
society.  Our  legislators  seem  to  delight  in  multiplying  and 
fomenting  the  principles  of  repulsion. 

If  I  could  by  any  act  of  mine  contribute  to  the  restoration 
of  a  just  and  honorable  peace  to  our  country,  I  should  be 
ready  to  say  “Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in 
peace,  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation.”  But  I  have 
little  reason  to  flatter  myself  that  such  are  the  intentions  of 
Providence.  The  British  government  have  manifested  a 
strong  disinclination  to  treat  with  United  States  under  any 
mediation,  and  although  we  are  not  yet  informed  of  their 
having  expressly  refused  that  of  Russia,  they  have  not  ap¬ 
pointed  any  person  to  treat  with  us  under  it,  and  we  are  in 
hourly  expectation  of  receiving  their  final  answer.  The  great 
successes  which  they  have  had  in  their  European  affairs 
have  made  them  more  indifferent  about  a  peace  with  America, 
and  although  they  are  indebted  to  Russia  for  all  those  suc¬ 
cesses,  they  are  not  more  inclined  to  submit  any  of  their 
maritime  pretensions  to  the  umpirage  of  a  Russian  mediator. 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


528 


[1813 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  25  October,  1813. 
«•••••  • 
Although  I  am  duly  sensible  to  the  gentlemanly  politeness 
of  Sir  John  Sherbrook  in  permitting  my  letters  to  be  trans¬ 
mitted  to  you,  I  do  not  wish  to  give  him  the  trouble  to  pe¬ 
ruse  any  more  of  my  epistles,  or  to  write  any  adapted  for  his 
perusal.  Yet  I  see  not  why  I  should  withhold  my  opinions 
upon  some  of  the  subjects  mentioned  in  your  letters.  For 
instance,  I  am  not  of  opinion  with  the  Senate  of  Massachu¬ 
setts  that  the  present  war  is  waged  on  the  part  of  the  United 
States  without  justifiable  cause,  as  little  as  I  am  of  their 
opinion  that  it  has  been  prosecuted  in  a  manner  indicating 
that  conquest  and  ambition  are  its  real  motives.1  But  if 
I  concurred  with  them  in  both  those  opinions,  I  should 
still  from  the  bottom  of  my  soul  disclaim  the  conclusion 
which  the  said  honorable  Senate  have  drawn  from  ita  and 
declared  to  be  their  sense,  to  wit,  that  it  was  not  becoming 
a  moral  and  religious  people  to  express  any  approbation  of 
military  or  naval  exploits  which  are  not  immediately  con¬ 
nected  with  the  defense  of  our  sea  coast  and  soil. 

A  moral  and  religious  people  are  bound  in  sacred  duty  to 
express  approbation  of  military  or  naval  exploits  performed 
in  their  service,  even  although  the  Senate  of  Massachusetts 
should  think  the  war  unjust,  even  though  the  war  should  be 
really  unjust,  provided  that  they  who  performed  the  ex- 

1  “  Resolved,  as  the  sense  of  the  Senate  of  Massachusetts  that  in  a  war  like  the 
present,  waged  without  justifiable  cause,  and  prosecuted  in  a  manner  which  indi¬ 
cates  that  conquest  and  ambition  are  its  true  motives,  it  is  not  becoming  a  moral 
and  religious  people  to  express  any  approbation  of  military  or  naval  exploits,  which 
are  not  immediately  connected  with  our  defense  of  our  sea  coast  and  soil.,, 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


1813] 


5  29 


ploits  believed  it  to  be  just.  The  virtue  of  all  action  depends 
upon  the  motives  of  the  actor,  and  it  is  neither  moral  nor 
religious  to  take  Mr.  Quincy’s  opinion  as  to  the  justice  of 
the  cause  for  a  standard  to  measure  the  merit  of  exploits 
achieved  by  Hull,  Decatur,  and  Bainbridge.  There  is  a  book 
much  esteemed  by  moral  and  religious  men  which  says,  “Who 
art  thou  that  judgest  another  man’s  servant?  To  his  own 
master  he  standeth  or  falleth.”  If  I  could  degrade  myself  in 
my  own  mind,  and  sink  deep  enough  into  the  kennels  of  fac¬ 
tion  to  embrace  the  opinion  that  the  redemption  of  my  sea¬ 
faring  countrymen  from  the  accursed  oppression  of  British 
press-gang  is  not  a  justifiable  cause  of  war,  I  should  still 
think  it  possible  that  other  men  quite  as  patriotic  as  myself 
might  be  of  a  different  opinion.  And  when  I  saw  such  men 
displaying  heroic  virtue  in  support  of  their  country’s  cause, 
and  sealing  the  sincerity  of  their  belief  with  their  blood, 
I  should  feel  and  would  express  approbation  of  their  exploits, 
unless  with  the  loss  of  all  sense  of  my  country’s  rights  I  had 
also  lost  all  sense  of  morals,  religion  and  truth. 

I  had  seen  some  weeks  since  in  the  English  newspapers 
this  pious  resolution,  but  I  never  thought  much  of  its  in¬ 
genuity,  even  as  a  party  measure.  I  know  very  well  that  it 
could  disgrace  none  but  those  who  voted  for  it.  I  know  very 
well  that  if  the  exploits  should  continue  to  be  achieved  the 
moral  and  religious  people  would  not  ask  Mr.  Quincy  or  the 
Senate  of  Massachusetts  for  permission  to  express  their 
approbation  of  them;  and  if  the  deed  of  glory  was  performed, 
I  cared  very  little  whether  Mr.  Quincy  or  the  Senate  of 
Massachusetts  expressed  their  approbation  of  it  or  not.  The 
approbation  which  avowedly  hangs  the  virtue  of  one  man 
upon  the  motives  of  another  is  too  worthless  to  be  an  object 
of  desire  to  men  of  real  honor,  morals,  or  religion. 

Since  I  began  this  letter  I  have  seen  the  National  Intel - 


530 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

ligencers  of  3  and  5  August,  containing  all  the  proceedings  of 
the  United  States  Senate  upon  the  nominations  to  the  Rus¬ 
sian  mission  and  the  projected  mission  to  Sweden.  The 
situation  in  which  these  transactions  place  us  is  a  little 
awkward,  but  we  have  yet  no  official  information  of  the 
event.  We  have  no  reason  to  expect  that  the  British  gov¬ 
ernment  will  treat  at  all  under  the  mediation,  but  Mr. 
Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  have  hitherto  been  waiting  here 
for  a  final  answer  from  England,  which  has  not  yet  been  re¬ 
ceived.  They  have  at  their  disposal  the  ship  in  which  they 
came,  and  intended  to  send  her  round  to  Gothenburg  before 
the  freezing  of  the  river  here.  Her  departure  has  however 
been  so  long  delayed  that  it  is  not  certain  she  will  now  be 
able  to  get  away.  We  have  the  ground  already  covered  with 
snow  and  Fahrenheit’s  thermometer  at  ten  degrees  below 
the  freezing  point.  Four  or  five  days  of  such  weather  will 
lock  us  up  for  the  winter. 

•  •••••• 


TO  WILLIAM  HARRIS  CRAWFORD 

St.  Petersburg,  15  November,  1813. 

Dear  Sir: 

I  have  received  your  obliging  favors  of  13th  and  30th 
of  September,  and  since  your  arrival  in  France  have  been 
seriously  wishing  for  the  means  of  communicating  with  you. 
The  conveyance  through  Copenhagen  has,  however,  been  so 
precarious,  not  only  from  the  state  of  the  relations  between 
Sweden  and  Denmark,  but  from  the  continually  varying 
aspect  of  affairs  on  the  Elbe  and  Holstein,  that  I  have  not 
until  now  ventured  to  write  to  you;  and  even  at  present  shall 
commit  this  to  one  of  our  countrymen  going  to  Sweden, 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


S31 


but  without  any  certainty  in  what  manner,  or  from  whence 
it  will  eventually  be  transmitted  to  you. 

It  is  true  that  the  British  government  has  finally  and 
positively  refused  to  treat  with  the  United  States  under  the 
mediation  of  the  Emperor  of  Russia;  but  we  have  as  yet  no 
official  notification  of  the  fact.  We  are  indirectly  informed 
that  they  have  sent  to  the  Emperor  Alexander  at  his  head¬ 
quarters  a  long  and  elaborate  memoir  to  justify  their  re¬ 
fusal  of  the  mediation,  and  they  have  at  the  same  time  mani¬ 
fested  their  willingness  to  treat  with  the  American  envoys 
directly,  either  at  Gothenburg  or  in  London.  Should  this 
proposal  come  in  a  shape  upon  which  we  could  deliberate, 
we  should  ask  for  further  instructions  respecting  it  from 
America.  But  from  what  we  know  of  the  dispositions 
of  the  British  ministry  you  may  safely  conclude  that  your 
negotiations  will  meet  with  no  obstacle  from  any  possible 
success  of  ours. 

Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  are  here  waiting  for  the 
official  communication  from  this  government  of  the  re¬ 
jection  of  the  mediation  by  the  British.  The  Emperor  Alex¬ 
ander  gave  orders  that  our  letters  of  credence  should  be 
received  by  his  Chancellor  here,  and  that  we  should  be  rec¬ 
ognized  in  all  the  usual  diplomatic  forms,  although  he  was 
absent.  The  Neptune  is  gone  to  Gothenburg,  whither  it  is 
the  intention  of  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  to  proceed  by 
land  to  embark  for  the  United  States,  as  soon  as  we  shall 
have  authentic  information  of  the  British  determination. 

Prince  Kurakin  some  time  since  informed  me  that  he  knew 
his  chapel  furniture,  etc.,  was  in  Mr.  Warden’s  possession, 
with  which  he  appeared  to  be  well  satisfied.  I  understood 
him  to  say  that  he  had  requested  him  to  keep  it  until  the 
arrival  of  Mr.  Barlow’s  successor,  and  then  to  place  it  under 
his  custody.  Perhaps  Mr.  Warden  waits  until  you  shall 


532 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

have  been  officially  received  and  recognized  to  execute 
the  Prince’s  directions.  I  regret  that  Mr.  Thomas  Barlow 
ever  permitted  it  to  be  removed,  though  I  hope  it  has  been 
safely  kept.  .  .  . 

TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  124.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  22  November,  1813. 

Sir: 

The  communications  which  will  be  transmitted  to  you  by 
the  present  occasion  will  inform  you  that  the  British  gov¬ 
ernment  have  at  length  positively  and  definitively  refused 
to  treat  with  the  United  States  under  the  mediation  of 
Russia.  We  have,  however,  hitherto  no  official  statement 
of  this  fact,  and  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  are  waiting 
only  to  receive  it.  The  Neptune  sailed  on  the  2nd  instant 
from  Cronstadt  for  Gothenburg,  and  a  few  days  afterwards 
put  in  to  Reval,  from  which  place  we  have  not  heard  of  her 
departure.  When  she  left  Cronstadt  there  was  every  pros¬ 
pect  that  the  river  and  gulf  would  be  closed  within  two  days; 
an  unusual  return  of  moderate  weather  immediately  after¬ 
wards  succeeded,  and  the  navigation  is  yet  open  a  month 
later  than  commonly  happens  at  this  season. 

With  the  refusal  to  negotiate  under  the  mediation  we  are 
indirectly  told  that  the  British  government  have  manifested 
a  willingness  and  even  a  desire  to  negotiate  with  the  Ameri¬ 
can  mission  directly,  either  at  Gothenburg  or  at  London. 
They  have  been  informed  that  we  have  no  powers  authoriz¬ 
ing  us  to  treat  otherwise  than  under  the  mediation,  but  they 
have  given  intimations  that  they  would  raise  no  question 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


533 


with  regard  to  the  extent  of  our  powers.  At  the  same  time 
we  have  been  given  distinctly  to  understand  that  they  will 
agree  to  no  stipulation  whatsoever  renouncing  or  abandoning 
the  practice  of  impressment  on  board  our  merchant  vessels. 
They  profess  a  desire  for  peace  and  a  disposition  to  agree  to 
arrangements  for  guarding  against  what  they  call  the  abuse 
of  impressment  to  our  satisfaction;  but  nothing  can  be  more 
explicit  than  their  avowal  of  a  determination  to  yield  noth¬ 
ing  with  regard  to  the  practice  itself.  If  the  powers  of  the 
mission  extended  to  the  acceptance  of  the  invitation  to  treat 
directly,  and  to  repair  for  that  purpose  to  Gothenburg  or 
to  London,  it  would  be  perfectly  useless  to  go  there  under 
the  present  state  of  our  instructions,  since  the  only  basis 
upon  which  the  offer  to  treat  with  us  is  made,  is  precisely 
that  which  we  are  expressly  forbidden  to  accept.  Mr. 
Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  have  it,  however,  in  contemplation 
to  touch  in  England  on  their  passage  to  the  United  States, 
and  will  there  be  able  to  ascertain,  whether  the  British  gov¬ 
ernment  can  be  brought  to  more  accommodating  disposi¬ 
tions,  as  well  as  what  modifications  they  would  propose 
of  the  practice  to  make  it  satisfactory  to  the  United  States. 

I  am,  etc. 


TO  ABIGAIL  ADAMS 

St.  Petersburg,  30  December,  1813. 

As  the  time  is  approaching  for  the  departure  of  Mr.  Galla¬ 
tin  and  Mr.  Bayard,  and  as  the  month  and  year  are  drawing 
to  a  close,  I  avail  myself  now  of  the  opportunity  of  writing 
to  you  by  them,  although  it  is  yet  uncertain  when  they  will 
go,  and  still  more  uncertain  how  long  it  will  be  before  they 
reach  the  United  States. 


534 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


I1813 

The  British  government  peremptorily  refused  negotiating 
for  peace  with  America  under  the  mediation  of  the  Em¬ 
peror  of  Russia.  This  has  been  perfectly  well  known  to  us 
these  two  months,  and  has  been  sufficiently  announced  to 
the  world  by  the  English  Regent  in  his  speech  at  the  opening 
of  the  session  of  Parliament.  But  in  order  that  my  colleagues 
may  be  enabled  to  take  leave  of  this  court,  the  official  com¬ 
munication  of  the  refusal  of  the  British  government  to  treat 
must  come  from  the  Russian  government  to  us.  It  has  not 
yet  been  made,  and  the  delay  is  owing  to  the  absence  of  the 
Emperor  Alexander  from  his  capital,  and  probably  to  the 
transactions  more  important  to  him  than  his  offered  media¬ 
tion,  in  which  he  has  been  so  deeply  engaged  during  the 
whole  course  of  the  present  year.  The  events  of  the  time 
have  been  too  conspicuous  and  too  memorable  in  the  history 
of  the  world  not  to  be  well  known  to  you,  and  many  con¬ 
siderations  will  occur  to  you  dispensing  me  from  the  task  of 
enlarging  upon  them.  But  in  the  various  and  continual 
movements  of  the  armies  which,  with  the  exception  of  the 
armistice,  have  been  incessant,  in  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune 
which  have  marked  the  military  history  of  the  year,  and  in 
the  multitude  of  complicated  negotiations  and  of  sanguinary 
battles  which  have  occupied  and  engrossed  the  Emperor’s 
time,  it  is  not  surprising  that  some  delays  should  have  taken 
place  in  the  course  of  the  communications  from  his  govern¬ 
ment  to  us.  These  delays  are  less  materially  important  as 
the  season  of  the  year  has  been  unpropitious  for  travellers; 
so  that  if  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard  could  have  left  this 
place  sooner,  they  would  scarcely  have  been  advancing  upon 
their  voyage  which  they  could  not  in  any  case  have  com¬ 
pleted  until  the  return  of  spring. 

In  refusing  the  mediation  the  British  ministry  through  an 
indirect  channel  have  intimated  a  willingness  to  treat  with 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


535 


the  American  envoys  directly,  and  have  given  us  a  sort  of 
invitation  to  go  thither  for  that  purpose.  We  have  no  au¬ 
thority  either  to  treat  thus  with  them  or  to  go  to  England. 
But  Mr.  Gallatin  and  Mr.  Bayard,  considering  the  mission 
of  mediation  as  terminated  on  their  departure  from  this 
place,  have  it  in  contemplation  to  stop  in  England  on  their 
way  home,  and  will  probably  wait  there  for  further  instruc¬ 
tions  from  the  United  States,  and  at  the  same  time  ascertain 
what  prospect  there  may  be  of  a  favorable  issue  for  a  direct 
negotiation,  if  our  government  should  deem  it  advisable  to 
substitute  that  mode  of  treating  in  the  place  of  the  rejected 
mediation. 

I  speak  of  both  my  colleagues,  because  the  decision  of  the 
Senate  with  regard  to  Mr.  Gallatin,  of  which  we  were  in¬ 
formed  through  the  medium  of  the  newspapers  about  the 
17th  of  October,  and  which  had  taken  place  in  July,  is  to 
this  day  officially  a  secret  to  us  as  much  as  the  refusal  of  the 
mediation  by  the  British.  We  have  not  a  line  from  our  own 
government  dated  later  than  23  June,  and  Mr.  Gallatin’s 
powers  to  act  are  yet  unimpaired  by  any  revocation  which  he 
considers  as  authentic. 

When  the  navigable  season  here  was  finishing,  the  Neptune 
was  ordered  to  Gothenburg  there  to  wait  for  the  gentlemen; 
but  as  the  events  of  the  war  have  opened  the  mouth  of  the 
Elbe  and  the  ports  of  Holland,  they  will  perhaps  order  her 
to  Helvoetsluys  and  perform  the  journey  thither  by  land. 
The  communication  with  Holland  by  post  is  not  yet  opened 
here,  but  undoubtedly  will  be  within  a  few  days  and  in  time 
to  enable  them  to  go  in  that  direction. 

For  my  part  I  am  still  bound  up  here  in  these  “thrilling 
regions  of  thick  ribbed  ice.”  I  am  unable  to  judge  whether 
our  government  will  think  proper  to  accept  the  overture  from 
the  British  for  a  direct  negotiation,  and  if  they  should,  whether 


536 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

the  President  and  Senate  will  consider  it  expedient  to  charge 
me  with  any  participation  in  it.  The  determination  of  the 
British  government  has  released  me  from  the  responsibility 
of  a  trust  which  would  have  weighed  heavily  upon  my  mind 
had  the  negotiation  been  formally  entered  upon,  but  it  will 
be  attended  with  much  greater  difficulties  in  the  direct 
form.  If  on  our  side  it  should  be  concluded  to  make  the 
attempt,  and  I  should  be  joined  in  a  new  commission  for 
that  purpose,  I  shall  be  gratified  with  it  as  furnishing  me  the 
occasion  of  returning  to  my  friends,  my  family  and  my  coun¬ 
try;  for  the  prospect  is  faint  indeed  of  the  possibility  of 
accomplishing  any  peace  with  England  consistent  with  our 
rights  as  an  independent  nation.  But  a  good  cause  should 
never  despair  of  the  blessing  of  Providence. 

»•••••• 


TO  THE  SECRETARY  OF  STATE 
No.  125.  [James  Monroe] 

St.  Petersburg,  30  December,  1813. 

Sir: 

•  •••••• 

The  event  of  the  campaign  in  Germany  has  been  such  as 
was  to  be  expected  after  the  accession  of  Austria  to  the  cause 
of  the  allies,  and  the  defection  of  the  Princes  of  the  Rhenish 
Confederation  from  that  of  France.  By  the  sudden  and  it 
would  seem  unexpected  change  in  the  policy  of  Bavaria, 
and  by  the  junction  of  the  Bavarian  with  an  Austrian  army 
behind  the  Emperor  Napoleon,  his  army  was  placed  in  a 
situation  so  desperate  that  nothing  but  his  extraordinary 
military  genius,  which  has  never  yet  deserted  him,  could 


1813] 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


537 


have  saved  so  large  a  portion  of  them  from  the  extremity  to 
which  they  were  reduced,  and  in  the  midst  of  treachery  of 
every  description  have  effected  a  retreat,  through  a  hostile 
country,  and  through  an  host  of  adverse  forces  at  least 
three  times  more  numerous  than  his  own. 

In  the  battles  near  Leipzig,  which  continued  from  the 
15th  to  the  1 3th  of  October,  the  combined  Russian,  Austrian, 
Prussian,  and  Swedish  armies  amounted  according  to  their 
own  statement,  probably  underrated,  to  400,000  men.  The 
number  with  the  Emperor  Napoleon  did  not  exceed  150,000. 
His  loss  there  was  about  40,000,  and  with  the  remnant 
he  was  yet  to  cut  his  way  through  an  Austrian  and  Bavarian 
army  of  80,000  men  in  his  rear,  which  he  actually  accom¬ 
plished  at  Hanau,  and  reached  Mayence,  his  official  state¬ 
ments  say,  with  100,000  men.  From  Mayence  he  returned 
immediately  to  Paris.  The  headquarters  of  the  Emperors  of 
Russia  and  Austria,  and  the  King  of  Prussia,  were  transferred 
in  the  beginning  of  November  to  Frankfort  on  the  Main. 

A  corps  of  about  25,000  men  commanded  by  Marshal 
Gouvion  St.  Cyr  had  been  left  by  the  Emperor  Napoleon  at 
Dresden.  After  making  an  unsuccessful  attempt  to  effect 
their  retreat  to  Magdeburg,  they  obtained  a  capitulation 
so  favorable  that  Prince  Schwarzenberg  the  commander 
in  chief  of  the  combined  armies  refused  to  ratify  it,  and  they 
have  been  sent  as  prisoners  of  war  into  Bohemia.  The 
fortresses  of  Dantzig,  Stettin,  Modlin  and  Tamose  have  also 
capitulated. 

The  retreat  of  the  French  corps  on  the  lower  Elbe  under 
Marshal  Davoust  has  also  been  cut  off.  The  kingdom  of 
Westphalia  dissolved  itself  without  resistance,  and  a  revolu¬ 
tion  was  immediately  effected  in  Holland.  A  deputation  was 
sent  to  the  Prince  of  Orange,  who  was  in  England,  inviting 
him  to  return  with  the  offer  of  the  royal  title,  which  he  de- 


538 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 

dined.  But  he  assumed  that  of  sovereign  prince  of  the 
United  Netherlands,  probably  as  a  temporary  character 
to  be  definitively  settled  when  a  constitution  shall  be  given 
to  the  country.  The  constitution,  the  proclamations  say, 
is  to  be  prescribed  by  the  Prince  himself,  and  nothing  ex¬ 
plicit  is  announced  of  its  character,  excepting  that  it  is  not 
to  revive  the  old  constitution  of  the  United  Provinces  or 
the  office  of  Stadtholder.  All  this  of  course  is  merely  pro¬ 
visional,  and  will  eventually  terminate  in  arrangements 
under  the  sanction  and  guaranty  of  the  combined  powers, 
and  as  far  as  will  be  found  practicable  under  the  dictate  of 
England. 

The  progress  of  the  Austrian  arms  in  Italy  has  been 
slower  and  with  more  considerable  vicissitudes.  The  Vice¬ 
roy  has  however  been  generally  upon  the  defensive,  and 
has  been  retreating  to  the  Adige.  As  the  appointment  to 
the  Austrian  chief  command  has  recently  been  transferred 
to  General  Bellegarde,  it  is  probable  that  in  the  ensuing 
campaign  that  country  will  be  the  scene  of  greater  and  more 
important  exertions. 

In  Spain  the  fortresses  of  St.  Sebastian  and  of  Pampeluna 
have  surrendered,  and  Lord  Wellington  with  his  army  has 
entered  upon  the  French  territory.  So  that  France  is  at 
this  moment  invaded  at  once  on  her  northern  and  southern 
boundaries. 

The  Swiss  Confederation  have  declared  a  neutrality,  but 
it  is  said  that  this  does  not  suit  the  views  of  the  combined 
powers,  and  that  Switzerland  will  be  under  the  necessity 
not  only  of  allowing  the  passage  to  their  troops,  but  of  join¬ 
ing  their  cause  and  furnishing  a  contingent  of  men. 

Three  successive  conscriptions  of  30,000,  280,000  and 
300,000  men  have  been  authorized  in  France  since  the  month 
of  August.  Two  armies  of  100,000  men  each  are  to  be  as- 


JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS 


539 


1813] 

sembled  at  Bordeaux  and  at  Turin,  and  the  rest,  if  they  can 
be  raised,  will  doubtless  be  employed  to  strengthen  the  line 
of  defence  from  Holland  to  the  frontier  of  Switzerland. 

The  Emperors  of  Russia  and  Austria  and  the  King  of 
Prussia  have  issued  a  proclamation  at  Frankfort  preparatory 
to  their  invasion  of  France  beyond  the  Rhine.  They  renew 
the  assurance  of  their  great  attachment  to  the  happiness  of 
France,  connected  with  their  determination  to  be  also  happy 
themselves.  They  say  they  are  willing  that  France  should 
be  greater  than  she  ever  was  under  her  Kings,  and  that  they 
have  made  proposals  of  peace  to  the  Emperor  Napoleon. 
Whether  these  proposals  were  accepted  or  rejected  they  do 
not  say.  There  has  been  a  general  change  of  ministry  in 
France,  where  the  Duke  Vicence  is  now  the  Minister  of 
Foreign  Relations,  the  Duke  of  Bassano  having  resumed  the 
office  of  Minister  Secretary  of  State,  and  Count  Mole  is 
Grand  Judge  in  the  place  of  Regnier. 

Of  all  these  events,  as  well  as  of  the  several  treaties  of 
alliance  and  subsidy  between  Great  Britain  and  the  com¬ 
bined  powers,  you  will  have  more  direct  and  earlier  informa¬ 
tion  than  it  would  have  been  possible  for  me  to  give  you. 
Should  a  negotiation  take  place,  I  think  there  is  little  pros¬ 
pect  of  its  terminating  at  present,  or  even  very  soon  in  a 
peace.  The  Emperor  Alexander  has  no  expectation  of  re¬ 
turning  soon  to  his  capital,  and  he  has  just  invited  the  Em¬ 
press  to  join  him  at  his  headquarters.  She  is  to  leave  this 
city  upon  that  journey  tomorrow  morning. 

I  am,  etc. 


540 


THE  WRITINGS  OF 


[1813 


TO  ROBERT  FULTON 

St.  Petersburg,  31  December,  1813. 

Sir: 

Immediately  after  receiving  your  favor  of  19  June  last  I 
made  application  in  writing  to  the  Chancellor  Count  Roman- 
zoff,  stating  your  request  that  I  would  take  out  the  ukase 
for  your  privilege  to  build  steamboats  in  this  country.  To 
this  application  I  have  received  no  answer,  nor  is  it  possible 
for  me  to  say  when  an  answer  is  to  be  expected. 

There  is  no  standing  law  here  for  granting  patents  to  the 
authors  of  useful  inventions.  Every  grant  of  that  nature  is 
made  by  a  special  act  of  the  Emperor’s  will.  The  Emperor 
has  been  more  than  a  year  absent  from  his  Dominions,  and  it 
is  highly  probable  that  more  than  another  year  will  elapse 
before  his  return.  The  objects  which  engross  his  attention 
are  of  such  magnitude  that  it  may  be  impossible  for  him  to 
bestow  time  upon  those  of  less  pressing  urgency. 

I  have  reason  to  believe  that  after  the  promise  contained 
in  Count  Romanzoff’s  letter,  of  which  I  sent  you  a  copy,  was 
given,  there  was  an  effort  made  to  counteract  its  accomplish¬ 
ment.  I  have  understood  that  the  person  who  was  the  bearer 
of  your  letter  to  me,  who  had  seen  your  boats  and  their  suc¬ 
cess  in  the  United  States,  had  himself  a  project  of  obtaining 
an  exclusive  privilege  for  a  similar  invention,  and  made  a 
representation  that  he  had  invented  a  boat  of  the  same  kind 
and  very  much  improved  upon  yours.  I  do  not  know  that 
this  application  produced  any  effect,  but  as  the  person  has 
returned  to  Europe  and  has  been  at  the  Emperor’s  head¬ 
quarters,  I  think  it  necessary  to  give  you  notice  of  the  cir¬ 
cumstance  that  you  may  draw  your  own  conclusions. 

General  Betancourt,  who  informs  me  that  he  is  an  old  ac- 


i8i3]  JOHN  QUINCY  ADAMS  541 

quaintance  and  friend  of  yours,  is  now  in  the  Emperor’s 
service,  and  has  the  superintendence  of  the  Department  of 
Water  Communications.  It  was  upon  a  reference  of  the  first 
application  on  your  part  for  the  privilege  to  him  and  to  the 
Minister  of  the  Interior,  and  upon  a  favorable  report  from 
them,  that  the  Emperor  promised  the  privilege.  General 
Betancourt  has  repeatedly  and  very  recently  mentioned  the 
subject  to  me.  He  advised  that  you  should  immediately 
send  your  agent  and  construct  one  of  your  boats,  considering 
Count  Romanzoff’s  letter  to  me  of  which  I  sent  you  the  copy 
as  of  itself  equivalent  to  a  patent.  He  says  that  he  considers 
it  so  himself.  That  as  an  immediate  act  of  the  Emperor’s 
will  it  requires  no  other  formality,  and  that  if  it  should  fail  to 
answer  as  a  warrant  for  you  to  proceed  in  your  design,  any 
patent  or  ukase  that  you  could  obtain  here  would  prove 
equally  ineffectual.  I  place  great  reliance  upon  General 
Betancourt’s  judgment  and  equal  confidence  in  his  friendly 
disposition  to  you.  I  believe  that  he  is  aware  that  there  are 
interfering  applications  to  appropriate  to  others  the  benefit 
of  your  ingenuity,  and  he  thinks  the  best  way  to  prevent 
their  success  would  be  for  you  to  send  your  engineer  here 
without  delay,  and  to  take  the  Emperor’s  promise  already 
given  for  a  patent.  I  am,  etc. 


MAY 


Date  Due 

- - 1- 

! - - - 

- - - - — 

Demco  38-297 

