! —_—E—_ 0 AIRES am —_—  — 


| 


Topandliees, © 


OR AN 


INTRODVCTI ON 


SO THY 


VNIVERSAL LANGVAGE. 
Digeſted intotheſe Six ſeveral Books , 
Cotes, $ hryſeomyſtes, 


C hreſlaſebeia Ne eleodicailes, & 
reenigeris Philoponauxeſts. 


B Y 
Sir THoMAs Ununart of Cromartie, Knight. 


Now lately contrived and publiſhed 
both for his own urilitie, and that of all 
pregnant and ingenious Spirits, 


—_—— ——— 
— 


Chgerre querenti nonne hee jeftiſ mares " 
(us non plura cupit , quan ratio ipſa j 
Fr arprid 4 hues 
To grant him his demands were it not juſt > 
Who craves no more, then reaſon ſayes he muſt. 


TD EC Enn—__S  —_— — 


LONDON 
Printed, and are to be fold by Giles Calvert at the Black- 
ſpread- E xg le at the Weſt-end of Panir ; and by Richard 


T onvlins at the Sun and Bible near Pye-cormer. 1653. 


O—_— OT —S —_ - 


m__ 


— 


ty 


$3&02288035 208 84.5 


The Epiltle Dedicatorie, 
To No-body; 


Moſt Honourable, 
w= EY non ſupponent Lord, and Soveraign maſter 
$1 of contradictions in adjeRted terms, that un- 
1 toyes I have preſumed to tender the dedicz+ 
Wy cie of this introduction, will not ſeem 
J ſtrange co thoſe , that know how yowr con» 
a carrence did further me to the accompliſh- 
Language , unto the frontiſpeice whereof it 


rreg - 
Yew did aſlilt me in the produRtion of many ſpecial fancies , 
whoſe promulgation will perhaps, exceedingly conduce to the 
delight of the Philoſophical Reader: by your help, amidſt the 
the penurie of books , and want of learned.converſation, have 
by me been enixed ſeveral ereatiſes ; which, for their apparenc 
uiefulneſſe , and curioſity , I ſometime intend to contecrate 
to the Shrine of publique view: if none hitherto hath made 
choice of ſuch a patron 3 neither hath any till this hour affor- 
ded an invention of that kind. In things whereof the propoſed 
ſubjeR is within our reach, imitation is imbraceable:hut where 
the matter is tranſcendent , we commonly bid patterns adiew, 
that porch will aot befic a cortage , which is ſuitable to a Ca» 
thedral, nor can unuiuall dedications , misbeſcem tratars on 
an extraordinary purpole ; ſecing therefore skill in ſymmerrie 
beſpeaks an artificer and gives the contexture of a work that 
decorumw , which becomes the Author : 1 am with force of rea- 
ſon perſwaded to this eleRion , thereby to glance at the pro- 
portion berwixt your favours, and my retribution ; for fuch 
were the courteſies you conferred on me, that | could not v- 
therways chooſe but lay hold on this expedient, to teſtific my 
remembrance of them. 
When after the fatal blow , given at Forcefter , on the third 
A 3 of 


*The Epiſtle Dedicatorie. 


of Septemb. x65 1+ to the regal partie, was 5 — 
pillaged,pilfred,robbed,and rifled,and nothing a lefr me, 
fortune could diſpoil me of, fave my health alone, which in 
the croud of ſo many incident difficulties,as 1 was forced toun- 
dergo, was moſt miraculouſly preſerved : Tow then out of your 
mercie , amongſt the victorious ſoldiers ,were pleaſed to com- 
miſerate my condition. When , in horſes, armes, apparel, 
and monie, I had, inthat place, taken from me above five 
hundred pounds worth Engliſh : yew , at that time, out of 
pictie, amongſt the Presbyterians of our armie, Cid regret 
my caſe. When it was told , that amidſt the fury of the raging 
{ouldiery , 1 bad above ten thouſand crowns worth of papers 
4104s embereled , without recovery : yow from your ——_ of 
nee patien- all the great men priſoners , were ſorry at the loſe. Andilaſt 
us co- by , when, after my being brought to Lend:n , withour el» 
144%" > ther monie or goods, I had my felf, and ſeveral others, both 
4s brothers, and ſervants ( whereof not any , ſave my ſelf alone 
vl »{c- had been in that City before) to provide tor. inevery thing , 
relwr : (04 that the States allowance (which nevertheleſſe continued no 
—_— / longer,then my parole was taken for their true impriſonment) 
4. did notreach unto: And that , after many of my felfow pri- 
p10ximum, ſoners , of conſiderable fortunes at home, had received , from 
efſendiv the Scottiſh faftors, on the Exchange, in matter of borrowing 
J"**; monic, anſwers fo full of churliſhneſſe, and inhumanity , that 
©. 1 amaſhamedtheear of any man of common honeſtie ſhould 
d:b114m , hear them: then was it ( whilſt the charity of thoſe Bankers , 
j10571199 and other rich Scets men at London , by lirtle and lirtle de- 
«#7 cayed, and became ſtill che leſſe , the greater the pitch was , 
{4 /.{+,,. unto which their wealth had formerly increaſt : And that for 
-t 4:11. fix months rogether , from none of my kindred , alliance, nor 
1614: dv any other of my prerended friends in 3cor/and, I had received 
ing fo much , as the miſlion , or return of a letter ) that you (fuch 
was your magnificence) were content to ſupply my need , and 
ſi cude- furniſh me with what I lacked. 
lis, Theſe favours, Ideem my ſelf in duty the more obliged to 
commemorate , that they were beſtowed upon me, in | 
Sir 1amcs of ſome others of that nature, namely, when, a while agoe , 


F/4/s Thada feitin Law , depending againſt a Gentleman —_ 


The Bpiftle Dedicatorie: 
bour of mine, for raking fifteen in the hundred , theſe ſixteen, ,,.. ... 

ears paſt and above, and refuſing payment of the principall + ft « 
ny that the ſaid ulurie might ſtil] continve, for the which, » rite, 
there was given unto him by my Father, ſecuritie in land (by a #97 © 
preſent poſſeſſion ) worth more then thrice the monie , which [7 
my Father had received from him ; as likewiſe , for plundrin . 
from my tenants ( in my abſence ) above ewo thouſand , oy 2 pris 
five hundred pounds ſterlin worth of goods : it was then that 174 4+ 
your grace, in the ſeſſion of the land , and Committee of E- 
ſtace , there taking notice of theſe enormous wrongs , did doe |" war's 
me juſtice. Much about the ſame time , when ſome Miniſters 1.4.5. 
had maimed my rents , to ſtrengthen their own ſtipends: your {r, 9x4 
reverence , fitting in the commiſiion ofthe Kirk , were pleas #414 
ſed to take my part againſt them , and patrecinate my cauſe. "7 
Ry yowr highneſle alſo , ſitting then at the helm of cbe State | ,,;;.. 
of >citland , when a prievance for the preflure ſuſtained by 

me , was in all humility pur in betore the ſaid Committee of 
Eſtates, was 1 maintained againſt the crueltie, and indit- 
cretion of thoſe, did overrate me in the exacion of publick 

dues, And finally, when by the oppreſſion of ſome ill affec- 

ted countrey men, under pretext of Commirtee as, my vaſ- 

ials, and tenants had fuffered extreme prejudice, ſtreight 
upon the preſenting of a petition thereanent, whereof at lea(t 

a bu , at leveral times were tabled: your wildome re- 

medi plaintif , and did for my cauſe redreſle the injuries 
done unto him. 

That with theſe benevolences: as the moſt eminent effects of 

your ingenuitie,l ſhould ( as affairs then ruled) be gratificd by 
your liberalitie, was from day to day,my conſtant expeRation; 

being always perſwaded to the greater probability of my ac- 
ceptance of them that in many ſound,and wel- grounded opini- 
ons of mine, long be'ore that time, you frequently jumped with 

me; for when 1 openly ſaid, that Presbyterie was like to turn to 
a Hydral Epiſcopacie, and that the gallantry of the Eng/:/b na* 
tion would never comport with tuch a government ( which 

h was thought ſhould have been ed by all-cthe No- 
and Gentlemen of Scot{and ) you out of your goodnels, a- 

mongſt them all { being feaſible of the heavie yoke 0! the De- 


mo- 


Wy ow 


——— _____ 2 


_— -- ww. 


—— —c——_——— _—O 


_ - 


= 
—_ 


, = 
L * v ”- L 
- Mig en tt ng 


o 
- 
w-_ ———— _ 
- v2 <—_ 


The Epiſtie Dedicatory. 


mocratical tyrannie of the Kirk ) were pleaſed to juſtify my 
ſayings. Beſides this, when the intending of one thing, and 
pretending of another, was by me a thouland times foretold 
to prove Ceſtruſtive unto Scotland, and that the cauſe of God 
could not produce Diabolical effefts : 7owr holineſs, amongſt 
the Zelots of the Nation,did give way to beleeve the truth of 
both. And when moreover 1 avouched , that money ſhould 
never be held in ſuch eſtimation, that either co honeſtie, or a 
good name, any ſumme, however fo grear, ought to beprefer- 
red : Tewr diſcretion, amidit many of the Eccleſiaſtical Armie, 
did in very decd acknowledge the veritie of the [aying,although 
verbally you denyed it. And at laſt, when to be charitable to 
diſtre(ſed men, whoſe milery could not with reaſon be imputed 
to their own faulc,* was by me repreſented to be an eſpecial at 
of poodneſs, you, out of your love, amongſt the Scors/b Mer» 
chants condeicended to it. 

W hereby moſt (ſeriouſly perpending the manifold, or rather 
innumerable teſtimonies of your goodneſs, bolineſs, grace, diſ< 
cretion, wildome, liber 4l1tit, reverence, mereie, pietie, generoſi- 
tie, magwificence, love, and other unexprefiible refþe7z7, I have 
perceived to flow from your bighneſ7 in behalf of me, whether 
1 applyed my (elf to the Nobilitie, Souldierie, Gentrie, Clergice, 
or Burger degree of the Conſiſtorian partie of the Scoriſh Nati» 
on: I muſt needs promiſe ( in acquital of theſe incongrehenſe« 
ble good deeds, out of your endleſs, and immenſe bountie, fo 
unde'ervedly erogated ) whilſt I breath, to break my parole 
unto yew, to be to you diſhoneſt, and prove diſloyal to yo-w in 
my truſt, to curſe you in malicious thoughts , reproach you 
with ſcandalous words, and wrong you with cruel, and uncon- 
ſcionable deeds: to do yow injaſtice, deceive, and coſen you : to 
perſecure ye» with hatred, envie,and rancour of mind: and ac- 
cording to the in'allible rules of the Sacred Evangile,ditamen 
of reaſon, and precepts o' Philoſophie, to approve my ſelf your 
faithleſs, implacable and wicked enemie; and conſequently,to 
your contrary oppoſite ( every = | upright, true, and ho» 
neſt : and to your contradiQorie foe ( ſore body) an affetio- 
nate, truſtie, ſtedfaſt, and unakerable both Friend, and Ser- 
vant. T bomas Vrquhar:. 

The 


$8'$36S2T 
(of r0n20233T0 


The Conrencs 


Of che FirtBoo x, entituled 
NEAUDETHAUMATA. 


He Author in this firſt Book of bis Introdution 
oy diſcloſeth many excellent wvirimrer , for the 
furtherance of Literature : Fſþ cially in the 
facility of comtriving expreſſions for ans coun 
ception , the mind of man i able to aff rd, He 
YI plainly ſerterh down the analogic, tht rught 
to be bet wixt things, and words; «nd that, to make a perf & Lane 
guage, things ſemblable im na'wre, ſhould be ignifyed by word of 
« like pronunciation, He proverh al bitherts known tongues, ro be 
full of imper feftion, both b reaſon of the inſuſficiencie of their 
Alphabets, and fer that there are miny commen things, which 
cannot, Wiihom circumlocution, be expreſſed by then, Ht Cm 
Pareth the lrarned Language! With one another: giveth freely bis 
opinion of all vernacularic tongues : and demonitratath an nnj- 
verſal defell in all, and each of both the "ne, and »her R becauſe 
' of the common nece/[ity they are driven wars, of mutu il borroty« 
ing for corveniencse of eloew'tow, 

T he Author alſo, im thu Brok, utterly rejeFeth the vulgar ly 
rec. ived opinion of the origin of Languay 1, and very neatly wit x 
the eppoſeri of theſe enrious arts, where n thrre is 19 hays, He 
confureth that —_— in matter of nuntbey 1wixt wordrand 
things, Wwherewnh the ſmattrers in knowledge, wind clock (heir 
inability of groing wat every thing vis proper term; and ſhew- 
th 


The Contents, 


ith be for the advancement of Learning and Vertu, & cleari 
the mind of all prejudicat tenets, he brains, and beart ſhinld be pur = 
ged of malice,and Wilful ignwarce/he two plagues of 4 Commen - 
wealthule bad acquitals, he hath received from ſom: great men of 
hu o\vn Commrey, be but glancerh at, toincordial other by 

trias, With move reſpett in timer coming, to men of no leſſe deſert : 
& declareth what 11ury, to that deity, wats which the beavens are 
ſubſervient , is done by tho/e lazie Scialifts, who frequently ſeth 
after ſuper natural canſer, where !be natural i; ebviow to the eyes 
of our wuder /{ andings 

The Author likewiſe ſetteth frth Tm thir Back, the poſribility 
of framing a neW idiome of far greater perfettion, then any bi- 
therto ſprben, andihat the prrformanoe of ſuch an under raking 
will witbout dowb: ——— 's the benefit, and con- 
tentouent of all ingenious 5c rs. By its Logo or 
comprehenſion of all witerable Words, and ſound; arnentat, be evi. 
dencuth the wniverſality of the propeſed Language and by infalli- 
ble reaſon proveth whilſt there is no other World , but this, the 
impoſribihity of for ming any other ſuch. 

Laftly, The Anther, after bis delivery of « genuine and u- 
right gloſs, on three paſſages of Solomon, Terence, and Paul, in 
conſutation of ſome Scholiafts, Idolitzers of corrupt antiquitic tobe 
had miſ-interpreted thoſe texts, concerning the nature of new in- 
vention; maſt mani = avoncheth, that exquiſit inventions will 
never be warting, ſc long as gord ſpirits are extant on the carth : 
and, in concluding this bis firſt Book, with £xtie and fix ſeveral 
advantages, this Language bath abrve all other, expoſeth to the 
view of the judiciens Reader, many ineſtimable ſecrets , worthie 
the peruſal of the beſt wits of the time. 


The frtBoosx 


OF THE 


INTRODVCTION 


Tothe Univerſall Language, intituled 
NEAUDETHAUMATA, 


OR 
VVonders of the new Sy: scn,which, 
a5 2 Preface thereto, comprehenderh irs moſt 


the AuTt#4o « himſelf, 


Ords are the fi of things ; it being to 
ignifie thee thay were inſticured ar firſt : 
nor can they be , as ſuch, direted ro any 
other end , whether they be articulate cr 
ſnarticulate- 

KL ) 2, Allthings arc either real or rational: 
and the real, either naturall or artificial. 

3- There ought to be a proportion berwixt the ſign and 
thing ſignified ; therefore ſhould all chings , whether real or 
rationall , have cheir proper words aligned unto them. 

4. Manis called a Micrecoſme , becauſe he mav by his con- 
ceptions and words containe within him the repceientatives of 
what —_— —— — ed. 


To Seeing 


The Firſt Book. 


5 Seeing there isin mature ſuch afinity*cwixt words & thinge, 
( as there ought to be in whatſoever is ordained for one ano- 
ther) that Language is to be accounted moſt conform to Na- 
ture, Which with greateſt variety expreſſeth all manner of 
things. 

Fu As all things of a ſingle compleat being, by Arifc*/e 
into ten Claſſes were divided); ſo may the words whereby 
thoſe things are to be ſignified , be ſet apart in their ſeveral 
ſtorehouſes. 

7. Arts, Sciences , Mechanick Trades , notional! faculties, 
and whatever is excogitable by man , have their own Method; 
by vertue whereof , the Learned of theſe latter times have or- 
derly digeſted them : Yet hath none hitherto conſidered of a 
mark , w words of the ſame Faculty, Art, Trade, or 
Science ſhould be dignoſced from thoſe of adother by che ve- 
ry ſound of the word at the firſt hearing. 

8. A Tree will be known by ics leaves , a ſtone by its grit, 
a Flower by the {mel , Meats by the taſte , Muſick by the ear, 
Colours by the eye, the ſeverall Natures of things , with 
their properties and effentiall qualities, by che Intelle& : and 
accordingly as the things are un themſelves diverſified , the 
Iudicious and Learned men after he hath conceived them a- 
right , ſequeſtreth them in the Severall cels of their under- 
ſtanding each in their definite and reſpeive places. 

9. Butin matter of the words whereby thoſe things are ex- 
prefied , no Language ever hitherto framed, hath obſerved 
any order relating to the thing ſignified by them: for if tte 
words be ranked in their Al call ſeries, the things re- 

by them will fall to be in ſeverall predicaments; and 
if the things themſelves be orically claſſed , the word 
whereby they are made known will not be tryed to any Alpha- 
berical rule. 

lo, This is an imperieCtion incident to all the Languages 
that ever yet have known, by reaſon whereof, For» 
raign Tongues are ſaid to be hard to learn; and when obtai- 

cafily forgoe 

11. The ethgics of /apitey in the likenefſe of a Bull, ſhould 
be liker to that of /s metamorphoſed into a Cow, then to the 


ſtatue 


The Firſt Book. 


flatue of Bucephulas , which was a horſe : and che. piture of 
Alcibiades onght to have more reſemblance with that of Co 
ridlanns , being both handſome men , then with 'the Image of 
Therfites, who was of a deformed feature : juſt fo ſhould 
things ſemblable in Nature be repreſented by words of a like 
compoſure : and as the crue intelligible ſpecies do preſent unto 
our minds the ſimilitude of thiags as they are in the objeR ; &- 
venſo ought the words expreſſive of our conceptions to to a- 
gree or vary in their contexture , as the things themſelves 
which are conceived by them do in their natures. 

12: Beſides this imperfection in all Languages there is yet 
another , That no Language upon the face of the earth hath « 
= wh Alphabet ; one lacking thoſe letters which acother 

h , none having all, and all of them i»comn/s lacking 
ſome, But that which makes the defect ſo much che greater, is, 
that theſe \ame few conſonants and vowels commonly made 
uſe of , are never by two Nations nced after the ſame 
ſaſhion ; che French A with che , being the Greek Hr; 
and the Italian B with the Sp1niſh, the Hebrew Vau. 

13- This is that which maketh thoſe of one dominion ſa un - 
akilfal in tat non and after many yeers — 
a ſtrange eſpair attaining at any time to the 
accent of the language thereof, beciuſe as the waters of that 
ſtream cannot be wholeſome ; whoſe ſource is corrapted ; nor 
the fu fare, whereof the ground-work is ruinous: 
ſo the various manaer of pronouncing one and the me 
Alphabet in ſeveral Narrons, produce this great and lamenta- 
die obſtruction 1n the Ducipline of Languages. 

14- The G of the Latin word legir, 15 after four feveral 
manners pronounced byrhe-Engbh, French, Spaniſh , and 
Ducch : the Ch hkewife is <&:fferently ed by divers 
Nations ; ſome uttering it afrer the taſhion of rhe Hebrew 


Shin, as the French do in the word chaffeans, chaſcan, chafticr, 

chatel; or like the Greek Kappa, as in the Italian words, che + 

dere, chiezaart, cinarura; of as in /taly are founded the 

words creſchrdunr, crariarans; for fo do the Spaniſh and Enz- 

liſh pronounce it, as in the words achaque, lecbe ; chamber , 

chance: other Nations ofa As Sa AIRES at- 
3 


cr 


: 


The Firſt Book, 
ter the faſhion of the Greek xz. Nor need weto labor for ex- 
i an for there is ſcarce any hitherto recei- 

, either conſonant or vowel, which ia ſome opt and other 
taking in all Nations, is not pronounced Ky Ap or four ſe- 


veral taſhions, 

15. As the Alphabets are imperfeRt, ſorge baying but 19 
letters, others 22. and ſome 2 4, tew exceeding that number : 
ſo do the words compoied of thoſe Lerters in the ſeveral Lun- 

uages, come tar ſhort of the number of things, which to have 
the reputation of a pertet tongue, ought to be expreſſed by 
them. 

16, For ſupply of this deficiencie, each Language borrows 
from another ; nor is the prfteRteſt amongſt them, without 
being bebolden to another, in all things enunciable, baſtant to 
afford inftruction : many Aſtronomical and Medicinal rerms 
have the Greeks borrowed from the Arabian, for which chey 
by exchange have from che Grecians received payment of ma- 
ny words naturalized in their Phyſical, ical, and Meta - 
phyſical Treatiſes. As for the Latin, it oweth all ics Scienti- 
fick ditions to the Greek and Arabick : yet did the Roman 
Conqueſt give adoption to many Latin words, in both theſe 
languages, eipecially in matters 0! military diſcipline, and pru- 

"ht ff ther La ſ though 
17. And as for all 0 as yer ſpoke, to 
ſome of them be aſcribed the ti of original Ton , I may 
fafely avouch there is none of them which of it ſelf alone is able 
to afford the (mattring of an elocution fit for indoQrinati 
of us inthe precepts and maxim”"s of moral and intelletua 
vertues. 
18. But which is more, and that which moſt of all e- 

that fince the Deluge 
them quinteſenced in 
__ one ſo beficred 


The Firft Bok. 


19. Some Languages have copiouſneſs of diſcourſe , which 
are barren in compoſition : ſuch is the Latine. Others are 
compendious in expreſſion, which hardly have any fexion at 
all : of this kind are the Dutch, the Engliſh, and iriſh, 

29. Greek hath the agglurinative faculty of incorporating 
words ; yet runneth not fo ghb in Poefie 2s doth rhe Lacine, 
though far more abundant. The Heoerew Iiewife, wich its 
auxihary Dialefts of Arabick, Caldean, Syriack, Xchiopian , 
and Samaritan, compoundeth pretrily, and hath tome ttore of 
words; yet falleth ſhort by many ſtages of the Greek. 

21 + The French, Spaniſh, and lcalians, are bur Dialets of 
the Latine, as the Engliſh is of the Saxon T ongue ; though 
with this difference, that the mixture of Latine with the Gau- 
liſh, Moreſco, and Gotiſh T make up the three firſt 
Languages ; but the meer qualification of che Saxon with the 
old Brindh, frameth not the Engliſh ro the full , for thar, b 
its promiſcuous and —_— _— it conſiſterh aloof 
of all Languages : which I ſpeak nor in diſpraile thereof, al- 

ras may ———— II — a- 

id Languages fiript of what is not originally thei ow 
we (ſhould no: be able with them all, in ——_ ob weld. 
to purchaſe ſo much as our breaktaſtin a Marker, 

22. Now to return from theſe to the learned Languages ; 
we muſt acknowledge it to be very ſtrange, why, after rhou+ 
ſands of yeers continual practice in the poliſhing of them by 
men of approved faculties, there is neither in them, nor any 
other T hitherto found our, one ſingle word expreſſive 
of the vice oppoſire either to Temperance or _ in the 
defe&t; many rigid Monks, even now 1 
of the one, as Dis mop wr was of the other. OY 

23+ Butthar which makes this diſeaſe the more incurable,is, 
that when an exuberanc ſpirit would to any high reſearched 
conceit adapt a peculiar word of his own coyning, he is bran- 
ded with Incivikey, if be apologize not for his boldneſs, with 
a Uned ita dixerim parcant Cicerantans maner , lymſcs De» 

melthenss genixs, and other fuch phraſes acknowledging his 
faule of making uſe of words never uttered by others, or at 
leaſt by ſuch as were moſt renowned for eluquence. 

B 3 24+ Though 


The Firſt Book, 

24. Though Learning ſuſtain great prejudice by this re- 
ſtraint of liberty to endenizon new Citizens in the n- 
wealth of Languages, yet do 1 conceive the reaion thereof to 
proceed from this, That it mp a leſs incongruity © ex- 
preſs a thing by circumlocution, thea by appropriating a ſin- 
gl- word thereto, to tran'gre's the bounds oi the ; 
as in ArchiteRure it is eſteemed an error of leſs conſequence to 
make a circuitory paſſage from one room to another , then by 
the extravagancie of an irregular (allie, to frame projectures 
dilproportionable to the found of the nouſe, 

25. Thus is it, that as according to the of the 
plat of a co - and compottedack of its the Work- 
maſter contriveth his roofs, platforms, outjetrings, and ocher 
fuch like part#and portion of the whole : juſt ſo, conform to 
compoStocs huh odexined ae fiſt fone the ence Lignif, 
compoſitions at firſt, have 1nNgui 
hitherto been pleaſed to make uſe of the words COOEED 
gi0g. 

26. The Bonification and virtuification of Lady, Scotw's 
Hexeity, and Albedineity of S«erez are words n-——" 
thoſe that affe& the purity of the Latine diction ; if 
were demanded, what other no les conciſe would 
cnngen with the neatneſs of chat language, their anſwer 

be alrum flevitinew : fo calica maccer it is for many to 
finde ſault with what they are not able to amend. 

27. Nevertheleſs, why for to our undefſtan- 
dings the eſſence of accidents, the fluency of the form as it is i» 
fiers ; the faculry of the - habit that facilitates it, with 
many thouſands of other ſuch the tearms are not 
ſo genuine, as of the members of a mans body, or utenſils of 
his houſe ; the reaſon is, becauſe the firſt nventers of Langua- 

who contrived them for neceſlity, were not ſo profound- 
y verſed in Philoſophical quiddines, as thoſe that fucceeded 
afrer them; whoſe kiterature increaſing, procured their excur- 
ſion beyond the repreſencatrves of the common objects, imagy 
ned by their foretarbers. | 

28. I bave known ſome to have built houſes for necedliry, 
having no other aime before their eyes, duc barely to dwell 


The Firſt Puok. 
in them; who nevercheleſs in a very ſhort ſpace were ſo en- 
riched, that after they had caken pleaſure to poliſh and adorn, 
what formerly _ bur rudely ſquared, their moveables (© 


multiplyed v , that they would have wiſhed they had 
made them os large extent. M 


19. Even fo though theſe Languages may be refined by 
ſome quaint derivatives and witty comp 1ſicions; like the ſtri- 
king forth of new lig"\ts and doors, outjerting of Crenels, cre- 
Ring of prickets, barbicans, and fuch like various ſtructures 
upon one and rhe ſame foundation; yer being limited to a cer- 
tain baſis, beyond which the verſed in them muſt not paſs, they 
cannot roam at ſuch random as otherwiſe they might, had their 
La been of a larger ſcope ar firſt, 

30. albeit Larine be far better poliſhed now , then ic 
was in the dxys of Emnixe, and Liviu Anaronicas, yet had the 
Latiniſts at firſt been ſuch Philoſophers as eferwand! they were, 
it would have attained to a great deal of more perfeRtion then 
it is at for rhe 

31. What I have delivered in freedome of the learned Lan- 
guages, I would not have wreſted to a ſiniſter ſeaſe, as if 1 
meanr any thing to their diſparagement; for truly I think the 
time well , which boyes in their tender yeers employ 
rowards the ing of them, in a ſubordination to the excel- 
lent things that in are couched. 

33. Buri I muſt acknowledge my averſeneſs of 
opinion from thoſe who are ſo ſuperſtirioally zddited to 


CE CONTENTS enough to ſpeak 
them, alchouph they knew nothing elſe ; which is an A 
worthy rebuke, ſeeing Philoſophia ſunt rer, non verba; and that 
whatever the ſignes be, the chings by chem ſignified ought (til! 
to be of greater worth. 

33- Yor it boots not ſo-much, by what kind of tokens any 
matter be brought into our minde, as that the things made 
known anto us, by ſuch repreſentatives, be of ſome conſidera - 
ble value: not much unlike the Innes-a-court-gentlemen at 
Landon, who uſurl _— their commons at the blow - 
ing of a horn, are berter pleaſed with fuch a figne (fo the fare 
be good) then ifthey were warned to courſer cates, by the 
ſound of a Bell or Trumpet, 34-Ano- 


The Firſt Book, 


14+ Another reaſon eth me thereto, which is this, 
That io this frozen Climate _—— that is 
not poſſeſſed with the opinion,that not only the ſ 
med Languages,but a great many ggher,wbom they callOrigi- 
nals( whereof they reckon ten or e in , and forme 
_ 9» bm ne x7 ry hr y weep Surry wy 
confuſion of Babel, immediately from God, by a miracle, infu- 
ſed into men;being induced to believe this,not ſo much for that 
they bad not peruled the interpretation of the Rabbies on that 
text, dec ' | 7 cg the __ 
were involved by diverſity of ſpeech, to have proceeded 
_— elſc, but their various and diſcrepant pronunci of 
one and the (ame La 7 mp nr ap ps 
be of an invention ſo tublune, that naturally the wit of man 
was not able to reach their com 

35- Some believe this ſo pertinacioully that they eſteem all 
men infidels that are of another faith ; whilſt in che mean 
while , 1 may confidently aſſever , that the aſſertors of ſuch a 
tenet , doe thereby extremely diſhonour God , who doing 
whatever is done , by nature , as the ations of an Ambaſſe- 
dor ( as an Ambaſſador ) are to be thoſe of the Sove- 
raign that ſent him , would not bave the power he hath given 
co narure to be dilclaimed by any , or any thing ſaid by us in 
derogation thereo!. 

36+ SHould we deny our obedience to the juſt decree of an 
inferiour judge , eter ag wan 2 ee 5b ere 
ved, did not pronounce the ſentence? 5 Ty yu 

ich to dechne, 


have their power, evenin great maters ; wh 

ſaying, they have no authority , ſhould make the averrer fall 
within the compaſs 01 « breach of the Starute called ſcanda/ve 
magnarums. 

37. There are of thoſe with us, that wear gowns and 
beards longer then ever did Ariftetle and Xſculapinr ; who 
when dorks anEclipſe of the Sun or Moon, or 4 comet in 
the aire, !|raight would delude the commons with an opinion 
that thoſe things are immediately from God ; for the fins of 
the people ; as i' no naturall cauſe could be praduced for fuch 
like appariyons- 


35+ 1 


The Firft Book. 


z3$ -— who for his cunning c 
ance in the Feats of Leger Demaine , was branded, by ſome 
of that Fry , for Sorcery , and another ( for being able , b 
vertue of the Maſſon word, to make a Maſſon, whom he ha 
never ſeene before, without ſpeaking , or any other apparent 
ligne , come , and falute him ) reputed , ns Arena vn 
Litter, to have had « familiar, their groſſe ignorance mo- 
ving them | to call that ſupernaturall , or above the na- 
_ reach of meere man , whereof they knew not the 
caule. 

39 By which meanes, Mathematicall Thaumaturgies , Op» 
ticall magick , ſecrets of nature, and other Philoſophicall 
myſteries , being eſteemed to be rancke Witchecraſt, they 
ruine the beſt part of Learning , and make their owne unskill- 


tullnes Judge , to paſle an Irrevocable ſentence 
upon hog md, of knowledge. 


40 The matter notwithſtanding would be of leſfe danger , 
were this the worſt : but to this ignorance of theirs,is conco- 
mitant ſo much wickednes,that when an action of any extraor- 
| is done, although by a man of a moſt ap« 
goons converſation & to a very good end, ſuch ——_—_— 
diſeaied, or releeving men out of apparent peril, yet1 
the tauſe thereof be unknowne to them , they will anlel 
charirable , as to attribute the effect to a good Angel, albeit 
their faich obliege chem to beleeve , that the Spirits belonging 
to any of che nine celeſtial] orders , are , tor the atchievement 
of tuch maſteries,in nothing inferior to the infernall Demons : 
but inſtead of Gebriell, Raphbarll, Michacll , and ſuch good 
Spirits, by whom(I think) it is more prob ble, an honeſt man 
would be aſſiſted, in works of a ſtrange, and hidden operagi+ 
on , then by the bad ones, they aſcribe the wonderfullnes ol 
the exploit, to the inſpiration Beelwabub, Abiden, Lucis ”, 
or ſome vther of the F ends of Hell ; ſo malevolently « 
aſperſe the reputation of gallant men, whoſe deeds ſurpais 
their Capacity. 

41 Truly , thoſe ewo qualities of Ignorance , and wicked- 
nes conjoyned , are of ſuch pernicious conſequence , that no 
Nation, mr wherein they get tgoting To 

A 


The Firſt Book. 


able long to ſubſiſt , for rapine , coveteouſnes, and extortion, 
flowing trom the one , as from the other , doth «ll manner 
of Baſenes, Puſillanimity , and cowardize, ignorance affe- 
Rerh the Braine , and wickednes the Heart: Yet both the 
Braine, and Heart of « common weale , by the miſchei- 
ouſly vnskillfull, and illicerately , malicious, are equally 


depraved. 
r” ſeeing vniverſa- 


42 For remedy of fo generall a Calamity 
lity bath its exiſtence in individualls , would each amend but 
one, the totall would be quickly rid of this Lamentable infer» 
ion. 

43 Therefore, finceever I underſtood any thing , know- 
ing that the we'fare of the Body of a , confiſteth 
inthe intirencs of its noble parts, I alwayes endeavoared to 
employ the beſt of my Brain, and Heart towards the furthe- 
—_—_— Honour of that Country , unto whichl did owe 
my 

44 In proſecuting whereof , as the heart is primmuns vivent 
ſo was it my heart, which, in my younger years, before my 
braines were ripened for eminent ings , gave me the 
courage for adventuring in a forrainCh ce © enter the 
Liſts againſt men of 3 (everail nations , to vindicate my native 
Country frem the Calumnies , wherewith they had 
it , wherein it pleated God fo to conduRt my fortune , af. 
ter I had disarmed them, they in fuch fort acknow their 
Error , and the obligation they did owe me , for fparing their 
Lives, which juſtly by the Law of Arms I might have taken, 
that in Lieu of three enemies , that formerly were, 1 
acquired three conſtant Friends , both to my felfe , and my 
compatriots , whereof , by ſeverall gallant teſtimonies , they 
gave evident proote , to the Improvement of my Countreys 
credit, in many occaſions. 

45 Army Heart, bath been thus devoted to the love of 
my native foile , ſo have my Braines , to the Honour thereot 
diſcharged ſo much duty , that berwixt what is printed , and 
what ready for the preſſe , 1 have fet forth above a bundred 
ſeverall Bookes , on Subjects never hitherto thought upon by 


any. 
46. Let 


The Firſt Book. 


46+ Let no man think , that Thave ſpoke this in hope of ._ 
future benefit , or by way of regret, 1 ſhould have faild ther. **-*.*- 


at. F2.7 6: 
(6.57.45, 


of in times paſt ; vertue ( in my eſtimation ) whether morall, 
or intellectual , carrying alwayes along with it a recompence 
ſufficient : nor yet out of pride , or vaine glory in extolling of 
my own praiſes, which ( as willingly as to live ) 1 would have 
{mothered , but that the continuall receiving of bad offices , 
for my good intentions , hath wrought this excurſion our of 


my pen. 

47+ Could any man imagine , 1 ſhould have been pages 
out amongſt all thoſe of Scorland , to fuffer molt prejudice, 
without z Cauſe ; that the wickedeſt of all the Land, ſhould 
be permitred to poſſeſſe the beſt part of my Inheritance , 
vader colour of alaw by meer iniquity : and other , lictle bet- 
ter then he , to gape after the remainder, without any faule of 
mine. 

48.who would think, that, ſome of my Tenants(whillt I was 
from home ) being killed, and neer upon three thouſand 
ſterlin worth of Goods taken from them, by a pack of villaines, 
who could pretend for their robery no other cxcuſe , Sue that 
they had been plundered by others, no reparation or juſtice 
ſhould be granted, although oftentimes demanded : that I 
ſhould be extorſed , in matter of publique dyes , beyond any 
of my neighbours : that a garriſon ſhould be placed within 
my houſe , and kept there ten months cogether, to my almoſt 
utter undoing , upon no other pretence , but that the ſtance 
thereof is ſtately, and the houſe it ſelfe of a notable good Fa- 
brick, and contrivance, and in the mean while, a party both 
of horſe and foot remain nevertheles quartered upon my lands 
till che remoteſt Highlands ſhould pay their ſeſſe-mony : that 

| Gariſons, beſides my own, ſhould by parties inforce 
me, upon their Governours bare tickets, to furniſh them 
with what proviſions they pleaſed, and yet — es de 
allowed unto me, ak | a Bill to that purpoſe 
to the Scors Commitree of Eſtates , 23 1did forthe quartering 
of ſeverall Troops of borſe , for mavy months toge: her, with- 
out any allowance. 
49+ Theſe grievous preſſures with many other, and as 

C2 many 


T1 


The Firſt Bock, 


many more I have ſuſtained by the miniſtry ofthe Land , 
whereof I make account in the large treatiſe very ny rm 
to give notice more at length, have occaſiond this digrefſion 
in a part,which likewite having proceeded from a ſerious con- 
ſideration of the rwo aforeſaid ſcurvie quallities, that move the 
Inhabitants of this Ile to run every foot to ſupernavural cauſes, 
engageth me to lay, that as it is a maxim in Philoſophy, thac 
entia wm ſunt mu 'riplicandsa ſine neceſſitate» Io : that it is no 
leſſe in congruity to avouch , that a thing hath miraculouſly 
been denedy (30d , or that for atchievement thereo! the help 
of an evillSpirit { becauſe of hig rs. > of more experi- 
ence , then man } hath been required thereto, when , inthe 
mean while perhaps , the performance ofit , by ſecondary 
means of an ordinary working,is obvious to any that have the 
dexterity to open his eyes to iceethe truth. 

50+ For which cauſe, they are much to blame , that think 
it impoſſible for any man naturally to frame a language ot 
greater perfeRtion then Greek , Hebrew , or Latine. 

51. For who, in ſtead of affording the true cauſe of a thing, 
cnc_—_ runs to miracles, tacitely acknowledgeth that 
God naturally cannot do it : wherein he commicteth blaſphe- 
mie, as that Souldier may be accounted guilty of contumacie 
and diſobedience, who rejeting the Orders wherewith an in- 
feriour Officer is authorized to command him, abiolurely refu- 
ſeth compearance,unleſs the General himſelf come in perſon to 
require it of him, 

52+ Asthere is a poſlibiliry ſuch a Language may be, ſo doe 
I chiak it very requiſite ſuch a Language were, for affor- 
ding conciſeneſs, and abundance of expreſlion. 

53+ Such as extol! thoſe Languages moſt are enforced ſome- 
times to ſay, that Laborant penuria verborum ; and thereunto 
ITY ſubjoyn this reaſon, Que plares ſunt re1 quan 
verba. 

54. That is ſoon ſaid ; and, ad paxca reſpicientes facile cxun- 
tiaw, But here I ask them, how they come to know that there 
are more Things then Words, taking Things ( as in this ſenſe 
= taken ) for Things wniverial; becauſe there is 

no word ipgken, which to the conceit of man is not able to 
re 


- 


The Firſt Book, 
repreſent more individuals then one, be it Sun, Moon, Phoenix, 


or what you will, even amongſt Verbs, and Syncategoremati- | 


cal ſignes,which do lu for the lities of things: 
JONES Dong ign of an univerſal ching; Peter 
ſignifying eicher this Peter, or that Peter ; and any whatever 
name, ſurname , or title, being communicable to, one and 
many, 

55+ T bus though both words and thoughts, as they are 
ſigns, be univerſal; yer do I believe that thoſe who did attri- 
bute leſs univerſality to words then things, knew not definire- 
ly the full number of words taking words for any articulate 
pronunciation. 

56+ Nay, 1will go further : There is no Alphabet in the 
world, be the Calculator never ſo well «11d in Arithmetick, 
by vertue whereof the exa&t number of words may be known ; 
becauſe that number muſt comprehend all the combinations 
done, Fang lever be enaring nd cenymeniy by ao A 

one, if any wanting ; 4 by no A 

phaber as yet framed, whomia ( as | have ready fad in the 
ewelfth Article) there is a deficiency of many letters. 

7. The Univerſal Alphabet therefore mult be firſt concei- 

, before the exa of that computation can be attained 
untos 

(8. Then is it , when havi 
tive of all themerde hemend 


couched an Al materis- 
of man, with its whole imple- 
ments, is able to pronounce, and bringing ail cheie words with. 
in the ſyſteme of a » Which, by reaſon of its logopan» 
dochie,may deſervedly be intituled, The Kniverſal Fonger,that 
nothing will better merit the labour of a ical Arith- 
metician, then, after due enumeration, h5xc inde, to appatiate 
the words of the Univerſal Language with rhe things of the 
Univer 


$9. The ana ie therein *twi xt the fi _ | 
ed boldi m_— — » that as, accolinges i wr 
there can be no more worlds but one, becauſe all che  marcer 


whereof worlds can be compoſed, is in this : 'ſo-cantbere be 
no Univerſal Language but this 1 am about to di unto the 
world, becauſe all the words enyacia ble ate ig it contai 


60. If* 


4 


AY. 
- 


The Firſt. Book, 

60, 1f any officious Critick will run to the omnipotency-of 
God for framing more worlds, « according to the common 
ſaying, N orhing « impoſſible 10 God, that implies not a con- 
tradition ) ſo muſt he have recourſe tothe ſame omniporent 
power for furniſhing of man with other ſpeech-rools then his 
rongue, throat, root of the mouth, lips, and teeth , before the 
us as NY of another Univerſal Language can be war- 
pegs / 

64, That 1 ſhould bit upon the invention of that, for the 
ſurcherance of Philoſopby,:and other Diſciplines and Arts , 
which never hitherto hath been ſo much as —_— upon 
by any ; aad that in a matter of ſo great extent, as the expreſ- 
ſing of all the things in the world, boch in themſelves ations, 
ways of doing, ſituation, icles, relations, Connexions, pa* 
thertick interpofitions, and all other appurtenances to a eres 
clocution, withour bei ing to any Language in the 


- 62. -But,poor ſouls, they underſtand not that in the paſſage 
of Sclemen is meant, that there is no innovation in the efſence 
of natural chings; all eranſmutations on the ſame marrer, be. 
ing into forms, which, as they differ from ſome, fo have an ef- 
arm je > rr rs br tor 
63% when ic was » Beware Phils , 
tan v3 1 oat born Fe rates, rh rats: 
of 1 know not what,corrupt the channels of the truth, and per- 
Cote Er Ee av ates 
64. As | erence Scipio conched 
ehem,or himiel they ough: to be infered rether as reftimo. 


-cies of neat Lacine , 
ties. 


65- iIfrhere hath been no new thing under the Sun, accor - 


The FirſÞ Book. 


ding to the adulterate ſenſe of thoſe Priſtinary Lodrocks, How 
comes the invention of Syllogiſms to be atrribured ro Arif orte, 
that of the Sphere © Archiavede 1, and Loganithms to N 2per ? 
Ie w ee wh theo, ——_— , hae found bur Gan- 

wder Art of Priating; ele rwo men lived at- 
- the deceaſe of Solomon, : 

66. Had there been Canon in Solomons dayes, Riboboum 
(by all appearance)would have made nfe of ther for the reco- 
very of his joberitance ; nor had ſome mention, of Artillery 
been omited ia the Books ofthe Afectbibert. = 

67. Pancereds's Treatile de nwoe adinyperris ( nlthough Po- 
lyder Virgs/ were totally ) would be, had there been no 
new thing ſince S-/owon penn'd Zrelefiafter, but as a diſcourſe 
oe fn ng remiiaiicences, and calling to thind fone forryerly 
loſt fancies. 

68. Truly1 am ——_ opinion of thoſe Ar- 
chaomanetick Coxcombs , that I really think, there will al- 
wayes be new inventions , where there are excellent ſþi. 


rits. | 

, 69+ 7 — 1. hae Trif- 
otetrail Trigonometry ility of tion by repreſen- 
ratves of letters and fyiladles; the proving of the equipollencie 
and oppoſition both of plain and modal enunciations by rules 
of Geometry, the uniolding of the chiefeſt parrs of Philoſophy 


a coatinuated | Oy and above « hun- 
7 different fubjeRts , the conceie of 


i 
dred other ſeveral on 
ſo much as one whereof never entered into the brains of any 
before my fel! ( many of them have been loſt at #or- 
ceftar- fight : ) ſo am 1 confident, char others after the, may 
fall upon ſome ſtrain of another kind never, before that, drea- 
med upon by thoſe of npes. 5 

70. Now tothe end the Reader may be tore enamored of 


dp > rr non bliſh a Grammar and Lexi- 
con, I ſer down ſome few qualities and advantages 


peculiar to it felt, and which no Language eVe ( although all 
other concurred with it) is able to reach unto. { 
71+ Firſt, There is not a word utterable by the mouth of 


man, which in this language hath not a —_— 


_ 
d a —_—_— - - 
— - _ 


-— a 


A— = 


© eo wood. Fe S4.- ——— + — Ct. 


The Firſt Bock. 


by it ſelf ; fo that the allegation of Bliteri by the Sammuliſts, 
will be of wall valid | 
72+ Secondly, Such as will harken ro my- inftruRions , if 
ſome ſtrange word be to chem , whereof there are 
thoulands of millions, deviſeable by the wit of man, 
which never hitherto by any breathing have been uttered, ſhall 
be able, a h he kaow not the ultunate fignification there- 
of, to declare what part of ſpeech it is; or if «a Noun, unto what 
redicament or clais it is to be reduced ; 'wherher ir be the 
hen of a real or notional thing, or ſomewhat ing me- 
chanick Trades in their Tools, or tearmes; or if real, 
whether natural or artificial, compleat, or incompleat ; for 
words here do ne for the things which they ſignifie ; as 
when we ſee my Generals picture, we ſay, Give any 
Lord General. | 
I} { Berta s This world COU two hundred 
a prime radices, upon whi are branched : 
for better underſtanding whereof, with all its 
boughs, ſprigs, and ramelets, 1 have before my Lexicon fer 


down the diviſion thereof ( ing uſe of 
into ſo many Cities, which ne fabGndet into ſtreets, 2 


gain into lanes, thoſe into houſes, theſe into ſtories , whereof 
each room ſtandeth for a word ; and all theſe ſo methodically, 
that who obſerreth my precepts therein , ſhall ar the firſt 
hearing of a word, know to what City it belongeth, and con- 
ſequently not to be | nr of ſome general ſignification 
thereof, till after a moſt exa&t prying into all its lerrers, finding 
the ſtreet, lane, houſe, ſtory, and room thereby denorared, he 
punRually hit upon the very proper thing it repreſents in its 
moſt ſpecifical Ggnification. | 

74. Fourthly , By vertye of adjeRtitious fyllabicals annexi- 
ble ro Nouns and Verbs, there will ariſe of ſeveral words,what 
com , what derivative, belonging in this ro 
da noun hairy, benedcopiccrs _ 

aint9 all the parts 0 Anthe mo nguape 
Fe the world beſides = bv 


75+ Fiſthly, So energy to every meaneſt conſticative 
partofa Coda ho Lingregeis cpprnyricned, chat one word 
thereof, 


The Firſt Bok, 


thereof, though bat of ſeven ſyllables ac mot ſhallcompeetien 
that which no Language elſe in the world is able to expres in 
fewer then fourſcore and fifteen ſeveral words ; and that nor 
only a word here and there for maſteries ſake, bur ſeveral mil- 
lions of ſuch; which, to any initiated in che rudiments of my 
Grammar, ſhail de caſie to frame, 

76. Sixthly, In the caſes of all che declinable narts of fpeech, 
it __—_ all other Languages what ſoever : fr whilſt others 
have five or ſix at moſ?, it hath ten, beſides the nomina- 
Uve. 

77+ Seventhly, There is none of the learned Languages , 
but hath ſtore of Nouns defective of ſome caſe or other, but in 
this Language there is no Heteroclite in any declinable word, 
nor redundancie or — _ SHOE 

8. Eighchly, Every word ca of number, is better pro- 
ded eheSeoich'in this Language, then by any ocher : for 
inſtead of two or three numbers which others have, this af- 
p_——_; to wit, the ſingular, dual, plural, and re- 


79+ 06s I Tr ee — . wheretn 
ſome words lack one number, and ſome another : tor here each 
=_ or perſonal part of ſpeech is endued with all the num- 
$. 
80. Tenthly,ln this Tongue there are eleven genders;where- 
in likewiſe it exceedeth all ocher Languages. Fw 
81. Eleventhly, Verds, Mongrels, Participles, and Hybrids, 
have all of them ten T enſes, beſides the preſent ; which num- 
ber, no clic is able to attain to. 
$2.1 , Though there be many conjugable words in 
other Languages deieftive of Tenſes, yer doth this Tongue al- 
low of no juch anomaly, bur h all to each. 
$3- Thicteenchly,1n lieu of fix Moods which other Langua- 
gonna moſt, this one injoyeth ſeven in its conjugable 
w 
84. Fourteenthly, Verbs here, or other conj ih: of 
ſpeech, admit of no want of Moodes , as do Langua- 


ms. Fifteenchly, lachis Langoage, a 


_ 


———— 
I ns non 


— << 


— 


— —— 


= - £4 Sons. _ _—_— Alm— - i Uninlat, TY 
_ 


The Firſt Buok, 


ples have four 6 ra. never heard that ever any 
other Language had above 

$6. Sixteenthly, No other Tongue hath above eight or 
n'ne parts of (perch; bur this hath ewelve. 

$7. Seventeenthly, For variety of dition in each part of 
ſpeech, it ſurmounteth all the La in the world. 

$8. Eighreenchly, Each Noun , or Verb, may begin 
or end with a Vowel or Conſonant, as to the peruſer hall 
ſcem molt expedient. 

89. Nineteenthly, Every word of this Language declina» 
ble or indeclinable hath at leaſt ten ſeveral _—_ 

90. Twentiethly,cach of theſe f 's,in circum» 
ſtance of che ſignification, di from the reſt. 

91. One and twentiethly, Every faculty, ſcience, art, trade, 
or diſcipline,requiring many words for expreſſion of the know- 
ledge thereof, hath each its reſpeive root from whence all 
the words _ delonging are —_ FA 

92. 1wo ewentiethly, In this Language oppole 
members of a diviſion have uſually the ſame letters 1a the 
words which ſignifie them; the initial and finahlerrey being all 
one, with a tranſmuration only 1n the middic ones» 

93+ Three and rwentiethly, Every word inthis Language 
ſignifieth as well backward as forward ; and however you in- 
vert the letters, ſtill ſhall you fall upon fignificam words : 
whereby a wonderful facility is obtained in making of Ana» 


rams. 

®'94- Fourand twentiethly, There is no in the 
world, but for every weed choca? it will a you another 
of the lame fignification, of ſyllables with ir, and de- 


| — ot WEIR with vowels or conlonancs as it 
oth. 
,by vertue hereof, there is no Hex- 


95- Five and ewentiethly 
amacer, Elegiack, Saphick, Aiclepiad, lambick, or any other 
kind of Latine or Greek verie, but I will afford you another in 
this La of the ſame fort, without a ſyllable more or le(s 
in the one then the other, Spoade anſwering to Speade, dattil 
to de7il, coſure to ceſure, and each foot to other, with all uni 
formity unaginadle. 


96, Six 


The Firſt Book. 


96: Six and ewentiethly, As it rrottech eaſily with 
metrical feer, {d at the end ofthe career of each line, bath irc 
the dexterity, after the manner of our Engliſh and other ver- 
naculary T ongues,to ſtop with the cloſure of a rime; in the 

whereot, the well-verſed in chat Language ſhall bave 


ſo little labour, that for word therein he ſhall be able to 
CRT monoſyllables of the fame 


furniſh at leaſt five 
termination with it, 

97. Seven and ewentiethly, in tranſlating verſes of any ver+ 

r ſuch as leakion, French, Spaniſh, Slavonian, 
eo ey Te 
or and in the cloſure of 
cach line a rime, as inthe nal. 

98. Eight and ewencierbly, by this Language, and the Let- 
rers thereof, we may doe fuch admirable feats in numbers, that 
no cyphering can reach its compendiouſneſs : for whereas the 
way of numbring by thoulands of thouſands of thou- 
ſands but confuſe the hearers underſtanding; 
to remedy which, | deviſed, even by cyphering ic ſelf , a farre 
more exa&t manner of — as in the Toatife of Arith- 
motick which 1 m—_—_ ready for the Preſs,is evidently apparent ; 
This concile words tor numbering, that 
the number Poets down whereof, would require in vulgar 
Arithmetick, more in a row then there might be grains 
ef ſand coaineble from che center of the earth, to the higheſt 
heavens, is in it expreſſed by wo letters. 


99. Nine no —_— nm p__ wor 
writing, a adding o 
Mere Oo numbers, which is a moſt Aer le» 


cret. 
100. Thirrierh! 3 An vs 9 vowels,and the 
conſonants ſtand for all the refults ot the lifm, from ten 
to eighty one, incluſively; wheredy many pretty Arithmerical 
tricks are 

10t. One aad thirrierhly, in the denomination of the = 


Sears, it affordeth the moſt ſignificant way 
oy le word alone which repreſencs oo —_ ear youdul 
_ 


aagucade, eater with the longace 


The Firſt Bock, 


_ both in degrees and minutes of the Star that is expreſ- 
dy it, 

102. Two and thirtiethly, by one word in this Language, 
we ſhall underſtand what degree or what minute of the degree 
of 2 ſign in the Zodiack, the Sun or Moon, or any other planet 
is 1. 

103- Three and thirtictMly, as for the year of God, the 
moneth o that yeer, week of the moneth, day of that week , 
partition of the day, hour of that partition, quarter and half 
quarter of the hour, a word of one or two lyllables at moſt in 
this Language will expreſs it all to the full. 

104. h__ and thirtiethly, in this Language, alſo, words 
expreſſive 0! h-rbs, repreſent unto us with what degree ofcold, 


moiſture, heat, or drinefs they are qualityed; t with 
ſome other property diſtinguiſhing them other 
herbs. 


105, Fiveand thirtiethly, in matter of Colours, we ſhall 
learn by words in this the proportion of light, ſha- 
dow, ns. darkneſs ——_—_— yp «þ "gh 

106- Six and thirtierhly, in the compoſition of ſyllables by 
vowels and conſonants, it affordeth the apteſt w that can 
be imagined, for expreſſing how many vowels and conſonants 
any fy fable is compounded of, and how placed in priority and 
ſicuation to one another. Which ſecret in this \is EX» 
ceeding neceſſary, tor anderſtanding the vigour of derivatives 
in their variety of ſignification, 

107. Seven and thirtiethly, for attaining to that dexterity 
which A«bridares King of Pont we was laid to have, incalling 
all his ſoldiers of anArmy of threeſcore thouſand men, by their 
names and ſurnames, this Language will be ſo convenient, that 
if a General, according to the Rules thereof , will give new 
names to his (ouldiers, whether Horſe, Foot, or Dragoons, as 
the French uſe to do to their by their nowr de guerre, 
he ſhall be _ _ firſt hearin o_ word that 
the name of a ſouldier, to know of what Brigade , Regiment, 

Troop, Company, Squadron, or Diviſion be is; and whether 
he be of the Cavalry, or of the Foot; a ſingle Souldicr, or an 


Offcer,or belongiog to the &rtillery orBaggage: which device, 
in 


The Fir/? Bok. 


in my opinion, is not unuſeful for thoſe great Captains that 
would endear them(clves in the favour of tlie Souldiery. 

108. Eight and thirtiethly, in che contexrure of nouns, pro- 
nouns, and prepoſital articles united tugether, it adminiſtrerh 
many wonderful varieties of Laconick expreſſions, as in the 
Grammar thereof ſhall more at large be made known uato 


«— Nine and thirtiethly, every word in this Language is 

ſignificative of a number z becauſe, as words may be increaſed 

by addition of letters and ſyllables ; io of numbers is there « 
rn nf fans. 

110. Fourtiethly, in this Language every number, how 
great ſoever, may be expreſſed by ba word. - 

111. One and fourtiechly, As every number efſencially 
differeth from another, fo ſhall the words expreſſive of ſeve- 
rall numbers, be from one another diſtinguiſhed. 

112+ Two and Fourtiethly, No Language butthis hath in 
its wo'ds the whole number aharery that , and 
five and ewenty conſonants; by which means isno word 
eſcapes the latitude thereof. 

113. Three and fourtiethly, As its iaterje&tions are more 
numerous, fo arc more emphatical in their reſpeQive ex- 

onof paſſions, that part of ſpeech is in any other 
nguage whatſoever. 

1 14- Four and fourtiethly, The more ſyllables there be in 

any one word of this Language, the manyer ſeveral ſignifica- 
|= with which propriety no other Language is en- 
dowed, 
115. Five and fourtiethly, All the ſeveral genders in' this 
Language, are as well competent to verbs as nouns : by vertue 
whereot, at the firſt ucrering of a verb inthe active voice, you 
=p Yn a 
beaſt, or any thing inanimate, ( and ſo thorow the other five 
genders) that doth the aRioa : which excellencie is alcogerher- 
peculiar unto tha Languz 

116+ Sin and forgery, In this Language there is an arr, 
aver whereby Jorexprſing al wanne of i000 great 
averd; w or all manner of aQtions, a 
facility is attained unto: ND 


7he Firſt Back, 


117+. Seven and fourtiethly, To all manner of verbs, and 
many (ynca ical words, is allowed in this Language a 
flexion by Cates, unknown to other Tongues , thereby to re- 
preſent unto our underſtandings more compendious expreſſi- 
ons then is poſſible ro afford by any other means. 

118, Eight and fourtiethly, Of all Languages, this is the 
moſt compendious in complement , and conſequently , fitteſt 
tor Courtiers and Ladies. 


119. Nine and fourtiethly, For writing of Miſsives, Letters 
effrece, end elterher menneoafiipiſites, backer ſerious or 
otherways, it affordeth the compaReſt ſtile of ge 
inthe world , and therefore pare ter Arne, 
be learned by Seareſ-men and Merchanes "El 

120. Fiftiethly, No in matrer 0 and Ej 
culations to 4 God Nie, for concifeneef expretii- 
on,to compare with it; and therefore, of all other, the moſt fir 
for the uſe of Church-men , and ſpirits inclined to devoti- 
on 

121+ One and fiſtierhly, This Language bath a modifics- 
tion of the tenſe, whether —_ =_ future, of 
curious invention for couching muc matter in few words, that 
n—_ gu my" 

122. Iwo ethly, is NOT & proper name in 
Country of the world, formhch thi _ 
peculiar word, withour being 1ng to any other. 

<= 90 A meg} og 

ing to this Language, there is not a Letter whi NOT a 
E kiee ſignification by it ſelf. 

124- Four and fifriet - 
do all of them ſignifie by their monoſyllables ; which no word 

in any other Language doth, ex »f:1x70, bur the compound 
ones: for though the ſyllabical parts of exlex ſeparately ſigni- 
fie as in the compound ; yer thoſe of hows doe it not, nor 
thoſe of dre , or d:vec, as in the whole :and fo icis inall 
Languages except the ſame : for chere are in the'tralian.and 
Latine Tongues, words of ten, eleven, -or ewelve ſyHables, 
whereof not one tyllable by ir ſelf doth fignifie any thing 
at allin that Language, of what it doth in the m_y 


The Firſt Book. 
adoleſcenturiati ſimamente, eabs litndinitatibus, oc. 

ye and fiftierhly, all che Languages in the world will 
be beholding co this, and this to none. 

126+ Six and fiftiethly, there is yet another wonder in this 
Language, which alchough a little rouched by the by in the 
fiſtie eighth article of this Preface, 1 will mention yet once 
more z and it is this, That though this language have advan- 
of all other, ie 1s impoſlible any order in crne coming fur- 
its becaulc; as I bave already faid, it c henderh, firſt, 
all words ible ; and then, in matter of che obliquity of 
the caſes and tenſes, the contrivance of undeclinable parts,and 
right [7 of vowels and conionants, for diſtinguiſhing of 
various ligoifications within the latitude of letrers, cannot be 
afforded a way fo 1ent, 

1 27. Seven and ftticrhly, the greateſt wonder of all, is,that 


of all cbe gev in the world, it is eafieſt ro lexrn ; a boy 
often | , being able to attain to the knowledge there- 
of ia moneths ipace ; becauie there are in it many 'acih - 


ITT rt An tn: bur ir 


and fifrierbly, ſooner ſhall one reach the under- 
poem bn things ro be ſignified by the words of this Lan= 
guage, k thoſe of any ,forthart Logartthmy in com- 
parifon of ablolutenumbers, ſo do the words thereof in their 
mnitials Eng according to the nature of the chings 
which they ſignifie. 

129. Nine and fiftiethly, for pithineſs of proverbs ,oracles, 
and ſentences, a6 yy es” it. 

130. Sixtiethly, in Axzioms, Maximes, and Aphoriſms, it is 
excellent above all other 

131+ One and ſixtiethly, for definitions, diviſions, and di* 
fiinCtions, no Language is fo apt. 

132. Twoand fixtiethly, for the affirmation , negation, 
and infinitation of propoſicions,it hath proprieties unknown to 
any other em moſt neceſſary for knowledge. 

' ep ſixtiethly, in matters of Enthymems , Syl- 
logiims, and all manner of Illative ratiocination, it is the moſt 
compendious in the world. 


134 Six* 


| 4 


The Fuſt Book, 


144. Sixtle fourthly, Negative Fare mote coth- 
pendroly yrtrgd in this Language, then in any other in the 
world. 


135. Sixtic fitthly, The iofinicant rerms by this Tongue are 
in one aye far expreſſed, which ſuccin&neſs is by nv other 

afforded. 

136. Laſtly, There is not any phraſe whatſoever, which, for 
being peculiar to one Speech, and conſequently in all ocher to 
be improperly taken (wherewith each known T in the 
es, ſtored ) bath , when Poe nf from 
its original ideme, the denomination of Graciſm , Latiniſm , 
Scotiſm, Angliciim,and ſo forth; but in this univerſal 
is ſo well admitted, that, inloſing nothing of its genuine 
neſs, it beareth along with it, without any diminution either 
of ſenſe or exprefsion, the ſame very emphaſis in the ſtream, 
which it had at the ſpring, the like w is 10 a6 other Lan- 
guage to be found. 

137+ Sing caltn - 

I mi ve couched thrice as many more, of no 

leſs c ; Ras. then the aforeſaid , but that theſe ſame will 

to ſharpen the longing of the Reader , after 

the incrinſecal and moſt reſearched of the new Gram 
mer andLexicon which l;am to eyvige, 


mepmuntmnn: 
The Preface 


To the lecond Boo x, entituled 
CHRESTASEBER. 


Ht ſcope of the Anuther in this bis ſecond Brok 
| « ts plead for the removal of ſome inpeds- 
ments, which Rand in the Way bf emitting 
theſe bis works of 4 enrions invention, wher + 
With he intends to gratifie this Mie ; in deing 
= whereof, he obſerver a very c end, 
wot commendable merbed , fir proſeenting of the noble deſogne , 
Die reth ws, Thr the Introduction. Natural Phy» 


teacheth wn, That one form is to be expelled, before ane» 
they can be introduced wen the ſubjefted matter ; for which 
7 Ariſtotle very wiſely, conflirured Privation for one | 
: der of Nature. No judicions Archite® will begin 
ro 4 fabrick, till the ground be firſt cleanſed of the rabbi, 
which bindreth the Laying of the foundation. Arts, a cipliners 
and ſciences, for bring qualities ( az are the faculties they 
emane) (though of another fpecier ) are predicamentally claſſible 
wader accident i,that have their off ential drpendance on that ſub- 
ſtance pubich without derog ating any thing from the ſoul of man, 
may properly be ſaid, to be the body, whoſe livelihood conſiſting in 
4 maintenance by externel means, The Author very rationally 
thence inferretÞ,@ neceſſity of bring eftabliſh:4 in the eltate of 
bus Predece ſors, for the prodution of his brain-iſuct , in muy 
elaberred ſecrets, T boſe the Author mutaphorically termeth 
meveabler, thereby ts claims COP of an att — 


= 


The Preface. 

bis redintegr ation into bus progenitors Land, and yet that be 
ſhould make [o db fpropor! renate « faralkl , be layath the weight 
wan theiniquity of the tines, ad vigour of Flagitarert, whoſe 
lamen able done wnte him, be moſt exrefionſly annplify- 
«th by three nit able examples + and in ſequ-! thereof dſeributh 
Hf ſmrve to the life, together with the brats neſs of the churlifh 
exalters of it. Why to the promiſed Laugnaye, # promiſed this 
Introdu[t;on, and tha: the tr amw!gation Wengof it retarded , the 
Amthey, beſides what © ſ1id, inſerteth this atber reaſon, leaft 311 
encoder ate prof itutron ſhew'd mulhe it be wadevaalbed : is con- 
firm Few, he h Wwertk by three ao fou 4 Pregnant examples, how cn 

Joyment abuter affeftion, andby ten inftances more, how in the 
eff mation 0 il-poiſcd ſudgements, very þreciomd ibinss bave 
bren prſkpoſed to 4m" q* lrg traſh, for Wwiineſi the tranſeen- 
dencic f the ef et; of ment al faculties, beyond: of either body 
& fortuneghe poret 7 af Scotus, and Sacroboſto : but rr collais- 
Fromng Learning with Warfave , be leaves the adds undecided, 
What large Denatives have been pa on laurned men for 
ther encouragement is Literatures ſpecifyeth by eight ſeveral 
examples : and by ſeven more, the indefatigable pains taken by 
eminent Schollars of former ages in the proſecuting wf their ftu- 
diery all which the Author 6s pleaſed to difplay i, « , the 
better thereby to extoll the gif's of the imtellefFigal part: and 
where be tranſiently lets fall 4 word in pra'ſe of hi; gon elucubra- 
tions, be excnſeth it by the neceſſity avoiding « greater evil, 
ſubjoyning thereto for better #Uinſtration, three ſhecions preſi- 
dentt of a King, a Prophet, and « Saint, all divinely 'nſþ red; 
and fienlly cloſeth all, with acertainty ( npon the removal of ob- 
firmction: ) o/ performing Whatever? be hab promiſed, the Conte x» 
ture of all which bring maturely perpended, cannot chooſe, but be 
pleaſing ro the induſtrions Reader- 


a&& $3&&4823&%4$& 
PTY 
The ſecond B oo x 


OF THE 


INTRODVCTION 


INTIT ULED 
CHRESTASEBEI A. 
OR 
Impious dealing of 


CREDITORS: 


: WHEREIN : 
The ſeveriry of the Creditors 
of the Authors Family, is deſired to 


be removed, as a main irapedimenttothe 


Production of this Univerſal Lan- 
ouage, and publication of other no lets 
conliderable Treatiſes. 


Hy it pleaſed me to ſet forth this Preamble 
a part, without annexing thereto the rudi- 
ments of the Language, by the faith 1 owe 
to truth, it was againſt my will, and the 

| cauſe thereot did meerly proceed trom 

MZ 5 without: Firſt, for that all the Papers cen- 
cerning that Subje&t were loſt at the ſpoil after Worceffer fight, 
and nexc, there being in Sce*land of thoſe that would deſpoyl 

me of my whole Lands, who _ as little for —— a 

2 ow, 


Ave df The ſecond Bock, 


ws /ac- Sow doth for a Pearl : ſhould 1 have publiquely expoſed theſe 
cnn} Lg treaſures, like &ep: Cock, they would have lereed a Backey 
pit 9/47 Corg before them. 
enum” 2. AndalthoughI no applauſe from them, whoſe 
Interes Arcadian cars by the war of no Nightiogale;are to be de- 
plcno «am mulceated: yet by reaſon of the power - bave in the land, I 
qurget ſa- Gong fic to (ſtop my Pen for a while, otberwrſe 1 ſhould 
— _—_ = my defigne, in the preſervation of my Predeceſlors in- 

7 Mum rance. 
-) quan 3+ For albeit it == thonghe unreaſunable , that 1 
tzxm ipſa ſhould be denuded of thoſe, paſſeſtions, my Anceſtors. have 
pt —_ enjoyed thele one and twenty hundred years , and upwards, 
©11,/9%*  and thatby them to whom I was never beholding infomuch as 
Avari ani. p_ nor any of my predeceſſors, fave my Father alone, 

e 


mus nullo w 


facility, inmakang ofun arguaeney abuſed, 
ſenarss i for inciching of themſelves ; and at whoſe hands rhey have 
ained ſo much, although they never get a penny from mee 


670, 


can be no loſers. 

$x95 boſdi- . 4. Yerasif | were their Debtor (of which Ticle, the civileſt 
tes male Nations in the world-will gcquir me )-1 deniand of che State, 
remuneris and Authority eſtabliſhed, this favonur amongſt others, that 
«v9; they would allow meche betefic ofthe ix and thirtierh Sta- 
ins ignic eate of the fifth Parliament of King James the third, which ne- 
in grem'o, ver yet was repealed, in fo far as it provideth , that the Deb- 
”» 1* *- tors moveable goods be firſt valued, and diſcuſſed\, before his 
"y lands be appriſeo, much leſs poſſeſſed, 

5. Andif conform to the aforeſaid AR, this be granted, I 
doe promiſe ſhortly, to diſplay before the world, ware of grea+ 
ter value, then ever from the Eft Indias were brought in ſhips 
to Earope. 

Qui f=dcz 6+ And though there be many ( even of my Fathers Credi- 
nammis tors) thatwill poſtpoſeit to a Little , yet are not Dia- 
bic pr{! monds and go'd of the leſs worth, becauſe the Americans make 
{ummi ; Moreaccount of Iron, and Beads. | 
condita 7+ I have ſeen of thoſe, that chooſed Sugar, before Amber. 
fallori prece; becauſe they deemed it ſweeter to the taſt : and prefer- 
pro pone ,_ Ted Black Towr7 velvet, to pure Segovia ſcarlet; for that it lee- 
ma; © med ſofter to the touch : Yet is not ſuch a ſimple , and un- 


The ſewn! Book, 


«Kilful miſpriſing of things to paſle for a Rule amongſt the bet- 
cer ſort, for inhanſing, or _—_— of their prices. 

$ For truth being i» indiv+66:44, as is the effence of what 
ever is, who is moſt verſed in the nature, and properties of « 
thing, is alwayes beſt able to dignoſce of its value. 

9+ A Shooe-maker cannot judge ſo uprightly of an elabou- 
rate Picture, as a cunning Arriſt in the trade of Painting: nor 
an illicerace Soldier pry fo > ina Metaphyſical, A 
ment , as a Learned Philoſopher brought up with quidds. 
cies» 

10. A Ploughman, is better acquainted with tilling , then 
Bils of Exchange : and a Merchant banker, with the rate of 
what _ a o to be taken _ rr to Ve- 
nice, then what Fair he ſhould go to, the chea 
eſt, and beſt caccel. | bo < 

pevather ey a Form Lend wanders Ja he coriaga ip 
0 to a Fort, as Land warriers,in the co a ſhip; 
and it will become a Clown as ill, to complement with dis 
dy, as a Courtierto carry Burthens. Each trade, or vocation 
- +», inane. amt and nos man being kill'd in all 


12, I have heard an Italian of good report fay , that, with 
the money got from a Lapidarie , for a box of precious ſtones, 
he bought a ſigniorie , Which the owner, ignorant ir 
ſuch, would not have diſponed for a Hundred times as many 
Jewels. | 

13. And have likewiſe known a Citizen in Paris,that would 
not have ler cut car fingle Chamber of his, though bur for a 
moneth, for ſix times more Cochenile , then at the hands of 
others, well ſeen in the like Chaffer, afforded the money , for 
which he was glad to (ell a og Leiſe of his _— 
houſe rogether, conſiſting of ren Rooms as - Which is 
the proportion of thirteen thouſand agied pet yonoly 
ro One. 

be 2 of which marr. is to be CR ſeeing 
men of all profeſſions tra movey, who uſually are unex- 
pert in the Commodities of one anothers vocation, i'it occurre, 
that the Debtor and Creditors be of ſeveral Faculties,the Deb- 

* ror 


The ſecond Book, 


tor muſt otherwayes then with the Cheviſance of his Imploy- 
ment, Labour for the Contentment of his Creditor of another 
calling ; and conſequently money being the common meaſure 
of all mercbandize, mult needs (ell ro ſome other, for the pay- 
ment of him. 

5, The caſe in ſome meaſure is my own , conſidering the 
condition, wherein, for the preſent, lam made to ſtand with 
my Fathers Creditors, whole lack of inſight in the Ware, I 
would make ſale of, __ with their earneſt preſſing me 
for money, enforce me, tor the better obtaining of the laſt, ro 
have recourſe to thoſe, that are more xKilful in the firſt co diſ- 
POne it tO, 

16.Yet if I were not netled by ſuch a Se& of bawling, & ob» 

Vide 4:1, QrreperousSeckers,in a time fo untertil of good ſhifts, &wherein 
I have already eſſayed the uneffeRtualneſs of all other manner 
of means, this vendacity ſhould never have appeared ia me of 


-. 


"» 4... a Commodity, which to te atthe rate of any coyn, I 
ta _ *e would have accounted a kind of Simonie, and a —_ which, 
ſalſa, $i! had my Land been as cleer of Merchants, as my minde is of 
— ws mercinarinels I had not daigned to ſtoop to for a King. 
wy dom. 

F120 ſell;-  17+-But for want of. other expedients,making bold to pitch on 
«i'k th this, ] heartily ſapplicate che lubſlidiarie-courteſie of the State 
_ /*- aforeſaid, towards the emancipation, and intranchiſing of my 
-- ** mind, from the drudgery, and ſervile ploddings, wherewith it 
Tu vitia hath been captivated, huw to perform duty to thoſe Fznerato- 
lomnuam ric Maſters. 

cnlelis 18. Who alwayes ſticking cloſe about me, like a cluſter of 


—_ ;, Ninging Waſps, and thundring vpon me charges, as unwelcom 
mina ca 1. £0 any generous Spirit, as is the couch of an /b» Penne to a 


ram d- ca- Crocodile , have. lo fretted, galled, and pricked me to the very 
pic +4 Soul, that all the Faculties chereof , baye by them been this 
ru 7 great While molt pitileſly, and atrociouſly inſlived, and incar- 
«nw 1114: Cerared in the comfortlets dump, of tearching for wherewith to 
«1:146us Cloſe their yaw ning mouths, and ſtop their gaping. 
M, 0041 4b. = 

_ Plutarch, Magno mals ft bominibuss av tia tderres quod benunds Magus & 
muliu incommeds con 7ftanmar proptcr immenſan pecunie (upiduiatiem. 


19, For 


The ſecond Book, 29 


19. For truly I may ſay, that aboveten thouſand ſeverall,,;, ,;, , 
times, I have by thoſe Flagicators been interrupted for money, 47. 43. © 
which geyer came t0 my uſe, directly or indiretly, one way, Avaros 
or other, at home, or abroad, any one time whereof, 1 was © «- 
buſied about Speculation, of greater conſequence,then all chat ,7..t 

they were worth in the world ; from which, had not 1 been /un bon- 
violegtly pluck'd away by their importunity, I would have ne eſe ut 
emitted to publick view, above five hundred feveral Treatifes ©/9s 
08iavemivns, never hicherto thought upon by any. pderet. 
20+ But as acertain Shepheard, on a time (according tothe ,,,,-,- 
waywiregd would have perſwaded the Fox not to deſtroy :y,91ie 
his flock, till he bad got their fleeces, the wool whereof wage? cnmw- 
tobe employed in/Cloth, for the royal Robes of the Soveraign '©* #'* #- 
of the Land; unto whom the Fox replied, Thar his main 1n-** 
tereſt heing+to fatten himſelf, and his cubbs, he did nor find 
himſeli fo much concerned in either Soveraign or Subject, that 
vpon any fuch pretext (how ſpecious ſoever } he would leavs 
his teruer unmagazined of all manner of proviſion, competenc 
for bis yulpecularie family. 
21. Evenſo may | avouch, that the nature of the moſt part \;,v,,, 2 
of this irange kind of Flagitators, being without any conſide- jufitie 14 
ration, or regard to.the condition of a Gentleman, or whether co-4bus /, 
the improvement or impairing of his Fortunes, ſhould further,” *- 
or retard the progreſs of the Countries Fame , totally to em- 5 
ploy themſelves in a coin-accumulating way towards the mul- evitie Abd 
tiplying of cheir traſh, and heedful accreſcing of the Mammon /*cit bad: 
droſſe, wherein their Lucre-hailing minds, and confopiated '4**/*#. 
Spirits lie intombed, and imburyed. 

22+ For again,as the old Hyex« of Quinzie (as it is report-d 
in ſore Outlandiſh ſtories ) after be had ſeized upan the ſub. ©" 
limeſt witred Gymnoſophilt of that Ape, on purpoſe to teed —_ ws 
upon him, being a Huogred, did vilifie and mijregard the tears 4 1-21 
and ſorrow, juſtly ſhed, and conceived by the Inbabitants of ''« cn 
that populous and magnificent City, for the apparent loſs of **** 
ſuch unparallelled wiidom, and exquiſite Learning, as through -— ta 
tamque vel ipſing der pefſuadare conſucuul cam nil fit tem ſarfium quod cy ales ws. 
ia © non ſolcat, 


the 


The ſecond Book, 
oO of ſo wy a_— for ever to re- 
dound ro rhe e Empire altogether poſtpo- 
ſing them, to the ſatisfying of his baſe appetite, wich one poor 
meal of meat, and that only in a ſorry breakfaſt he was to take 
out of his bowels, killed him, tore him in 5Oy hoard qu 
ſnarched up that repaſt,che better to ge. > 

in three houres thereafter , for another of the like na- 


rure. 
vas 33+ Juſt ſo,amongſt many of my Fathers Creditors, hath there 
di bin a generation of ſuch NR IDIIITEN, 
offers c0- on tem 1. tn. ins Sept good 
$i» anne vate intereſt 
pune 6 of mine, hath been (| Cee SEE 
Qui ma- «z- through their Cruelty, bo cad crmemetentaiin 
lwat locw- often ng to lupply our of m = 
_ ent in and provide from a 
oc ep one half rearms lntereſt , alchough 
a Pertie, and trivial Summe, prognecrcye eyes of more eſteem, 
cogfhdare. then the Quinteſſence of all the Liberal Arts, 
Av ipfs (- that of the Moral Vertues, epitomized in the 
11am als - though imbelliſhed to the Boot, with all 
em { « ments whatſoever, for diſc 
aiun! ) marſhalling quality after bere , 
farmas. poſſeſſion of a little Lumber, 
CN CSIC REY 
4- And indeed, to ſpeak i 


= > 


« little Peeble ſtone, Af ar che end erat 
her foot : ke dre 
that the ſincereſt minds, even of the moſt fa are 
ofrentimes irhpedired from ſoaring MR atetitar, 
becauſe of the clog of worldly incumbrances, which depreſ- 
Nas quam ſeth chem. 
explets 25. Even ſo may it be ſaid of my ſelf, that when I was moſt 
ge # ſeriouſly imbuſied about the raiſing of my own, and Countries 
% /-». teputation to the ſfupremeſt reach of my endeavours, then did 
i my Fathers Creditors, like ſo many milſtones banging robe 


cow, 


anahor wes tyod to 
confi- 


The ſetond Book, 


heels, pull down the vigour of my Fancie, and violently hold 
at under, what other wayes would have aſcended , above the 
ſublimeſt regions of Vulgar conception 
26. Thus I being, as another Antromeds, chained to the ' © 
Rock of hard uſage, and inthe view of all my Comparriots, 
expoſed to the mercileſs Dragon, Ulurie : I moſt humbly be» ;,,,.,. 
ſeech the Soveraign Authority of the Countrey , like another /-+: 4-94 
Perſows, mounted on the wi Pegaſus of ReſpeRt tothe (1 7 
weal and honour thereof, eo releeve me, by their power, from © ** 
the eminent danger of the jaws of ſo wil 1 a monſter. Ms 
27. Which maketh the very meaneſt, and moſt frivolous 
ſumme of any ( like the Giant Epbia/tes, who grew nine In» 4. *. 3. 
ches every moneth) immenſely to 'pread forth its exuberanc * 5: 
without any other ſuſtenance, or nouriſhment, thea ,,* 
the meer inviſible Flux of time, that tarveth all chings elſe,ua- 2-4 1:14 
till it extend it ſelf at laſt co a mighty huge Coloſſus of Debt, © + cx. 
able, like that of the Kbodes, ty take faſtning upon two territo- _— 
ries at Once. | f = Sx 
28. And in recompence of a {0 illuſtrious and magnificent 11 cup 
Eattion, unto the State of this Land, as fitteſt patron for ſuch 4a be 
a preſent, will I cender ſome of the aforeſaid moveables whole ** © 9 
value I doe warrantably make account to be of no leſs extent, *,". 9 
then in the eſtimation of all che Univerſities of both Nations,& 14 1riaws 
other pregnant Spirits of approved Literature ſhall centuplate /#nz: 
the oth of the whole money, that for debe can be asked **** : 
by thoie Creditors,out of the profoundeſt exorbitancy of their ''*o 
, tp» 
Covetouſneſs. five. 
29. By my appealing t hus to a Judicatorie, conflated of the 
prime lights of the Iile, and who (as all wiſe men elſe) do more 
magnifie, and extull the endowments of the mind , then thoſe 
of either body, or fortune : ic is very percep:ible, unto which 
of theſe three of good tlus offer of mine is to be re- 
duced. 
30. No man will deny, that is not deſticute of common 
ſenſe, but that Scorus, and Secroboſco, brought more reputati- 
on to _ their learned writings, then if they had en» 
riched it with Gallioons, loaded full of gold: :n& rt! at it had 
been berter for that Nation, + loſt many millions of = 
ge 


The ſecond Buck: 


gels, then that through penurie, or any other accident , the 
workes of thoſt Gallant men had been buried in Oblivi- 


ON. 
gms as in both body and mind , the inſtruments of the 
nobler faculties are eſteemed of the greater value: ſo ina po- 
lirick incorporation,'o much the more ſhould be reſj and 
dignified the advancers of the reputation thereof, then the ac- 
creicers of its wealth, that of the three of goodneſs, the 
Cum +2. qualifications of the mind have the b 
ritia alc 323» And although, there be Legions in Scorland of thoſe Ge 
rey ow _— _ that _ 
wn jees» fragrancy of the mo 
- & the mol 
| things, re- 


dition of Literature. 

34: Which bath been held in fuch iffſim account by 
the prudem eſt of Priſtin ages, that making it come in com 
tition with Souldiery it ſelf, they did nor ſtick to aver, har 
Greece (which of al Nations was moſt renowned, and moſt 
worthy to be moſt renowned, both for wit and valour)did owe 
more cordial praiſe, and commendation ro the Philoſophers 
thereof, then to all its moſt military and warlike Champions; 

ing in this Caſe, knowledge in Sciences, to fortitude in 
the fields ; and the habits of the IntelleRual faculties, to thoſe 
of the moral. 

35. Bur unfainedly , ſeeing to the ſoundeſt judgements of 
any. and moſt conſentaneous to one another, in their Adbe« 
rence to ApodiRtick concluſions , is oftentimes incident a re+ 

nancy of Opinion in matter of DialeQical ratioc nation: 
ad chet fome ofchem in a very ſimilitudinary probability of 
prevalency on both ſides of the Argumear, i 


The ſecond Bok, 


Topick celluls, mediums prompting ther to have in grea- 
n eſtimation magnaniminy 0 —_ z then vivacity of 
Spirit, 

36. Iwillin ſo far as concerns my ſelf, for that I hope ere 
long to breath in ſuch auſpicious dayes, as will give way to my 


good —_— me wich chole favorable opportunities 


may make a ually recomendable in both, 
other cheek ro ſuſpend the on of my verdi& , then 
by any ſentiment of mine , poſicively to ine of the pre- 
eminence of either. 
7. However, todiſcend more particularly to the pur- 
ol ſeeing it is every where uncontroverſibly acknowledged, 
that the goods of the mind are of more worth, then thole of 
forrune ; and by conſequence, the pregnantly conceived, and 
maturely ennixed offpring of my own brain ( which leait I 
ſhould teem to philotize it, I in all houmilicy fubmit to the un- 
partial cenſure of the choiceſt Spirits ) of farre greater value, 
then any peece of money due to my Fathers Creditors. 
38.1 doardently deſire,and ſupplicat the State not to ſuffer 
Ve majeſty, and ſacred name of Soveraign authority, under 
coloar of a Law, any more to be abuſed in favours of thoſe 
men, who have made uſe thereof in ſeveral charges againſt me, 
in the name of both the King Char ler's, and now in 
that of the Keepers of the Liberties of England, to no other 0 47 
end bur ro —_ of my Predeceffors Inhericance, witaout any fodidine 
mine. _ 4 
39+ Withall , 1 heartily intreat them to vouchſafe the _ 6. 
Patronizing of the preſent , I am eo make unto them , and in ,;,u * 
Teſti of their acceprance of it, exoner me ot the Burthen qu pote 
of theſe F __ by raking ſuch a courſe, as to their diſcre- 2/4 
tions ſhall moſt expedient, which, if they conſider —_ _ _ 
were it for the defrayment of greater ſums, will be ot ſmall di» c; ,,.,, 


ficulry. fallax a- 
40. And here I promiſe, by the Faith I owe to God , that 4«iget pre 
this courteſie, ſo conferred, ſhall (if I live) as Seed fown in "ry Pry 
fertil ſoyl, z hundred fold, co che promoving of the repus ,, /, z,7. 
putation of the Land. | tas decigic 
41. Whichin an age, fo full of Calumnies, and nar "< 
F 2 the 


The ſecond Bock, 


the moſt zealous thoughts do not eſcape miſ-interpretation, is 
not to be rejected, man thing in that kind, which may con- 
duce to the undecerving of Forrainers of any prejudicate opini- 
on © late conceived by them againſt the integrity of our 
Countreymen. 

4:+ Some will ſay , that, I demand much , and things un- 
uſuall ro be granted : others again, that 1 promiſe tar more, & 
am too prodipalin my own praiſes : Bur my (elf will avouch, 
that as my demand is reaſonable,ſo would 1 have ere now per- 
formed what I promiſed, and not ſpoke fo much as one fſylla*+ 
ble in my own Favours , but that by one and the ſame occa- 
ſion, I «as neceilicaced to doe the one, and forbear the 
other. 

43+ It is ordinary amongſt Seamen, to ſay the Tempeſt ſo 
increas'd, thar, for Gafery my life, I was glad to throw my 
goods over-board : I have heard Soldiers likewiſe affirm , and 
have ſeen,that they have beartily abandoned their Purſe to the 
prevailing m—_ for obtaining the better quarter : yet to 
examine cither of theſe «ions aright,they were but mixt ones 
tending tothe leſſer evil ; voluntarie, ſecundum 914, but int 
plicrrer, unwilling, 

44 Juſt ſo is, for ſbunning of the greater harm , to wit, 
the laconveniency might enſue upon the vilifying of my brain- 
works, 1 chooſed to reſtrain their Emiſſion, and com- 
mend what was to be promulgated : either of which , had ir 
not been for the aforelaid neceſlities, would have been as un- 
welcome to me, as to the Merchant , was the caſting out of his 
goods into the Sea z or to the Soldier, the delivery up of his 
purſe unto his Foe, ' 

45+ Enjoyment commonly abates Eſtimation , but | 
ing doth increaſe it ; And as there are of thoſe, who, for 
one night of a Lady, have beſtowed double the means, would 
have ſufficed for a JoynQure to the Mother of their lawful 
children, although a better and more handſome woman to 
the boot : ſo are vulgar Spirits ( for the moſt part) highly 
miſtaken intheir ſenſe of the true value of things of any um» 


portance. 
46+ Jude valued at three hundred of Oint- 
F ment 


The ſecond Book. 


ment, which Mary poured 0n the feet of Cbrift, whom him- 
ſelf ſold tor thirty, 

47. I have icen of them, that accounted no more of Amber- 
grece, then of Fullers Earch, though in ſome parts, a handtull 
of the one , will be worth a Thouſand cart loads of the 0+ 


48. I have likewiſe heard of a hundred crowns, given for a 
Freſh Salmon, where the Scors Pinc of wine did colt bur three 
balf-pence + and of a Salmon every whit as good, got for fix 
pence, where ſo much wine of no better kind - would have 
ſtood you in half a Crown, which is the proportion of twenty 
thouſand to one. For who at Toleds with the hundred crowns 
got for a Salmon, ſuppoſed freſh, which at 46erdeen he boughc 
tor a ſixpence, did purchaſe four choutand pines of Wine, which 
at his retura to Aberdeen yeelded him two thouſand Crowns, 
hach clearly obtained twenty thouſand ſixpences for one : Or 
who at Aberdeen with the two Crowns got for four pints ot 
Wine, which at Toleds he bought for a fixp«nce, did parchate 
ewenty freſh Salmons, which at his return to Toledo , yeelded 
himgwo thouſand Crowns, bath in che ſame manner, for one 
ſix pence obtained ewenty thouſand, which is a hundred 
to one, two hundred times told. | 

49. Of theſe examples there are many, which to fumme up 
in one of a more diſproportioned miſtake, then any of the reſt, 
I will tell you, | hat there happening a Gentleman of very 

worth, to ſtay awhile atmy houte, who one day, a+ 
mongſt many other, was pleaſed, in the deadit time of all the 
Winter, wich a Gun upon his ſhoulder, to ſearch for a ſhot of 
ſome Wild-fowl: > after be had waded through many waters, 
taken exceſſive pains in queſt of his game,& by means thereof, 
had killed ſome five or fix Moor Fowls, and Partridges which 
he brought «long with him to my houle, he was by ſome other 
Gentlemen, who chanced to alight at my gate ( as he entred 
in}very much commended for his love to ſport ; And ( as the 
faſhion of moſt of our Countrymen is, not to praiſe one, with 
ont dif another) 1 was highly blamed for not giving 
my (elf in that kind to the ſame exerciſe, having before a ys 

t 


ſo commendable a Pattern to imitate ; feng EERen 


Vide *Av?. 
6,7,9, 12, 


It, 13,46, 
47 145, 43, 


BF. 6. A: 
$I,424584, 
$4,if. 


The ſeco1d Book, 


Gentleman deſerved Praile, for the evidentproof he had given 
that day of his inclination to thrift and laboriouſneſs , that ne- 
vertheleſs I was not too blame, ſeeing whilſt be was buſied a- 
bout that Sport, 1 was imployed in a diverſion of another na» 
ture, ſuch as optical ſecrets, myſteries of natural Philoſophie , 
reaſons for the variety of Colours, the finding out of the Lon» 

irude, the —_ of a circle and wayes to accompliſh all 

| al ca 


—_— culations by ſignes , without tangents , 
with the ſame compendiouſneſs of aanies, which, in the 
eſtimation of learned men, would be accounted worth fix 
hundred thouſand Partridges, and as many Moor-Fowles. 

50. But, notwithſtanding this relation, either for that the 

underſtood it not , or that they deemed the exer- 
ciſe of the Body to be of greater concernment, then that of 
the minde, they continued firme in their former opinion , 
whereof I labourcd nt to convince them ; becauſe 1 intended 
according to their Capacities to bear them _ 

51+ In the mean while that worthy Gentleman Was no- 
thing of their mind , for being wet , and weary after travel , 
was not able to cat of what he had fo much toyled for whilſt 
my braine recreations ſo ſhar my appetite , that 1 
lupped to very good purpoſe, T hat night paſt ,the next mor- 
wr + 7 SL rot a foorman ot mine, to try his ſortune 
with the Gun, during the time 1 ſhould difport my felf , in 
the breaking of a horſe : and it fo fell our , that by I 
had given my ſelfe a heat by riding , the Boy returned 
with a dozen of wild fouls , half Moor toule, half Partridge, 
whereat being exceeding well pleaſed , 1 alighted, gave bim 
my borſe to care for, & with entred in to fee my Gentle- 
men , the moſt eſpeciall whereof was-unable ro riſe our of his 
bed, by reaſon of the Gout and Statick, wherewith he was 
ſcized tor his former dayes toyle. 

5 2+Thus iteeing matrers of the greateſt worth, may be under- 
valued by = are deſlirure of underſtanding: who would 
reap «ay t by what is good, till it be appreciated 
ſhould be charie of ics cofiizaniong ler this therefore ſuffice , 
why to this preface , or !ntroduction , | have not as yet fub- 
joyned the Grammar , and Lexicon, = 

33+ 


The ſecond Book, 3” 


£34 But why it is - ſhould þ Lone __ phages Vice ane 
without the jeopardy of vaine , a is clear , 44. & the 
and evident , being neceſlicated ( as 1 have told inthe filth 3.7 Book, 
and twenty eight articies of the ſ:me Book) to merchandiſe it 77.4 
for the redintegrating of an 4ncieat family , it needeth not (ye 
be thought ſtrange , that in ſome meaſure I deicend to the Fa» 
ſhion of the ſhop- , who to ſcrue up the buyer to rhe 
higher price , will tell them no better can be had w—_—y 
tis the choiceſt ware in Englazd , and if any can match it, 
ſhall bave it for nought. 

54+ So in matter of this Literatorie chaffer, 1 determined 
not to be too raſh in the proſtitution thereof, leaſt it ſhould be 
vilkfied: _ onin my oo to the grea- 
ter Longing , an ardenc deſire might ſtir up an emacity, 
to the furtherance of _ 

55+ Thus the firſt of this Scale, being to avoid the ,,; ,,.... 
diſpreciative cenſure of Plebeculary Criticks, who(as Children ,aorcs 14 


lng cher apple to an Inheritance , or, Eſa like , polt "vs oder wat 
their dirth-right co a diſh of ) have no | Or 


as, where they come in Comperition ,7.,1",” 
with any ſenſual goodneſle; or ifthey doe conſider of them , ,-4. - 
in ſo far as concerneth new inventions , they (lightingly veto cr. 
vent themſelves chus , the matter is not great, could 
have done it, what ferveth it for edification, Philoſo 
is dangerous, the Apoſtle himſel! avoucherh it, and other 

| apo ries , 
and their own ignorance, they caſt in the tace of Lear- 
ning , that there is more humanity in the voice of a bull , or 
that of the wildeſt bear that ever was , then in the ſpeech of 
rad dans mp elogiarie interchers 

56 , is arie i in 
—_ —L. on t rn nr Am _ 

100) w ofine moſt a ck writings there wan- 
teth noc of preſidents "- 

$7-Meſer,in « book comonly faid to be of his own writi 
intituled hi , the meckeſt man upon the face of the earth, 
and P<wl, inthe 13 of the 2 to the Corinthians, which was 
an Epiſtle of his own, a'cribed to himſelf the ſtile of 0ne of the 
chie- 


Tle ſecond Book, 


chie'eſt of the Apoſtles, magnifying likewiſe bis own Learnin 
therein, and other qualifications , wherewith be was endow 

58. Nor was Dovid, for all his heinous tranſgreſſions, free 
from this manner of exalting himſelfe ; for in jeverall of his 
Plalmes , he wiſhed to be judged according to his righteoul- 
neſſe, all which, though proceeding trom the pen of man,had 
the Spirit of God for the Ditator. 

$9. Truths related to a good end, carry notalong with 
them any Blemiſh of oſtentation , and the intention being that 
which ſpecified the Action, luch ſelf commendatives are 
not to be diſpraiſed ; ſeeing they bring us to the third ſtep of 
the Scale , which is ſeriouſly to long after Learning. 

69, Men of the greatelt renown among the Ancients have 
been fo taken with the Love thereof , that ſome diveſted chem« 
ſelves of large Patrimonies, and vaſt poſſeſſions, the better 
to atrend their Studies , Such was Anaxagoras : others pulled 
out their own eyes, that they might be ſubje& to the leſſe di- 
ſtraction from Philaſophicall Speculations, as did Democriras: 
others again, like Carveades, with metaphyſical raptures 
were ſo taken up, that when fer downe to table ro eat , they 
forgot to put their hands to their mouthes. 

G61. Nor was this at ſtarts, but fo indefatigably Qudious 
were the moſt of thoſe prime men, in times of old, that $ ime. 
nides writ bis poeſies , ChrySppus his Logick , and /ſecre- 
tes his Panathewaicen , when cach of them was full fourſcore 

The rea. yeares of age : it being likewiſe reported by Cicers , that So- 


der may phecles, in his bundreth yeare, write the Tragedie of Os-+ 
bc calcd pure 


wo ave 62. From thisearneſt deſire of Literature, wee a'cend a- 


to the xz nother ſtep, which is ro hold him in great eſtimation , that is 
Axioms well qualified therewith , and nor it the offipring of his 
mentis- brain ts periſh , through the detect of worldly goods where- | 
_ ,*- with to ſupport it. 

mine en- 63+ Of that moſt noble kind of Favorers of Learning, was 
ticuled Alrxander the great who allow:d ſeveral rhoufands of men to 
The v1»4- attend upon Arif orle, in the writing of his Natural biſtory , 
—_ for which , when done, he gave him ina donative, two 


toror Hundred and fifty thouſand pounds Rerlin. Logins Lita 
$:0iland, to 


The fetond Book, 
to Pliate the , would have given four hundred thou- 
ſand Crowns for his Annals : and ens Popilins Andronicu: 
for a lictle treatiſe of that fort, got ſixteen thouſand Du- 


cares, 

64+ 1ſecraths for one oration which he pend , had given 
amo him fix thouſand rwo hundred and forty pounds ſterhio : 
and Aatowms | n— I at yr 

a crowne for a e, which he had 
tehedience of Fiſhes. Ro 
+ Proleme, on Clrombrets; the Phiſitian, beſtowed a hun+ 
talents : and at how dear « rate Arifotle bought whe 
Books of and Plat» thoſe of Philelans the Pyihage» 
riew, is fer down in Aulw Gellixe , and Yalerins 
Aaximus. 

I —_— n—— hrs wane 
it to be thought, that theie Largeſſes were ſo much competent 
prices for the Learning a ed of, as maniteſt ceſtimonies 
of the _ unteigned 10N to the learned man. 
| 67+ . 


as there 's no known proportion berwixt a crook- 
ed line, and « ftreight ; and chat che angle of conti , is 
leſſe then the laaſt acute angle that is : ſocannot all the tran- 
fi | be paralleled with thoſe of the 
wr cither we beleeve Ovid, whillt he @ith, Nil non morte 
le tener, peftoris exceptis, ingeniique banis : or the Dutch 
Poet Buſchizs, in this his Epigram, 


Jegenium, _——— fats 
Non nor wnt trifts, nec did'cere mor: : 

Nee cole ( þ cordus qued beber ) font cater 4 mari cs, 
Divitie, rebar, gloria, ſame, genus, 


Or yet Julins Scaliger, who in his fixt book de re prerics, (in- 
ticuied, Hypercriticas ) eſleth, That be had rather have 
been the Author of Pinder's Prebionich, and Nemeonich lines, 
then King of 4r«geu, although be accounted them far ſhortin 
value, tothe third Ode of Heorace's fourth book, or ninth of 
his third , which nevertheleſs he eſicemed to be by many 
ages inferiour to Pirgil's verſes, at ſo high « rate he valued 
the minds endowments, 

G 68. Seeing 


The ſecond Book: 


; thus it is then, that, being put into one ballance, 
the ſcale of incraing depreficch the other , I would not expoſe 
any ſuch talent of mine for external means, were it poſſible for 
any eMe to buy, with all the moneys inthe world , that which 
I woul1 preſerve therewith, to wit, that antiquitie of race, by a 
continuat diſcent from many Predeceſſors,in one and the ſane 
Land, which would be altogether buryed in oblivion , by duf- 
poſſeſſing me of my ancient inheritance. 
, 69 Yet were + free from the ſlavery of Flagitators, though 
* moſt of the Iſland ſhovid diſapplaud my writings, I woul4 ne- 
_ vertchele's emic them, without hope of any further recompence; 
for a deed oof vertue, whoſe reward is in the ation it (elf, m1kes 
the very doing thereof to paſſe for a competent remunerati- 


* o© 


70. But the exigence of my eſtate, and forrune , requiring 

; another courſe ro utes, 1 will on this fourth ſtep of the 
ſcale, as 0n its landing place, expatiat my (elf upon the equity 
of my demand, and affarance of the performance of what I 
promiſe, for the better doing whereof, 1 make account to rg 


{omewhart of ovr tamily, other ſome of the rigour of the Flagi- 
tator, a little of what the Law in Juſtice may provide for ei 

of us : and laſtly, to mount the higheſt degree of all, by clo- 
ſing with a perſwaſion to have my Anceſtors inheritance made 
free to me, and mine- 


CC—_ 


ln Flagitatores. Ep. 1+ 


Scotorum © templis nun exulat omit image, 
Seulpta nec in ſaxo ſed nec in are mancet « 

Canſa patrt nimirun, oft wnunm venerabile numen, 
Nec colimn!, quanquanm novims! ofſe den. 

Aura nam peoſtquam Scotu aff ul fit image 
Nomina ſola colunt que grave orca rewer., 


% 
\ \ 


- \ 
| 


Pooreonrotopua 


The Deſigne 


Of the third Boo, entituled 
CLERONOMAPORIA:. 


- S in the Book immediately ſoregning the Auther 
very plainly hath pointed at the main block, 
which lyeth in the Way, as 4 bindraxce to the 
progreſs of bis brain-itinerarie: : (+ in this, the 
third of his Intreduttion, dath he, with great 
perſprcacity, eduge moſt prremprory reaſons ont 
the cleareſt firings of bath modern, and 
ancient, bvine, and humane Law, why it | be removed. In 
or mean while the better to prepare the Reader tolvards a matter 
5 prime concerament, be begins the le with 4 peculiar, 
pL} wieur For Narrative of the COTE theſe Pear rae 
Were caft in, ts the end that the _ wnuſftly he was dealt with 
the perſons, whe didinjeft them, the greater juſtice 4 
yo Mt relief from their oppre 7 yy, 6 have ——_—_ 
particulars, and unfolded them to the vieW of the publick,, aid 
very much damp the Genins of the Author, who, could he have 
ot herways done, wenld undonb! edly bave manifeſted a molt cordial 
<< ſlike of any motion, tending to approve the offring wits Pan, the 
park of the howſhold gods , or diſcloſing to al the my/tirier of 
penatal rites, But the threed of the diſconrſe hanging thirewpon, 
without a gap in its contexture, it conld nat be aveyded ; ofpeci- 
ally, that generons and worthie K night, the Authors Father, be» 
ving been unparaliledly wronged by falſe, wicked, ind eovetons, 
men, bimſelf bring of all men living, the jute}, equalleſt, and 
G 3 moſt 


woff beoneſt in his dralings 5; bois humor wat rather than to 
break tis word; ts loſe alt be bad, and land ts bis awe 
wndel borate promiſer what ever they reſt, Which tos 
firift adbirerce to the anſtereſt principles of veracity , pro 
ved ofremtimes damn 1fvable to him , in bis meg othati ons wich 
ma”"y cunning (be kr, who knew with what profitable odds, they 
e-mld ſorme themſelves in won the windings of /o good a nature, 
He in all the neer wpwn) faxttie year 5 hetrnoel WeUer 6 
red any man voluntaridy, theweh by proteBting, and ſeconding of 
ſome twnt Wark full men, br did much prendge bimſelf : be never 
veſmſed to beſwrety for any, ſocordial be wat rewards buy ac- 
qu mance ; yet ( contrary to all expeflations ) bs hmdneſſe 
therein Was atrended by ſo much good luck, that be never payed 
above two hundred pounds Englith, for all bs va dinuonial favor ts. 
By the wnfaithfulnr on the ane fide, of ſorne of bis menial ſervants 
in filching from bims nnch of bis perſonal Eſtate, and fol hood of 
ſeveral ( bamber lain! , avd Bf, to Whom be mtrwſted 
the mana ing of bir Rong, in the unconſcionable diſcharge of 
their Revents, b giving one arcount thrite , and of ſuch ac. 
connrs many: And, SL ako combents rr quency of diſad- 
vantagions bar gains which the flueneſs of the ſubtil Merchant did 
involve him in, his Loſt came wnawes & npon buy, and irrefofti- 
bly. lth + an ar wed wan ;, ton great truit to the one, and facility in 
brbaff of the r1bry accafuoning ſogrievors 4 mirfor tune: which ne» 
verthe oft, did not protecd from want of K neawledge, or Abilitic 
in N atwral parts : for in the buſuneſt of ether men, be would bave 
iven a very ſound advice, and was ſurpaſſing dextroms in Ar» 
, mnnon, non any reference ſwbmitted ts him, but that bee 
thought it <4 drrogate from the N ovili'y of bu boaſe, and repw»= 
tation of bis perſon, to {ok to petty thing: in matey of bis own 
affairs, Wrerenpon, after forty years cuſters, bring habitnated 
therewnte, be ſound bunſelf at laſt (to bus | regret) inſenſb 
plunted into inextricably difficnliter, wm! « field whered, 
the inſatiable Creditor to mak: bus harveſt, by the raine of 
that Family, firnck m with bis fickle, and by marking bumſelfe 
with a vizard, Compoſed of the rags of the Scotiſh Law, in its ſo- 
vereſt ſenſe, claim: the ſame right to the Whole inheritance s 
Rodi ve Feantindals grany, fir Gaby np ee 
purſe 


The Preface. 


purſe wherein it war. Theſe wretched, and nnequitable tour - 
ſer, indefa'igably proſicured by mereileſt men, to the niter nmade- 
ing of the Author, , and externninion of bis name, have induced 
hiw , ox of his reſet to antiquity, bis piety te ſhcenſſion, and 
that intims re fard of hinnſelf, Which by divine injuntion ought to 
be the rule, 1nd meaſure of ris love towards his neighhour, ts (ot 
down in thi: parcel of bis [mtroduition, the orne' nſage , where» 
with he bath bren ſerved theſe many yrars paſs, by that inexora- 
ble race, the lamentable preparatives, which, by granting their 
deſires, wonld enſwe 19 the extirpation of woribie ped/grees , and 
the wnexrmlifyable impuſtice thereby r mg ts him, who ne- 
ver was in any thing __ to them. The premier be enlargeth 
With dive”: quaint, and pertinent Sinnilier and after a neat appa- 
relling of Wſnry, initr belidey garmmats, be deduceth from the 
Law!, and (n/tomy of all Nations, the tender care that ought ts 
be had in the preſervation of antient Fannilies : the particulars 

, 1 martey of Ordoenance, be evidenceth by the alt: of So- 
lon, the Decvenr of the Decemvirs, and farmer of the Twelve 


Tables: And for itr execnti ju the perſone of QuFabius, 
Tiberius the Exoyerer, and the Iackicidh nv of the ſacred 
inflitution of Jubilerr. By which cnarr ation nothing is more clear- 
ly inferred, then that / both Jews, and Geniiler, Painims, 
and Chriſtians, in their both Monarchical, and Polyarchical Go- 
vernments, have bers (@ tealors in their obf ſr to {+ pi+ 
9% 4 mandate, that the preſent age bring no leſs concerned in the 
hayey Fmies thereef, them the gau9 deyes of old, the id An- 
thorety my [le foruld be pleaſed, net ts eclipſe their comment. 


mms —_ _—_ _ dec)- 
hering 1moplac 461/1ry 0 Harers , hewing [4 
_ barks, —_— a own ——— , thereby _ 


to bates bu & iow ; and hinting «t the wnneatural breach of 
Some of bis Fidaciarier, be th the candor of bu own 


endeavour! and nixuiencie to give all men comtenement, the diſ- 
commſe Wheredf, in all its = mn 5 deſerverh the ſerrions 
anmadyer fron of rhe wy enions K cader. 


THE 


Ad lluftrifimos Dominos Comitiorum Sereniſſimi Stam? 
ANGLICAN |. 
Carmen [1; pid? ener, 
_ quam vidit ſublimi in ſede ſuprrbam, 
Preq; aliis unam ſepe twb ſr capet ; 
Eben priſca domus feneroſo fiemmate fabs 
Itrcharts dire ſanorepreſſ4 jacrr. 
Commlocecnteine Mldehs anther , 
( &ra ſed in twrpem condup licanda /inum ) 
Hime eroſm ager vaſt, viitique penates, 
Et lex cms tur bat inique {ares 
At wor 6 patrer legnans ques ſumma poteff as. 
Onig, datis popmlus jure benigna iribus, 
Ne finite indigne ru4! wt domm: pi 1ma lapſm, 
Terra, wt numeritnm rats relinguat 
He ſacer Maſur lots paynaſſide lympha, 
Vroat of Ani gloria prime hors 
Primus Hyperbore ws mw 41 qui duxit ad axen, 
Cum fliu>ni! dommuns barbare terre ſunm. 
Pont lyram Patarae tn am, ts berbiton Orpben, 
Simt licet & carmen ſax ſecuta twum : 
Ie rudem popwlum primne feritate rents, 
Juſerat Amor edidiciſſe moders 
Nunc queral: _—_ ſive, colleſy; niveſe, 
Gen: v1duata , monticol <q; gemmunt, 
Nec Pan Arcadia | lam ſape vecai or, 
Onan nunc re terra relifta ſonar. 
Patres bello wins prin, paciſy; columne, 
Ferte 6, nam mer iran ferre poteſtis opens, 
Creditor hex tot as ſylvas off, fluning pete? , 
Et centena avide jugrre Ventre prem'!. 
tit Scylla in medio ſertnr latrave profunds, 
Sorbet ( aquoreas diva Charibdus aquais 
M19; rates avidit clandit GodWinus arens , 
Gazaq; cnn domino nox redit wra (mo, 
Sed neque pul. a famer, det tandem Jupiter wt fit 
Carne verax propria viſceribuſque ſatur. 


$48 &94IT&SAHIL94SE 
HHLTL44 CIZSIHL T44L 


The third Book 


OFTHE 


INTRODVCTION 


INTITULED 
CLERONOMAPORIA 
OR 
The intricacy of a diſtreſſed 
Succeſlor, or apparent Heir. 


WHEREIN 


For the better evulging of this 


Vniverſal Tongue,andother works, 
the preſervation of the Authors ancient 


ritance, is by the lavves of all 
Nations, Pleaded for. 


Ay it therefore be conſidered , in the firſt 
5; place, that a competent eſtate, ( which, 
-\h«; theſe many yeares paſt , hath yeelded a 


Theithird Book, 

( conſecutively ( through a dire& uni Series , for 
the moſt part, and Lineall Gn ps Re, Bt 
ſeverali Anceſtors, from Father to Sonne , for the ſpace of 
{ neer upon ) fuurſcore two lubiles, at 25 yeares cach ſerved, 
feregring ProdereMrs in the fan Ry, } content 
| eceſlors, in ame n | de- 
rebel, cad cranſmitred , with many eſpeci alries, pri- 
vileges* nad immunities from cor cncther', in all inte- 
grity , uarill the cime of the majority, and perfe&t 
age of my Father : who according to the preſcripe form of the 
country received it then , from his Guardian, or Tutor ( as 
they called him) without any burthen of debt (how lictle ſoe- 
ver) or proviſion of brother , fiſter, or any other of his kin- 
dred, or allyance, wherewith to affet it ; be having no- 
thing elſe( being void of all manner of incumbrances ) to care 
for , out of {© conſiderable means , bleſt with fo much free- 
dome, but himſelf, and Lady alone , my Mother , ir pleaſed 
his Father-in-law , my Elphingſton then high Treaſu- 
rer of Scotland , at the time of the mariage , © $8. ys ng 

{to ma the foreſaid patrimony , with ſuch caſe and 
ty , through x various Change of neighbours , «nd fo careful. 
7 chreyetencs him, that Wt nee hu adrenpe g 
received trom his predeceſſors, and to retaliate ſo great a fa- 
vour , he ſhould be and tyedto leave uato her eldeſt 
Son, to be of ber ( who ſome 5 yeares afterwards 
*+appened to be 1 )the ſaid eſtate, inthe fame freedome , and 
catireneſſe , every way , that it was lefrunto himſelf, which 
before many noble men , and others he ſolemnly promiſed to 

doe to the utmoſt of h:s power. 

2. Nevertheleſſe , By 4 one way, or what elſe 
Fan! 0-1 krinw not , and on the ide, byche extortion , and ra- 
due ine of ſome uſurious Cormoranes whole money t hen was con- 
ſirnnm ot laid out, xs « doit for | dem men of great re- 
Lai prevyennges, to be hooked by : the fortune of his affairs turned 
ms it © far otherwayes, from the bysk had been put in (to 
quo" 5'** the and hezvy diſlike of all his-friends,, and his own 
pole, Nikewileatlaſt , when he knew not howito/help ir!) chat all he 
bequeathed unto me , his eldeſt Son, in matrer of worldly 
means, 


The third Book. 43 


means, was twelre or thirteen thouſand pounds ſterling of 
debt , five brethren all men , and ewo fiſters ( almoſt mariage- 
able Jto provide for , as leſſe to defray - this —_ with, 
by ſix hundred pounds ſterling a year, alchoagh the warres 
dad net fee ine fares , then what tor the main- 
taining of himlelt alone, in a peaceable age he inherited for 


+ But that, which did make my caſe the more to be com- _— 
milerated , was, thatall cheſe huge , and exorbicanc ſummes {ls «rs 
were charged on me by thoſe , to whom | was never olga Cal 
in a penny , nor whole money ever came to that fine, t > Or 
it might be known to what good end , it was borrowed; there, 5 Lis 
_eing aonng more certain, then that the education of his [or ab awo, 
w 


children, comprehending my felf, and all cogether, 


with what he ex on his daughters portions, and other 
wayes eerie for fureryſhip lid _ in || amount to a- 
bore two yeares rent , and a half, ofthat eſtate , which he 
totally enjoyed tor ſix and thirty yeares together : and that 
in fuch balcyonian dayes , without any compulſory occaſion 
of beſtowing his means other wayes, then might beſt pleaſe 
himſelf, that till ewo yeares before his deceaſe it was not 
known by the commons of the Land , what the words of Me 
gueteey , and Prbeman did (ignilie. 
4- Notwithſtanding all this , and that neither dire&tly, nor {474 
indirectly , I had a band in the coneracting of ſ@ much , as pe 
one two-pence of the aforeſaid burden, Thoſe Credicors ,,.; «: als 
( all Scars ) dealt fo rigorouſly with me, that by their unchari- /acrun 
table ſeverity ( even ia my fachers time ) it was done what lay 7 *cms 
in them , to ſhake me looſe of my progenitors inheritance,and / '* © 
denude me of what I was born unto , by inveſting themſelves (111, 441% 
inthe right ofthoſe Lands, that through che continuat race {cr aus, 
of ſix dozen of Predecefſours ( as aforcfaid ) were after the 
expiring of man , by their valour, vertue. and in- 
duſtry , moſt heedfully cranimitred co chele late yeares, free 
from all intanglements , claims, and intricate pretences 
whatſoever, 
5-Yer did I thereby attain to the greater portion of my fa- 
thers bleſſing , who conſcious _ prejudice | futained . by 


leaving 


44 The third Book. 


. .,, leaving me(contrary to the promiſe made to his Farher-ic-faw, 
So Sn taftonn af he Countrey ) ſo much inthralled * 
n+ in had of me that reſpe&,, and remembrance , alchough in ano. 
the ycar "ther dominion for the time , that , beſides his conſtant bewai- 
i. *.* ling the hard condition , — —_— his boufe 
Ger he in my perſon, during alll the time , and lingring 
arching diſeaſe , whereof at laſt he died , he ſo generouſly , and lo- 
of the Co- yingly(as truly be was one of the beſt men im the world)acquir 
venant. himfelt two dayes before his deceaſe , thache had all my fix 

brothers ſtrongly bound , and obliged before !a nous witneſſes 
himſelf being one , and the prime of all, eſpecially my nea- 
reſt brother intituled che Laird of Dan Lagerfor OCCa= 
ſion, to ſharpen his thank ulineſſe the bond was conceived, be- 
cauſe of that portion in Land he received from him worth a- 
bove 3000 pounds Engliſh money, under pain of bis everla- 
ſting curſe, and execration,'o afliſt concur with, follow, & ſerve 
m*, (for thoſe are the words) to the utmoſt of their power, in- 
du try,and leans, & to ſpare neither charge,nor travel,t 
it ſhould coſt them all chey had, to releale me from the 
ſerved bondageof the dominecring Creditor ,andentricate my 
Lands from . impeſtremenrs, wherein they were involved : 
yea to beſtow nothing of their owne upon no other uſe , till 
that ſhould be done ; and all this 'v their own hand wri- 
ting , iecured with the clauſe of regiſtration , to make the op- 
brie the more notorious, in caſe of failing , as the paper 
it ſelf , which I haveinrerents, £ with another (1 
$0 the tame ſenſe, by my mother,ang alſo my brothers and S$i- 
ſiers, Du» bu7ar only excepted. will more evidently teſtifie. 

6- Thus lack ——_—— bave deſired of him, but 
what by my grand-father he was ingaged to leave me in mat- 
cer of temporal means. I muſt inall humiliry make bold to beg 
the permiſſion to proceed a little further in this purpoſe , ſee- 
ing it doth not diametrally milicate againſt che reverence, I 
one to the eſtabliſhed authority, and municipall Laws of the 

nd. 

7* Incompetition with which , chough by the Laws , and 
and ſtaturs of many the moſt civilized of Europe . the 
punuſhunent , or correction inflicted for of undertaking 


The third Book, 45 
exceſſive burthens upon ancient eſtaces , be meerly perſonal, ... . . 
and not ( like Gebaz#e7 leprofic) de cctans. there I_- " 
being more regard had by them to the memory of worthy, and 4s; /an; 
renowned Gentlemen( whoſe reputation they would nor have <44/9-cr 
laid in the duſt, by the ſupine remiſſneſs of any one of their 7; [2% 
ſucceſſors ) then to the raiſing up of the forrunes of thoſe, who ,.,.,; .,.- 
have 4 oy king CO them by , bur _ id (ce, 
neglet, for ,and im dent cariage of thoſe ,that 
borrowed their 14M wy 


money. 
8. Whereby like the indwellers of G«/#:4, they may be (aid 77, 5.2; 


to purchaſe their gold ing ; for in whoſe hand foever any 47.7, 
lieele heap chereofis roms n obligation; the ſcmalle + po 
time of any engendreth intereſt \ which is no ſooner 44/4; & 
bred , then ape to propagace another progenie , of the fame radix on- 
pregnancie the firſt , ro beget a third : and fo forth from 7 mar 
term to term , by the inceſtuous copulation of the Parent with 7 
the whole. Children together, and with each a part, and every —_ 
child conjunttly,& feveraly with all the reſt:Jone —— non extin- 
_—_— po again out of that, producin yo. pn 
il, in that progreſſive way of procreation\, 4 new increa 4 
of the like nature with the former. 4574 
9. And all by vertue of a bond dormant , lying paſſibly in -« wh 
the greaſie cobweb of a muſty cheſt , whoſe maſter (perhaps) © << 
ing lulled all this while in « dull lethargy of eaſe , awakerh jo. 1; 
not { Like the | Apollyon , in the eleventh of the Aperas (opidicas, 
tym inmituled Abaden ) but to the deſtrution of ſome one or 
other of his paper»fetterd ſlaves, proving ſuch a bad one in- 422x5, 
deed to whom be hath c ited his , that he never (aich Sr. 
abandoneth them , till his coverouſneſs ( making that the fer- _ 
tileſt chingof any , which of ic ſelf is moſt unfruictul ) have, in 1, 
the uncooſion.ble multiplying of fach a graceleſs gfiera* 14arcum- 
tion, reared up that unballowed refult from a ſpark ( as it 4. 4+ 
were Jin « corner of their houſes , to the hight of a moſt pro- "= on 


digious flame , toconſume them , their wives , and children, ;;.; © 7%. 
with their whole eſtates , and fortunes for ever. Sis quan- 
4447 One 


mes theſaw! confluxivint int car un ann ſattabitas, 
Hes creſcat ſcrlevats fits prades, recentss inceſtus jane fiayii amor nulla) ve petendb 


Ereſccad'q, piador . 


H 2 10. Yet 


46 The third Book, 


(oitem. 10+ Yet ſeeing the rigour of the Law of Scotland, ſeems 
wrde o rather | as the times have this while paſt ) to favour, and 
c»/14 1:5 gbertthe unmercifull creditor , then the debtors innocent ſuc- 
7" 4*.- ceſſor, 1 haverill this hour ( alchough not without ſome in- 
». ward reluQancy ) choſey rather to undergoe the ſternaeſ-,10d 
anauts auſterity thereo? , then begillatively to ſupplicate the everſion 
ws acti- of an eſtabliſhed cuſtom. 
pt tanto 11+ Albeic( whatever Lawyers ſay ) Ibe ſure, thatLaw, 
17" as it is conform to equity , and juſtice, requireth as well { it 
not more ) that there be antidots , and preſervative remedies 
for mens eſtates in Lands , as for the fortunes of them, whoſe 
1. x , ſtock is onely in money 


A 12. Eſpecially, in the behalf of thoſe, whom to deprive of 
aac jun- their ng 9} as is glanced at a little in the Gxrie cighe 
e 


g-u'ar /* Article of the ſecond Book ) would ingulph , and bury in for- 
_ "= gerfulneſs, that antiquity of Line, which all the riches on earth 
\, Xux- 1s not able to chem conſequently,making __— ſtoop 
quam 4- tocoyn, and vertue to gain, bring the only ſupport, and props 
«1% of honour, to ſerve as el to the unquen« hable fire of avari- 
nonqun® tious hearts. 
queſta, 13- And I may very well fay, ſeeing it cobzres with the 
pa_eg in hand, that I ſuſtain a greater prejudice, in being de» 
®* barred from my Lands, which were more then two and twen- 
ty hundred years agoe, acquired by the valour , and e 
of my Predeceſſors, then tne Sons of the aforeſaid itors 
can ; fol by the want of the money, pretended to be due to 
them, for my Fathers debt ; che overthrow of a worthy Fami- 
ly, being more deplorable, then the miſſing of what a Thiefe 
may filch out of a clout : and have reaped as little benefic of 
the fummes lo lent , as the brats, they are as yet to beger, have 
done of the Revenues which ſhould be mine. 

14. What forcible Starures have been publiſhed in former 
apes, for obviating the decay of honorable houſes, is not un- 
known to thoſe,that are any thing verſed in the hiſtorie of pru- 
dential Law. 

15. In this, the ableſt, and moſt judicious men on earth, 
have imployed the beſt of their wits : and So/on, that famous 
Legiflator amongſt the Arbewass, and wiſeſt man then living, 

Ma 


The third Book. 


made as ſo favourable for the preſervation of antient Fami” 
hes, and fo ſtriftly to be obſerved, that the controveners of 
them, ſo long as the ſplendor of that Republick laſed, were by 
the Arecopegit: moſt exemplarily, and condignely puniſhed,zs 
the reliques of the Artich Laws, till this day , will ſufficiencly 
bear record. 

16. Nor was this ſo conſcientious an ordonance, ſo totally 

to the Common-weal of the Greets , but that the rema-» 
nent of the world , in thoſe happy times of old did taſt of the 
wholeſome influence , and s of it, 

17. The Decemvirs ( amongſt the Kewax: ) inſtituted, and 
ordained , that thoſe who were apt by their mil- government , 
and reckleſs condu&t to endanger the undoing , and ſubver- 
ſion of their predeceſſors boule, to the apparent detriment , 
and damage tor ever of ſuch , as by nature were deſigned to 
facceed after them in that family, ſhould be diſabled from difſ- 
poning Lands , alienating any whatſoever goods, and con- 
rracting debts , in ſuch ſort}, that whoſoever ſhould meddle 
ordeal withthem , in cither of thoſe kinds , ſhould do it at 
their owne hazard , and perill , without hope of reſtitution 
of any loſs, or hinderance they might ſuſtain thereby , as ma- 
nifeſtly may be ſeen » by the Law Julams, in the paragraph de 
twra Furioſorum, and inthe Law, & x5 bon hs Para- 

ph, a4: verbis wbligatoriic, 

18. Which being conform to that other Law of the twelve 
tables, whereby ſuch like inconſiderate perſons were appoin- 
ted to have ſurveyers, and\ controulers ſet over them , and 
wholy prohibited , and interdicted from all manner of mana- 

ing their own affairs, as the words ofthe Text it {elf more 
faccin&ly declares, Quand bona tua paterna, avitaque neg- 
ligentia twa diſperdis Liberoſy, tw1t ad egeftarems perdnicis , oh 
ram rem tibi , ca ve , commercieq; hes = 

19. It is apparent how hainous, horrid and facrilegious 
an offence it (cemed to be in thoſe happy dayes, to have a hand 
in pulling down the monuments of their fore-fathers vertue , 
and demancling the honour of their houſe , by dilapidating 


their N 
39: And leaſt theſe premyſed a8ts, bould be thought ro 
oy ve 


The third Book, 


have been but good Laws ill obeyed, and worſe executed : 
ſuch rigorous puniſhment was inficted upon the delinqencs wn 
them , that no perſon guilty , of what age, or;condition 
ſoever, was ſpared. 

21. As may be inſtruſted by Quints Fabires, fon to Quin 
'z Fabixs the great, furnamed Allobrogicws , who, by an 
edit of Qwintns Pompeine Prater , was curbed and inhibited 
from doing by his miſguiding , and unadviſed cariage any 
harm or prejudice to the houle of his progenitors. 

23 And by that prodigal Senator of threeſcore yeares of 
age ( otherways wiſe enough ) over whom the Emperour 7i- 
berixa did conſtirure, and impole a tutor , or governour , 


24-Chiefly being warranted thereto by the ſacred Scripture 

it ſelf, in the old lteſtament, whereo!, che people of 1ſracl 

is ſaid to have been enjoyned to marry in their own Tribes , 

Jubilees _—_—_ and all debts whatſoever, after the revolu- 
ex 


tion , pired date of ſo many years, ordained to be diſ- 
charged , annulled, freely acquir all bonds and bills reſcin- 
ded and cancelled and all this only for the preſervation of an- 
cient houſes. 

25. Of which the countrie of Seorland allo , till within theſe 
fourſcore ten , was fo , thac Signior 
David, one of Quren Maries pri could not for 
all the mony he was maſter of,obtain in that whole dominion, 
the purchaſe of one handred pounds ſterlin of rentin Land , 
whereby :0 acquire the benefit of a Seershh title , the more ta 
ingratiat himſel{{ being an 71a» ) in the favour of the Nati- 
on ; ſo unwilling in thoſe good days , was every one to break 
upon any parcel of their predeceſſors inhericance. 

26. Secing thus it is then, that all Nations, and almoſt all 
Religions, bath Jews and Gentiles, have had the benefir of fo 
commendale, and pious a cuſtome, ſhall Scorland alone be 


The third Bock, 
deprived, and deſtitute of it, and chat only ſince ir is ſaid by 
themſelves, to bave received the puritie of the Goſpel, and a- 
bout the year of the Jubilee, no man will chiak ir, that hath 
any opinion of the Nation? 

27- But although ic were {0 (as God forbid it ever come to 
tha: __ that like to the molt rigid Levellers who would 
inchaos the ſtructure of ancient greatnehs, intothe very rubb:(h 
of a Neophytick parity, it were inacted there be no more re- 
gard had thereafter of priſtin honour, then of old garments ; 
and chat none be thereby digaifyed , bur in fo far, as the num- 
ber, weight, and meaſure of modern coyn, ſhall ſerve to in- 
banie bim. 

28. Yet with ſome probability, doe many harbour in their 
breaſts the opinion, that with a vever ſo lictle auxiliary ſuff- 
rage of publick Order, there ſhould be found amongſt them, 
= the ge in an gees offices ( not to 

ak of my lf) have obliged to the proprietaries of our 
_ n —_ who would ——— (in what they 
c Jwit any greatiacitement 0, the defi- 
ciency of the Law in that point. and further of Ives.che 

ration of my Predeceſſyrs family in my perſon. nullam eff 

29. Nowwithſtadding all chis, che acing of the foreſaid » /ic1um 
ſubſidiarie expedient, being too far below my inclination I 1 ſur- 
doe really Imagine, that ( without che conſcripeitious adjutan- *** 4; 
cie of the State )I ſhall engerpriſe but impoſſibities, and ne-\00 
ver enjoy the propoſed end ; which nevercheleG my baſhfull- *;,,;;, 
neſs and naturall averſneſs from craving what might put me comminue 
to a bluſh if denyed would never have permitted me to profe. '* £444 
__ ſuch means, it by the iw-quitie ofthe times , & ——— a 
alry 


iſloy- 
ome I did put into, and rouch harſhoefs of the *** 
_ credicors, 1 had not been fruſtated of my other 
gns. 


30- For albeit, ro the moſt frugall, ir might ſeem a task _— 
very difficult, ro make the payment of my Fathers debt, con» {fcc 05 
filt with the preſervation of my fore- eſtate : when by 1«i & /&r- 
the malignant influences of concredited ſummes, the Land "© 
rents do uſually ſhrink in, to the accreſcing of the burthen; © © 


there being nothing more certain , then. that the appriſiog of ua ef, 


i 


Av 011 
G45 17s 
guſtitio þ 
M's (Gy, & 
4U4 111 

Commu 4,1 
nnum 

IwTi (#* 
jus 4 Cult 
ſunt [{ tut / + 
(9/4 If 

9q*'V29 [ £- 
i EET 
VIIT pdite 
Pp a. 


- with ſuch like impe 


The third Fook, 


of Lands, ſerving of inhibirions, arreſting of Farms in the hands 
of Tenants , purchbeſing of letters for Civering up of the Ma- 
nor houſe, & other ſuch like moſt rigorous proceedi where. 
by one is made illegal , would have diſabled any ( though 
never ſo well affected ) from putting his means to the beſt a- 
vail, and caking that fafe. courſe tor himſelf, and creditors 
together, which otherways (with leſſe diſadvantage to either) 
_ be periormed by one, that were free of theſe lets and 
dilturbances. 

31; Whereupon enſue ſuch diſmal inconveniences , that 
commonly , when a grm—_ eſtace begins to be c 

rements, little or no uſe at firſt is made 

of che rents thereof ; eicher for that the Tenants ( for fear of 
creditors a'tachings and arreſtments ) pay not their due, leaſt 
they be forced to repay ir, & ſo,through the uncertainty of ma- 
ſters, ſpending all on themſelves, become ſome times inſuffici- 
ent debtors: or for that merchants(deing afraid to fall into the 
reverence of creditors , becauſe of inhibitions and arreſtments) 
dare not bargain for victuall , or any ſuch like annual commo« 
ditic : both, or cicher being like todrive on the decadence 
of a houſe ro its utter deſolation at laſt. 

32+ So that inſtead of a double benefic,that ought to accrew 
to both the Debcor, and Creditor, by the timely payment of 
both Lands, and money rent , a twotold prejudice ( for the 
moſt part ) through the ſtrinels of the creditors, is incurred, 
to wit the one, by delaying their own pay, and the other , by 
haſtning the ruine of the houſe of their Debtor + as if men 
ſhould be tyed to cotay = ſummes of money, and yet not 
get leave to make aſe of their own means, wherewith ro do ir, 
there being hardly any ſhift remaining for a man ſo uſed, but 
to have recourſe to his wits. 

33. Nor is it any thing leſs lamentable,that the Law of <cor- 
Land,in matter of Horninr ſhould be a main furtherance of this 
inconvenience.by debarring any one lying under che laſh cher- 
of,from getting payment at the hands of others of never fo juſt 
debrs due to *% : whereby a greater load being laid on him 
that is already overburthene1. 1 xchrnav-Ps policie of breaking 
the bruiſed reed, and thruſting him over head and cares inthe 

water 


The third Book, 51 
—_ that was in itto the chin, is very punQually obſer- 
ved. 
34+ Which rugged, croſſe, and thwarting proceedures ſo —_ op 
incenſed , damped, and exaſperated my father , that a charge /,,.,, 
from a creditor , being as the hiſling of a Baf4ich, the difor» ors of 
derly troubles of the Land being then far advanced ( though 4, 74 
otherways he diſliked them)were a kind of refreſhment to him, _ /s = "ig 
and intermitting relaxation from a more ſtinging diſquiet- —_ dele- 
- (latws was 

35, For that our inteſtin troubles, and diſtempers, by fi- 4* /« /o=r- 
lencing the Laws for a while , gave ſome repoſe to thoie, that 7" #4 
longed for a breathing timc,and by hudling up the terms of \,,, ;.... 
Warſuntide , and Martimaſs, (which in Scotlandare the deſtt= nericyr, 
nated times for paymenc of debts) promiſcuoſly, with the other 
ſeaſons of the year , were as an oxymal julip , wherewith to 
indormiat them in a bitter iweer ſecurity. 

36. Yer for all this, and notwithſtanding the grievouſneſs 
of ſuch ſolicitudinary , and luRiferous diſcouragements, able 
to appall che moſt andaunced ſpirits , and kill a very Paphla- 
gonian partridge, that is (aid to have two hearts, 1 did never» 
theleſs , without — my felt a jot , undergoe the defray- 
ment of the deb, alrhough not as a debtor , with as much ala» 
crity, and cheerfulnefſe, as if it had been of my ownunderta- 4/«< © 
king : and took fuch ſpeedy courſe therein , that immediately *'*" /©” 
after my Fathers deceaſe , for my berter expedition in the dif- ,,, © 
charge of thoſe burthens , having repaired homewards ,1did 
ſequeſtrate the whole rent ( my Mothers joynture excepted ) 
to that uſe only, and, as I bad done many times defore,berook 
my ſelf ro my hazards abroad , thae by vertue of the induſtry, 
and diligence of thoſe , whom by the adviſe, and deliberatt- 
on of my neareſt friends , 1 was induced to intruſt wirh my at- 
fairs , the debe mighc be che ſooner defrayed , and the ancienc 
houſe releeved out ofthe thraldome , it was fo unluckily taln 
into, 

37. Bat it fell out ſo far otherwayes, that after ſome few 
years reſidence abroad , without any conſiderable expence 
from home, when 1 thought, becauſe of my having mortified 
and ict apart all che rem to no other end , r Ao the curting off, 

I 


and 


The third Book. 


and dealking of my Fathers debt that accordingly a great 
thereo' had = diſcharged: I was ſo far diſappointed _=_ 
expeRation therin,that whilſt conform to the confidence repo* 
fed in him 1 h to have been exonered,and relieved uf ma» 
ny Creditors, the debt was only paſt over, & tranferred from 
one in favours of another, or rather of many in the favours 
of one, who, though he formerly bad gained much at my Fa- 
thers kands.was notwichſtiding ut the time of his deceale none 
of his creditors, nor at any time mine; my Egyptian bond 

by fuch means remaining ſtill the ſame, under task maſters dit- 
fereat only 1n name, and the rents nevertheleſle raken up to the 
full , ro my no [mall detriment , and prejudice of the houſe 
ſtanding in my perſon. 

38. The aime of ſome of thoſe I concredited my weighteſt 
adoes unto, being, as is moſt conipicuoully appareat , tiat I 
ſhould never reap the fruition, nor enjoyment of any portion, 

cell, or pendicle of the eitate of my predeceſſors, unleſſe 

y my fortune , and endeavours in Forrain countries, I ſhould 
be able to acquire as much as might ſuffice to buy it(as we ſay) 
out of the ground. 

9. And verily ( though not in relatioato theſe ignoble , 
end un«orthy by-ends \ it was my purpoſe, and re'ojution to 
have done fo, which aſſuredly , had not the turbulent diviſions 
of the time been ſuch as to have croſſed ,, and thwarted the at- 
chievements 07 more faiſible projets , I would haye accom - 
phſhed two or three ſeverall ways ere now. 

40. And yer for all the ſtops, and inconveniencies, that 
flowed from the late unhappy ſtirrs, and garboyls in both Na» 
tions, Ihad. by all probability ) got a great many thouſand 
pounds thereof , had not a wretched , poor,and trivial ſumme 
ſcarce worth the naming , been more prevalent with che afore- 
laid party. " 

41. By re:ſon of whole injurious , ang unequitable dealing, 
in appropriating to themſelves , and yo po by all appea- 
rance )to their own uſe my rents, and neither ng the 
Land, nor exonerating me of any conſiderable part of the 
burthen, wherewith either it, or I ſtood affeted : I was mo+ 
ved to face about, and return homewards , to take that ſolid, 
and 


The third Buck! 53 


and deliberate courſe with the crazed eſtate left unto me, as 
might make the ſubſiſtence of my houſe, compatible with the 
ſauisfaticn of my Fathers Creditors. 
To which , with might and main , to the uttermoſt of 
my abilitie, I ſtrove, with pecunial charms, and holy-water Q<#-m 


favile nes 


out of P/urs'; Cellar, to exerciſe and lay the Spirit lately rai» 7," 
ſed, and raging abroad, without the beſprinkling of a Chryſo- ,,/, _ 
paſt hyſſop, aot to be conjured : my ſuccefsfulneſs therein a- nw /1quic 
Ing ,vou ob fans all intervecning impediments , to the fi- #1c10%)- 
cal diſcuſſing of ſome of theſe = , and, in a plauſible "*- 
way, acc to the exigence ot the perſons, and circumſtan- 
ces of the — condition and quality of their ſecurity, to 
diſpatch the reſidue of them epaſſyreroricatly, that is, one after 
another. 
43- And to this end, applyed all my aforeſaid rents, fave fo 
much , as for publick dues, and augmentation of Miniſte-s ſti- 
pends were exacted of me: in the latter whereof, becauſe of 
the hereditarie loſs, which I chereby am like to ſuſtain, 1 will 
make boldrto inſiſt a lictle , with that reverence nevertheleſs , 
which becomes me to the Church, and to be eſtabliſhed Ec- 
cleſiaſtical order of the Land. - —_—_ 
24. Here nevertheleſſe, Let the good Reader be pleaſed to ,, 7.x. 
take along with him for his betrer conceiving of the unmerci- a4: 165 
fulneſs and indiſcretion of my Fathers creditors , how when to /«ci=at ir- 
ſome of them I had offered preſent poſſeſſion of Land, til they 97 1%= 
ſhould be found paid; and unto others, who formerly had ;3 
been victual Merchants, had made tender of my rents of that 1» ;u/inodi 
kind, ar very eaſie rates, to be delivered by my depuries, with- «14 b+- 
out their running of any hazzard atthe hands of a diſtreſſed © 
Tenandrie : the anſwer of the former was , That they would ORE 
have no land, but money ; and of the other , That though ++ popce; 
they had often before that traffiqued in ſuch like commodities. 4 nux- 
yet that then for being taken up with other more publick buſi - 142 
neſſes they could nor accept of niy proffer,bur wiſhing I might 7,0 
have the fortune to deal with thoſe would give the greateſt ;- 
ices, expected I ſhould nor fail to letthem have the money 
bor defalcation of ſome of their accounts. 
45+ By which their ſubdolous and cra'ty tergiver __ , 
I 2 rom 


54 The third Book. 


Pe damn from what in a time of peace, they would have fo eagerly em- 
«1714 **- braced, they have made it too evidently apparent, that in pro- 
96 4: 4® ſecuring of their own caſe, they have aimed at my utter deltru- 
\ Ate ' ! 

Q+/cra Gon, both their reſolutions concentring in this, That they 
[-5t4 {uit thought it more expedient, by a little forbearance, to ſuffer 
damn *- their unhallowed ſums to increaſe, for the better obtaining at- 
p's oy "*' terwards of my whole Eſtate to themſelves, then by any ways 
XN 08 apr: 

wt medling with my rents, in a tumultuous time, to bring me the 
{odds (oonerin a capacity of enjoying my own, through the dimi- 
p <4: b»- nution of my Fathers debts,by cheir receivings- This pirthey 
"+, ** digged for me,which that they ſhould fall into themſelves were 


-- "emi doth juſt and equitable, 


FIT.2z 
fonts w- 


bil ſalts — , —_— — — _ — 
babeni, 


ln Flagitatores. Ep, 1. 
Tre: quondam FEncas Harpyas, virgins ora, 


Aique nnguet volucrum vidit babere truer. 
Namque fame rabidus dum littore prandia ſuwit, 
Omni fardarnnt vel rapmere ire. 
Creditor his fimilis, perturbans onunia, paces 
Nullam views qui fimit offs ſas. 
Huarpia proprict certant defendere fines, 
Tile ramen pegor namque aliend raps 


Alterum. 


N on (ati; apparet cur nomina creditor onunus 
Accigit a creds *. ret ratione vacat, 

Debuerat petim veritars incredulng , ot fic 
Sortiri ners/'0 noming di fna ſug, 

E ſe avidus nullnm naw credit in athere numen, 

Nec quenquam fidun Creditor eſſe virum. 


$$6$'$$ 
$923985 


The Scope 


Of che forrth Boo x, entituled 
CHRYSEOMYSTES. 


$% 
Z 20 


$$ & 
IS þ 


He Author having in the two precedin? Rooks, 
very orderly proceeded from the manifitatron 
of the buge log of Flagitators lying in his way, 
to the diſplaying of pregnant reaſont , why the 
ſaid impediment ſhonld be removed , for the 
weal of the whole 1/1r, whoſe Liter ure by bu 

endeavenrt be ©s to improve; Jn this fourth Brok of bus Intre- 

duftion, he maketh mention of another block , which, thangh no: 
f ſo immenſe «bulk, ought nevertheleſs, for its repugaancie 
With the propoſed end, be as well laid aſide, as the former , and 
that ir the unjuſt decrees, where with the Preſbyterian Comm ſi- 
on hath robbed hin of 4 great deal of bu rents, H: for Cop (en- 
dionſneſt ſake , begins with the figure of Apophaſir, to ſoy br in- 
tends not to expofinlate for the immrie (abatned by that Kirks- 
wanerich tyrannie, which deſporyled him of bus right of Patronage 
to bis Churches, and from thence deſcendeth to a plain Narrati. 
on, bow contrary to an eftablited {mon by A of Parliament, 
and in oppoſition to ſeven relevant reaſoncyte any one Whereef th:y 
would not daigne 's make anſwer, the Conmuſſion of the Kirke; 
without 7 rving an) bearing to the Authors advecats , drcerned 
one of bus good Priefts to have an augmentation out of b'; patron, 
rents , nr] equiyalint to as much mare, 41 Was poſſeſſed by 
bis Predeceſſor in that Church ; and the Churches of the other 


Pariſh(in fpite of buth Law & Reaſon) to be diſnnited,c+ to = 


The Preface, 


of the Miniſter ithereof, more fipend mortifyed, then to them 
beth formerly was thﬀmght ts br ſufficient» This & one of the 
chi; 1 of the block of Pretbyterial Government, which becauſe the 
violent aſſertors thereof would by « pretended jure divino av- 
therity pretinacionſly obryude npon our conſcience! , and Co-eſſ ens 
that it inthe ebjelt of our Faith, with the molt orthodox Eccleſr- 
aftical deffrine , the Author very civilly , without falling upon 
the common School -comtrover ſiet twill i onta diſcomrſe concernin 
Fabler, Sercerers, aud diftratted people, wherein, they wi 
br found a4 erroneous in their opinions, as in their rule oppreſſive. 
The Author dejires to have the prolixity of the d'igreſſion for this 
canſe excuſed, the Who wenld encounter with ſuch an adverſary, 
muſt ſtep a little aſide to cope With him aright, He walls in 
ne known tral, bir ations are arbitrary, a«d paſſion direfts bu 
motions: and where be finds evaſions ſmitable to bu bypecyifie, 
Proteus never traniformed himſelf into ſo many ſhaper, as be will 
dor for his own ends. What the Author ſpraks of the devotion 
of his Anceſtors, before the Nativitie of onr Saviour , and When 
afterward; the only Roni þ Faith War embraced by them : Of the 
antiquitie of bis T enandrie, and their thilfulneſy in the Cre» 
monies of p iffine Sacrifice : Of windicating old cuſtom: from 
the aſptrſions of Nenterick, Sciolifts, and maintaining rhe inge- 
nioſirie of Fable : Of th: confſtence of Portical Filtsons 
with trus Divinity, and ſympathie twixt old and wew 
Rome in their Rites and Myſteries of Religion : and Leuft- 
ly, of Hypecondriach , and Fanitical brainer, and the great 
perpetrations of horrible wnjuſtice is Scotland, by the roo 
frequent miſtakes of their diſeaſer, # tome other purpoſe; but 
m view of the Conrteeous Reader, ts carreer bis Spirits along 
the bonnds , the rigid Prerbyter would not have 10 be trod won ; 
ani to make that Judicatory prvceive, to whom be muber bis 
apreale, how unfit it were , that any confiſtorian vaile ruld 
da ben the light of bis Eluenbrations, Aft er dll be cloſeth with 
the covetouſneſs, and inflexibilny of the ſelfiſh K irkhift, which 
as it ucennexrd ith foregorng paſſages, to the diſcretion of the 
gentle jernſer cannot come unſeaſonably. 


The 


S&&824304480080 2404 
KSLISSA AS DABLSSEL 


The fourth B oo x 
OF THE 


INTRODVCTION 
INTITULED 
CHRYSEOMYSTES, 
OR 
The covetous Preacher, 


WHEREIN 


The rigour ofthe Scotiſh Kirk, beyond 


that of the Churches in former ages,is ſhewn 
to have very much obſtructed the Authors deſign, in 
the emiſſion of this new /diewe, and other 
Tractates of that nature. 


a Ere I omit theKirks denuding me of myHeri- 
» table righc of Patronage to the Churches of 
the Shire , whereo' my Predeceſſors have 
above theſe two decades of Ages been both 
Hereditary Sheriffs and ſole proprietaries : 

me as likewiſe to make mention of the five 
Chalders rent of additionall ſtipend , any year worth 5001. 
Scotch ,which the Miniſter of Cremertie hath now, more then 
his _ Incumbent in that Charge did enjoy. 

2. I will only ſpeak a word or two of my two other Churches, 
which when leperated in former times , and thoſe of late too , 
bad but 300 |. Scotch of allowance betwixt them both , which 
neverthcleſſe 


The fourth Bock, 


nevertheleſſe was « great matrer then in proportion to the 
little ſtock whence < to be educed ; and therefore togither 
with other more relevant cauſes, were by a commiſlion to that 
effe& by the Parliament then ſitting in the year 1617, united 
into one, and ordained after the deceaſe of either of the two, 
* that then preached in them , ro have the cure of them , ſerved 
ſingly by the Survivor , and fo contecutively from one another, 
by one alone. 
/ 3+ Pur when the ſtipauGtionanie tide , immediately after the 
Deke of Hami/towns unluckie engagement , begun to overflow 
'” the Land , and that I thought with ſuthcient Bulwarks of 
argument to have ſtayed the inundation thereof , from the two 
forelaid half Churches I was violently driven , like a feather 
'- before a whirlewind, notwithſtanding all my defences, to the 


= /'{antuary of an inforced patience. 


4. Forthough I did put in theſe ſubſequent reaſons, againſt 
the diluniting, and adjeRitious proviſion of the aforeſaid two 
Churches. 

Firſt , that boch pariſhes cogither are but three miles long , 

* *” and one of the'churches theroifcalied the Kirk of Callicudden) 

ſeated in the middle (or near by) fo that the dwelling houſe of 

the remoteſt pariſhioner of either of the pariſhes , will not be 

above a mile and a half diſtant from chat church,and yet wich- 

in 40 miles of that place, and thatina plain country , there 

are of thoſe whoſe dwelling houſe in the pariſh , is ſixteen 
miles diſtant from the pariſh Kirk : 

5+ Secondly , that there are not thirty ſix ploughs labouring 
in both, and when acknowledged to be united , they hall be 
found the leaſt pariſh in che Country , both for rent , * people, 
and bounds. 

6. Thirdly chat theſe ewo have been but one pariſh ( by all 
appearance) from the beginning ; for Cxl/1cwddes is buile af- 
ter the faſhion of a Church , but chat ocher ( now called Kirk 
muckel ) is in its edifice ike bar to « Chappell, 

7. And foriooth , it was nothing elſe but « Chappel, which 
one of my y goon in the rime, that the Roaw/ + Religion 
was univerſally profefled in Sevrland, cauſed to be builr for 
his own eaſe of devotion. 

8. For 


The fourth Bok. 


8. For having a ſummer dwelling adjacent thereto , 
within the precinct of the pariſh of Cromwercee , and three miles 
diſtant from the church thereof, he chuſed rather,then weekly 
to go {o far to hear maſs, and orher fuch liturgies, as, onthe 
Sundays, and many feſtivall days, are amongſt the Cathag 
lick Komen: till this hour in uſe, to be at the charge of that 
petty Fabrick , and the maintenance cf a Chaplain , whereby, 
with the lefle labour to exerciſe his devotion at his own 
doores. 6 

9. and inteſtimony thereof , my father , not thinkinMie 
ſhould have been at any time deſtined for a pariſh Church , 
but a place only for preaching , with the more eaſe to the au- 
ditorie cauſed make it as much longer as it was beiore , which 
evidentlyſheweth, it being the eſt church as yet in all 
the country that it could not at firſt have been but a Chapel. 

19. Nor is it to bethought ſtrange , why my Anceſtors of 
late have been pleaſed to expend io much on !tructures,to a re» 
ligious end ; fecing as my father , who was the firſt proteſtane 
that ever was of our houie beſtowed the charge of the addicio- 
nal length of the ha if of the whole of that chappel, which now 
they call a Kirk, and as ſome of my tors, beſtowed all 
thoſe lands in the parochin of Roſe Aarkaic which now are in 
the Poſſeſſion of Robert Leflic of Fiwafe upon the Biſhop 
Dean and Chapter of Kos,and that others of them were at the 
colt of building the churches of Creavertie and Cullen /d4rn,and 
many other monuments , betokening their zeal to the Kone /b 
faith then profeſſed : ſo amongſt their forefathers , were there 
ſeverals of our familie , who before the days of Chri# , inthe 
ſame foreſaid pariſhes, founded many Temples , delubres , 
and fanes, for ſacrificing in the groves, and bigh places to 
ſupter, Inno, Mari, Pallas, Merewie, F enus and Diane, the 
reliques whereof are as yet in myLand obvious to the eye of a- 
ny curious antiquarie , and fo much extant till chis day as by 
the circularie oval, Triangulary, or ſquare figure, together 
with the various manner in ſicuation of the ſtones, will to an 
__ Mythelog ff, and well veried in rites of old, make 
it eaſily diſcernible , to which of the Heatheniſh deities the 
reſpective dedication was made. 

K 1: . That 


7 


The fourth Book, 


r 1-That ia my bounds ſhould be ſeen remainders of ſo great 
antiquity, is much : yet is it more to have them in a io 
remote the territories of the Theonemerberr , and - 
tors of the divinity of the Ancient Poets ; but moſt ſtrange of 
allitis , that in my Lands ſhould be found of thoſe , who 
( though they can acither read nor write ) will nevertheleſſe 
be abie to exchange diſcourſe with any , concermng the Na» 
ture of the Hentheniſh deities, and afford pertinent reaſons 
for the variety of Sacrifices , and other circumitantial points 
| ro be performed in the days of old. 

12. 1 asked them how they came by this knowledge , they 
told me, that their fathers taught it, who had it from 
thei progenitors , unto whom ( lay tbey ) it was derived from 
their firſt fore-fathers , that accompanyed my predeceſlors A- 
{yper, Boltiftr, N or, Aſftioremm and Latorh inthe abo- 
riginarie acqueſt of theLand of their Anceſtors reſidence, and 
in this their relation, they were ſo punRtually exaRt, that ſome 
of chem by Nomenclature, in a Lincall pedigree irom Father 
to Son , of above threeſcore ſeverall perſons, inſtracted their 
dependence upon our family , in one and the ſame Land, three 
hundred defore the days of our Saviour. 

13+ That this is very probable, and that none hath a more 
ancient Tenandrie then my (el?, 1 doe the rather beleeve it,thac 
both hiſtoric, and the moſt autbentick tradition we have , a- 
youcherth the firſt Labourers , and manurers of that Land, to 
have come along with my anceſtors Belriftor, Nomrfter and 
Lutork, and for their ſervice done, eſpecially to the laſt 
of thoſe threegreceived Leaſes thereupon inthe quality of yeo- 
mans, who were ſo well pleaſed with what they got , that af- 
ter they had moſt coarentedly ſpent the beſt of their age, when 
decrepit years did ſummon them to pay their laſt due to nacure, 
they bequeathed unto their children the hereditarie obedience 
they did owe their maſter, co whom they leſt their bleſſing, 
and beſt wiſhes. 

14. Which proved fo 'effetual in advancing obſequi- 
ouſneſs on the one ſide, and protetion 0n the other, that in 
tus poſterity they were moſt tortunate, from 2ti0n to pe- 
neration, and ſo deeply ingaged to cach, inthe long continu- 
ate 


ate fucceliion of _ houſe, that the iid of theic childrets 
in a ſubſecutive of to Brat, and Sire to Sauckli 
have, til chis boure, chrough ſo vaſt a flux of time, — 
nanciarie enjoyers for pay of thoſe their reſpective rooms , 

nout any interruption of afledation, or breach of Leaſe, 
which, at the expiring of any 5 years end, might ( unwroa- 
ged the late er )have been beſtowed on any other. 

15+ | have Farmers, who, albeit neither they, their Fathers, 
nor fore-fathers ever payed to me, or any of my predeceſſors, 


above fifteen ſterlia a year , dwell nevertheleſſe in the 
ſelf ſame houſe , which hath been inhavired by their Anceſtors, 
trom to child , above nine hundred years together , 


though none of them ever yet had a leaſe tor above five 


Is. 

16. But of ſuch; as have removed a furlong. or two from 
the of their progenitors abode, there are that can reck»n, 
in their own familiar pedigree, a row of anteceſſors who have 
dwe't in that country - a thouſand years beyoad thar 
time, 
27. Although this conſtancy of reſidence be commendable, 
yet doth it carry along with it thisdifadva ,that the pro- 
genie of theſe firm ahiders, is always of a extent , for the 
moſt part,asmay a by ſeven or eight ſeveral ſurnames, in 
two pariſhes of my , whereof ſcarce one was ever heard 0: 
in any other place ofthe world. 

1 8. The reaſon hereof proceedeth from that , when at firſt 
( after the manner of the plantation of the //rae/iter in the Pa- 
left im: exch Tribe by it ſelf ) my predeceſſor had xſligned to e- 
very family a part , its own allotted parcel of ground , they 
very ſuddenly took fuch deep root therein , that to ther 
ſucceſſors they left an irremovable aſcriptitiarineſſe co the ſoyl 
in which they bad been ingraffed. 

19+ Each Hamlet by that means, decenarie , or Wayen- 
take ( to uſe the Sax» word ) having its peculiar Cl» ( a5 we 
call it) or name of a Kinred , none whereof will from that 
portion of Land , bouge with his will tro any other , upon ne- 
ver ſo great advantages offered unto him,the interflitting from 
one pariſh to another , though _—R— , being _ 

2 MUTUAL 


j9 


60 


The fourth Fook, 


mutnal diſpleaſingne's, that all, and each of them eſteem of ir, 
as of an extruſive proſcription to the Barbadoer, or depulſorie 
exile to Malagaih. 
2<- it is amongſt ſuch of both ſexes, that are found ſome 
Philarchzan Zelots, whoſe priſtin, and breborian cuſtoms, ſa» 
vouring 0: ſuperſtition,mani'eſt great antiquity, many of them 
endeavour the proſecut ing ct pood encs with an upright in- 
tention by exoler, ard Palephaſian means utrerly exploded : 
which lecceſſive courſe of fantimonial dutie bath ſucceflively 
been tollowed by many with fuchunverterate proneneſs, that 
{ome of our Neorerick facricolaries, bave been much (candah- 
ſcd at the hereditarineſ(s thereof. 
21, We, for be ng Chriſtians , ought to avow that thoſe 
ways(alrhough ſuch a+ were trod upon with grear obſervancie 
by the antient Gentil-)[hould nevertheleſs, 'or deviating from 
the ſt-eight paths of che preſent profeſſion of the Country, be 
nothing at all relyed upon ; becauſe they were excogitated by 
the only wit of man : fo for the ſame reaſonand faith we owe 
to him, who is the truth as well as the way , ſhould all of us 
endeavour to be u right in our pan, and not to deter- 
mine raſhly of a faule, but to contider thereof according to 
the nature of its dehnquencie , withour aſperſing it with the 
guilt of another crime. 
22+ To puniſh a Fornicatos for murther , or a Theef for 
Fornication , is an aR of injuſtice ; becavſe the firſt degerrerch 
rather then kills, and the other rather takes then gives; and 
to chaſtiſe one for an offence, which be hath not committed, 
is a meer oppreſling of the innocent : for that whatever ſe- 
cret ſin he have, that may deſerve it from above, it is with- 
out any cauſe, knowne to him that inflicts the CorreQi- 
on 
23. So is it, that we may eſteem that cenſure unreaſonable, 
and injurious, which impures to Sorcerie what meerly pro- 
ceeds from the frivolous praiſe of poetical divinity ; and 
and that ſcholar, a bad Kciene , that is miſtaken in the ex- 
erciſe of that whereof in the Schools he was taught the ſpe- 
eGulation 

24.1 


The fourth Book, 


24+ I have heard of afillie old Wife, who for doing ſome 
prettie feats (wherein ſhe had been inſtruced by her mother) 
according to a pre'cripe manner. ſer down in ſome of! the Vers» 
ſes of Hower, whom neither of them bad the skill to perute , 
but had learned the contents from their Progenitrices up 
wards, through many ages, was branded wich the {Mputition 
of having the concomirancie of a D. mo%,and accuſed of witch- 
crafr, by vie, who, being a pro effor of the Grech, whipt a 
boy, for not getting theſe verſes by heart, it being the Task, 
that was enjoyned him for a days Leſſon , as ifthe Devil had 
been more aſſiſtant to the operation, then the Theorie, and 
that it had been lawfull tor them to ſtudie, what was felonie for 
others to ena, 

25. Amongſt this meaner ſort of people , there are ſome, 
who tenacioufly cleaving to their frets of old, doe very o'ten 
repair at fet times to Fountains, Oak-trees, little round Hil- 
locks, and great ſtone heaps, where,with pre-conceived words, 
and motions beficting the ſervice , _y doe things truly not 
approvable, becau'e unwarranted by the beſt religionarics of 
y pr , yet that there is charm, faſcination, inchanement , 
infernal aſſiſtance, or any thing elſe more,then meer cuſtom in 
them, may ſafely be denyed ; for that in the choiceſt of the 
ancient of the both Greek, and Latin Poets, are couched, 
in ſet terms words, expreſiive of all the points of that Po- 
ecicall Licurgie, 

26, Who doubteth hereof , let him read Homer, Pre 7, 
T heeerit, Hoſted, Pinder, Ariftophincs, Ovid, Clandian, Hee 
race, Martial, and others, which it he doe nor, his lazineſs to 
peruſe theſe books, ſhould not be of ſuch prevalencie over our 
credulicie, as to make us beleeve, that others doe deviliſhly, be- 
cauſe he knoweth not what it is they doe ; otherwiſe (as is faid 
in the zoth Article of chis firſt book ) the Lebron rule of the 
various degrees of ignorance, would be the ſole direQtory, to 
the overthrow of knowledge. 

27. Accprding to the unſtreighene's of which canon ſquare, 
or pattern, in what countrey ſoever it ſhall _ . men of 
eminent condition for place, and fortune (whole example uu- 
ally is che only Line and Level, whereby the mokiced — 


The fourth Book: 
body of the people is ordered , both in their Lives and opini- 
pes to be ſo regulated , as implicitly to follow ſuch leaders, 
and, without any farther examination , to ply as they bow, 
jog as they wag, redandruate as they ampirvat, «nd every way 
beſtirre themſelves after their motions, more conſtantly in that 
their inconſtancie then the riſing of the billows of the Sea , at 
the boyſterous and impetuous thuds of a raging Zeree: 1 bere 
is nothing more infallible then that a countrey, Kingdome , 
or Common-weal ſick of the ableplie of fuch an epidemical 
ſeQtatorſhip, ( of which diſeaſe, incivility , malice , uſurie, ig- 
norance and hypocriſie are the ordinary ſymproms)muſt 
by the frequencie of its convulſions againſt reaſon, equity , 
and conſcience ( though under pretext of a Law } gornh and 
be ruined at laſt, either by the violence and furie of a forraine 
enemy , or by inteſtin broyles, and commotions within ic ſelf, 
or by both rogicher : ſo dangerous a thing it is, willfully co 
hudwink the mind, & blind-man-buP't , in the propatularie 
view of a meridian fun, as if we were quoquoverſedly mufled , 
inthe ſable mantle of Cimmerien darkneſe 

28. It is a bad acquiral we give the ancients of great Licers- 
ture, for their pains taking ro civilize our manners, and inſtru 
our minds in all the choice, and moſt reſearched myſteries of 
Learning, and true Philoſophie, by the lovely, tweet, and curi- 
ous allurements of poeticall devifes , to twit them with the 
name of Devils, fiends, and infernal ſpirits. 

29+ Whether ic be ſo or no, I appeal to all the judicious 
Mythologiſts of this age , whereo! ſome being moſt emi- 
nent in their knowledge of T heologie and of choiſe literature 
in other commendable faculties , have in their learned Wri- 
tings made moſt evidently a , What ſacred rayes of true 
divinity, lie hid in thoſe excellent fables of old. 

20. Such as ſay , that fables are lies, and therefore, not 
unlike to have proceeded from the deceiver . and father of lies 
underſtand not well what belongs to truth, and derogat much» 
from the moſt authentick writings of any, wherein allegories , 
parables,and apologues are almoſt every where obvious to the 
readers peruſal. 

31- Complexed truth is in affirmation, and negation, which 

7 


7 be fourth Book 


in matter of ſignes enun-ed of one another, hath its 
ſignification in the things by chem ſignified, as when we - , 
man i; reaſonable, we mezn not that the word mar, is the word 
reaſonable, but that the thing , for which the word was ſup- 
pones, hath rea/ow in it, 

32, Even {0 isitin a fable, where the epimprbie , or mo- 
rality thereof is ſuppoſed to be Gar *hhed by the words, and not 
the licteral ſenſe, which by chem us expreſled, bur i» at7u igna- 
ts ( as it were ) and not exercite, 

33- Asthe Fables in .£/op of the off, and the Lamb, the 
Lyon und Mouſe, the Frog, and the Oxe, the Graſbeper , and 
the P:/mire, the Bull, and the Goat, the Dove, and the Adag- 
pie, the E« le, and the Raven, the Cache and the Huw 
the Bee, __ the Bear, the Dog, and the Sbee , the Stork and 
the Fox, are _ in their Epinthetics! by ſome 

t mens opprefling ofthe innocent : 6y the rele retri- 
__ of a Tads !avour : 6y the ruine that Pride brings up + 
on the arrogant man : #y the advantage of careful induſtrie, 
beyond wanton idleneſs : by kicking againſt thoſe their berters, 
whom misfortune foppreſleth : by the hazard that ma 
men run, to be deceived : 5 undertaking things Parr! {ren be- 

ond their power: by keeping themſelves wiſely within bounds: 
L, the | ure ſomewhat, then in being re- 
rengedo luffer more: 6y the _ / prejudice, which falic wit- 
,t 


neſling bringerh upo —_ he great delight we of- 
_— m—_ſ_ inclinching, and a jeſts, and 
all which to _—_ > to be as tru eſled , by 


that He alddalavary manner of ſpeech, as by a > = biſtorical 


—_— of the pur > decyphered by it, is to aſcribe leſſe 
to the rayes of the Sun at noon, in an eſtival Solſtice , 


on when in Cpricor® he is meerly borizoncal. 

34 As in copious Languages, there are ſeverall words made 
uſe of, for ſerting forth one and the ſame thing to our under- 
frandings, whereof nevertheleſle each apart is a ſufficient ſigne, 
for its tion, though not with ſuch imbelliſhmene : 
fo we difſever truths from elocutions framed in this 
kind of way, we would open a door to the deſtruction of elo- 
quence, by baniſhing trom our diicourls all figurative utte- 


rance 


* 


The fourth Book 
rance, in the delicious varietie of 7roper and Schemes,” 

35. There are moe wayes tothe wood, then one, ( as the 
common ſaying is ) and from the circumference tothe center , 
may be drawn infinite lines, whereof nevertheleſs, not any can 
fall perpendicularly on the Baſs, ſave one : yet is the obliqui- 
tie of any of thole radial lines, the lefſe, the nearer it approach 
the perpendicular, and ſo much the greater, the leſs that the 
enple be, which with the Baſis it comprehendeth. 

36. Juſtſo , there being one ſole God omnipotent upon 
whom the conſervation of the whole world d eth , which 
is the ground work, and Bajs, whence is ed that perpen- 
dicular of perſeftion, and true knowledge attained unto by 
the only ſaints in beaven , and celeſtial hierarchies, there pro- 
ceedeth from che circumference of the duty of man, an innu- 
merable diverſicie of religious Sets, and faiths, tending all,and 
each of them cordially ro the aforeſaid Bahr of incompre- 
henſible goodneſs, whereof chere is not one, that, by reaſcn 
of bumane frailty commixed with ir, declineth not a little from 
that orthogonal ſtreighrneſle, which in the 7 beocatberor is re« 

uired. 
L 37. However, there is not hing more ſure, then that as the 
more amply by Learmng, and _—_— of heart, the acute an» 
gle (cocallirſo) of a profeſſion be dilated, it will prove the 
more orthodoxical, ſo the rr deflexion, that by wicked- 
neſſe, and ignorance it be brought ro from the propoſed up- 
rightneſſe, it will be the lefle warrantable. 

38. By which account. alrhough all be dire&ed to *one end, 
yet becauſe of the imperfettions which anavulſibly adhere to 
the ſoul, whilſt ic remains inveſted with mortality, there being 
none of them without ſome blemiſh, the difference onely is in 
more,and leſſe; berrer, and worſe. 

29. Nevertheleſſe, albeit in every ſtate almoſt there be a 
diſcrepance in the manner of regulating the conſciences of the 
people, yet without any danger of hereſie , may the myſteries 
of one and the ſame devorion be diſplayed unto us , after fe- 
veral faſhions, as the variety of the ſignes taketh not away the 
unity ofthe ching, that is repreſented by them. 

40. The Trumpet incourageth 1 roops of horſe, the ſame is 
done 


done by Kettle-drums : the foot is animated by the Tambour, 
and with our Hsgblanders, the Bag-pipes effectuares every 
whit as much. The Mabwwerans repair no faſter to their 
Moſcheer, ac the voyce of Le iths, ills «tha, which calleth 
them thereto, then we doe to our Churches, at che knell of 
the Bell, h of an inarticulat ſound. 
- 41+ Ifthe thing be the fame, which is ſignified, as likewiſe 
the conception we have of that thing, although the ſignes 
be various, which to that our conception doe repreſent it : 
Whereat is it ( 1 pray you) that we ſtartle ? Is not the ſacred 
Word interpreted as well anagopically, as literally ; and alle- 
n+ | ny. he ocher mays, ——_— 
100s accounted authentick, and the a ity 
attribured to each. 
43+ It isevident to ſuch, as will look out with their own 
eyes, that the firſt infticuters of Fables, which admit of a Phy- 
ſical, as well as Moral ſenſe, did in cheir pluralictie of gods , 
aim at the knowledge and worſhip of one onely divinity , in 
whoſe ion they conceived all other deities to concenter, 
as ſubſtantial qualities flowing from his vertue, power, and 


3- Do not orr ſelves affirm, That all that truly can be 
tad of God, is God himſelf; becauſe of his ſimplicitſime ab- 
ſtraedneſſe, pure at, and fubſtance, void of all matter and 
compoſition : and yet what is more commonly ſaid amongſt 
our Theologs, then that many are the attributes of God, 
which kind of ſpeech they maintain to be neccſary,tor our ber- 
rer underſtanding z hence the word, Authropoparbie, a deſcen- 
ding to the capacity of man, 

44- God is juſt, he is loving powerful he is, and wiſe : yet 
all, and each of thoſe qualities in the Abſtrat belonging to 
him, are God himſelf, Afr, Capid, Mars, and 4pots, by 
the priſhn Poers have been made, by a Metonymical trope, to 
ſtand concretively for the divulſives of the juice, love, prwer, 
and widow of God : not much unlike to the ſecond notions, 
to which we grant an objeRive exiſtence in the mind. 

45+ That the Heathen did beleeve in the unity of the God- 
head, is alſo apparent by ot all cheir Geiti ag} + 

exes, 


65 


The fourth Book, 


ſexes, were in conſanguinity, and affinity with Jepiter ; which 
is as mach to fay , as that all power, vertue, goodneſs, and cf. 
ficacy, proceeds from God. 

46. Neptwar'was eſteemed the power of God, in the Seas : 
Amerve, the power of (50d, in Learning : P/wto, the pow- 
er of God, in ſubterranean concavities : Bacchw, in Wine : 
Ceres, in Corn : Nemeſis, in revenge: and fo through all, 
whatever m1y concern Gods efficacious working , tn relation 
either ro the qualitie, whence it loweth, the whER, that re + 
ceives it, or place, wherein ir operateth; by emanation, or any 
other kind of produdt oy, 

47- To make uſe therefore, cicher in our diſcourſe or wri- 
tings of the words Rellora, Hebe, Eolws, Merenric, Aphrodi e, 
Heremler, Pan, $ «11rn, Hymen, and fo torth through the whole 
Liſt of Poetical terms, for warfare, youth, wind, eloquence, luſt, 
vertme, the nntverſe, time, virginity; and almoſt all that is of 
any importance, cither for ſubliſting by irs ſelf, or qualifying 
of us. doth ſo little derogate from the puritie of our Religion, 
that (in my opinion ) our manners are improved by it, our 
Languape inriched, and, by vertue of Rethorical tropes  ſug- 

eſting to our minds two ſeveral things at once , the ſpirits of 
uch as are ſtudious of Learning, filled with a moſt wonderful 
delight. 

&. And why ſhould not Greek and Latin words of fo fub« 
lime expreſſion, obtain acceptance in this our Engliſh tongue, 
when many ultramarine termes of very low conſideration, and 
vernacularie in our neighbour Nations, receive admittance 
10 its 

49. Ruitmaſter, Ruit, Plunder, and Proveant are Dutch ; 
yet have-ve made them Eng/1s; the French words of Parole, 
Cavilleer, Van, Rear, are now by us ſpoke uſually : We have 
likewiſe made perfe&t Engliſh of the Spaniſh words, Junto,Be- 
voters, B alcone, ©Montera : as allo of thoſe [talia» ones , Fi- 
4x44, Montrbanco, Curverts, Ciarlatane with many moe both 
of theſe, and other Languages, which luxurious wits of forrain 
education, for the greater empbaſis,have obtruded apon their 
maternal 1diome. 

50. Nay I will goe further, by thoſe excellent fancies is ſo 

curiouſly 


The fourth Book. 


curiouſly imbel liſhed the doctrine of both the Law,! and Goſ- 
pel, that in a Book entituled Adyfagogur Porticws, written by 
Mr. Alexander Refe, you may find prertily, God is re» 
preſented by Apes, by Arias, by Jupiter, by Neptune , by 
Promethews ; bis Spirit by Brea, and his Word by Ariadne : 
How Cir:# is the true X/calepines, and bow vively he is evi- 
denced by Ampiies, by Apelo, by Arifews, by Aurora, by 
Bacchuu, by Bellerophon, by Cadmus, by Ganymed,, by the 
Genis, by Hercules, by Mereurie, by Minerya, by Neps 
tae, by Orpheis, by Parſons, by Prometliens and by Theſe+ 
«ws : How Chriſtians are expreſſed by Heresl(es, by Jaſon , by 
Spobinx, and by #iyſer ; And how laſtly, che Church is ſigni» 
fied and fer forth by Aria, by Ceres, by Diana, and by Ja* 
ſon's Shi 
$1, And all this by the elucubrations of that worthie 
Gentleman Maſter Al:-xa»d:r Roſe, whoſe praiſe in that late 
Book ſet forth by me, in vindication of the honor of 5cotlard, 
I expedient not to omit. 
$23. That the Catholick Romans have conſtantly, and as 
doe , after the manner of the learned Paynims of old, moſt 
ily reliſh, variety of conſecrations , plurality of invocati- 
ons , and adoring ove and the ſame thing , under a great di- 
verhtie of ricles , is apparent by the ſeveral names of Churches, 
huge Legend of Saints , and different dedications to one dietie 
as of one edifice to Chriſt the redeemer, and of another to 
Chriſt the mediator, of one to our Lady of help, and of a+ 
nother tour Lady of mercie : even as the warlike Kow wr dew 
voted their temples to [«:iter Feretrins; and [wpiter Stator: to 
Diana Lacina, and Diana Flu. 
54+ In this likewiſe they agree, that amongſt the Heathniſh 
Philoſophers there were many ſets, fuch as Sr.4cts, Acadornichs, 
P evipaterichs, Pythagoreans,and Cynicks and amongſt thoſe we 
call Papifts,chere are divers orders of Monks, Fryars,T bomiſtr, 
and Scetifr: ſubdivivided again into Eccleſiaſticali incorpora- 
tions , fuch as Cordeliers, Recallefts , Suecolants, Capmetnnr, 
Facillans, lacobins, Dominicans, Aunguſtins, Iiſuitr, Teatins , 
Oraterians, Benediling, Cartafians, Carmeliſts and muny other 
of that Nature, diſcrepant more in name, then opinion ; in 
habir then profeſlion. L 2 55. That 


67 


The fourth ook, 

$5, That there is unformity in both doQrine, and dif- 
cipline betwixt tlie Churches of the Ancient , and Modern Ks- 
mn, will never be denied by any , that having applied his 
mind to the Philoſophical Poeſic of the one, and icholaſtick di- 
vinitic of the other , is well veried in the rites of both. 

56. And truly, there is ſo t knowledge wrape under 
the vail of chat affabulatorie divinity of old , that not to be- 
leeve inthe truth of many points thereof , will argue as much 
ſenſleſnefle,and Riupiditrie in him , that is ſo incredulous, as it 
can of miſcreance , and infidelitie in the perion of any, that 
would queſtion the infallible events of the moſt authentick 
revelations of the other. 

57+ It is ſaid by them, that Sarw» was the ſon of Caler , 
and Ther, that he devoured all his children, fave /npiter, In+ 
=o, Neptune, and Plate, that he di them again ; and 
_ he deviriliſed ( alww , was expelled his kingdome by 

apr” 

4 And ſay not we the ſame, though is other words, 
whilſt we avouch , ther time is meaſured by the motion of the 
heavens, and ebbing and flowing of the Sea : that the Ele- 
mentarie , and a bodies are corruptible , whilſt the Ele- 
ments themſelves in their pureſt Natures are not ſo: that the 
corruption of one thing 1s the generation of another : that 
there can be no more worlds but one : and rb it lieth not in 
the power of time to limit the duration of the celeſtial influen- 
ces , inall which ir ſeems that the Ancients did philoſophate 
pretty handſomely. 

59+ Had they remained there , it had been well, but when 
they begun co adulterate that knowledge with ſuperſtition, & 
out of conicience. to immolate the bloodie ſacrifices of young 
Infants , upon the altars of Satwrs ; then was it that their pro- 
feſlion became deteſtable to all the civill men in the world,and 
what was commendable therein , even abborred ; becauic of 
its intermixture with ſo much wickedneſle. 

60. Yet is it the part of wiſe men to ſever the from the 
bad , and without any relation to times, to to what 
of ic (elf is righteſt, and to account that religion damnable 
(what ever it be ) char deſtroyeth muruall duties, and autho- 


The fourth Book. 

61. The Poets fay , that Vulcar was the fon of Tupiter,and 
Tune ; that he was lame, that be was thruſt our of heaven, that 
he was foſtred by Theris, and the fea Nymph, that he had 
Vinwr, and _— to his wives, that the ſemence , where- 
with be t to have imbued 4fi=crva, had its difluence 0n 
the carh; and that he was the imicth , who made the armour 
of the Gods. 

62. And doe not wee, though in other termes, affirm the 
ſame , whilſt we lay, that firy meteors are begot in the air, by 
the motion, heat, and influence of heaven : rbar the flame of 
our fire aſcends not in a ſtreight line. but crookedly : that 
lightning , and thunderboles fall out of the air upon the earth: 
- naturall heat is intertained by radical moiſture , and the 
ignean mixrures in the ſecond recion by Marine exhalatioos : 

beautie, light, and ſplendor are concomicane with the heat 
of fire: that heaven, for being pure from the commiſtion 
of elementarie qualities , remaineth ſtill a Virgin, in ſpight of 
that natura'l hear, which diffuled on terreſtriall things , ma- 
keth chem fruit/ull in generation: and 144 naturall heat is the 
armour , and defence of our life, by which we are preferved 
from our deſtruction , our lite, and motion ceafing, when it is 
gone, now what can be ſaid againſt chis , but chat their 
way of expreſſion is ſomewhat more figurative, and elo- 


61+. The ancient Heathens did aſfever that Bacchw was the 
Son of Jupiter, and Sews {rr faved our of her aſhes, when /«- 
piter in his coit had burnt her with chunder, chat be was cheri- 
ſhed in his Fathers thigh, nouriſhed by the Hyades ; bred in 
Egypt ; and afterwards conquered the /»dian: ; that he had 
both a Virgin and a buls face; was ſometimes Male ſometimes 
Female; now with a beard , anon without one: that he was 
worſhiped on the ſame altar with Min-rve, and accompanied 

the Mauſer : that whilſt he was a Child Afercorie carried 
him to Aſacri, the daughtrr of Ariftew, to have his lips a- 
nointed with honey + that he flew the ſerpent Amphiibens , 
that virgins were his prieſts , himielf painted naked , and the 
Mag-pie conſecrated to him - that he was turned into a Lyon, 
was called Liber , andDyoniſiww , and the firſt thatmade bar- 
gains: - 


The fourth Bock. 


gains: that he was three years with Proſerpins, and that he 
was torn by the Titans , buried , and revived 

64- Though this relation ſeem a little {abulous, yer doe we 
maintain the truth cthereot , whilſt we athrm, r6ar the Viac 
tree by the influence of a warm air produceth grapes z tht 
aſhes are excellent dung tor Vines: #64: the beſt wine is where 
the ſoy! is hot, fubje&t ro thunder , and where the trees are 
parched with the rays of the Sun : rh Egypr a fieclimate 
tor that Liquor : t&« moiſture maketh it proſper very much z 
and ther the Indians were very temulencious Sympoſiaſts: rhet 
there is a hudge difference, and almoſt incredible berwixt the 
effets of wine moderatly , aud immoderately taken : ther 
wine drunk with mediocrity conduceth much to wiſdome , and 
Learning , and refineth our wits with eloquence , which brin« 
geth us to a felicity of expreſſing our felves moſt ſweetly , in 
the beſt things chat are : that wine killeth ſorrow , utterly ba- 
niſheth it from all joviall congrecations , in pulling from ir 
che ſing at both ends of melancholie , wherewich the 
beginning, and cloſure of all commenall ws 69 for the 
moſt part ſtung, withouc this Ly <a» liquor : rar ſometimes 
wine makes men effeminate , prompts them to reve-l ſecrets, 
and oftentimes occaſioneth much prating : c&& many times ic 
inrapeth choſe that drink it: r&a7 it maketh men to talk freely , 
and Riicrech up the mind t» high attempts : ch&ar commonly it 
is in taverns that men are apte(t to bargain-making, when they 
are well whitled with Septembral juyce : rhet it will be three 
years before the Vine tree cancome 40 its full perfe&tion and 
that its twigs cut off, an ſet inthe earth will afterwards bring 
forth good and ſufficrent grapes. 

65- Doe not both theſe ways tend to the ſignifying of the 
ſelf fame conception of one and the lame thing 7 truly they 
doe : Yet is it with chis diſcrepance, that our conceit thereo* is 
naked and bare , and theirs apparelled with an expreſſion of 
more pemp and ſtatelineſle. 

66. Torun after this manner albeit in never ſo 
a way, through the remainder of what is extant of this kind of 
inveloped Philuſophie, would require a Treatiſe of a greater 
bulk , then theie few miſcellanie ſchedules are able to ins 
cloſe, 67. Yet 


7 be fourth Book 


67, Yetisit a thouſand pities, that the knowledge of all 
Arts , and Sciences, both Practical and Theoretick, havin 
been very ingeniouſly ſhrowded, by the learned men of Old, 
under the molt gorgegus cover of Poerical fancies,there ſhould 
not of that pretious Mantle now be teen, ſo much as the ten 
thouſandeh part ; too tevere innovators by an ubiquitarie con+ 
flagration, having devored the ret, 

68. Truly I lament it. and could wiſh from my heart, that 
the diverſe exquiſite books written on that ſubjeR, by Orphee, 
Muſeu, Linn, Fhurnutas, Palaphat the Steick,, Dorothee, E- 
vanther, Heraclit of Pontrs, Silen of Chis, Anticlider, Evar« 
ter, Zenin,Cleantber, Chryſippus, and ſeveral thoutands com- 
pited by other Authors, which have been luſt theſe many hun- 
dred yeares agoe ; whereof 1 beleeve ſome were amongſt 
thoſe of curious arts, mentioned in the nineteenth of the A72Z;, 
were at this time obvious to our peruſal. 

69- 1 ſay not this to undervalue other books, for the Spi- 
rit of God hath taughe us, that the two Teſtaments of the 
Law, and aww doe tar excel them « but only to gire you to 
underſtand, that Diamonds are not the worſe, they be in- 
chaſſed in Gold ; nor a Patacoon to be rejected, becauſe a 
Portugal ducat is better. 

70, Yet may the Ore de Tibar, and Plate de Pers, which 
are the beſt gold, and filver that are any where ; that, being 
of 24 Carats ( or Quilater, as they call them there ) and this 
full ewelve-pennie fine, abate much of their proper value, by 
being allayed with baſer metal ; there being nothing admics of 
mixrure,which is not capable of being adulterated. 

71. And likewiſe the unsKiltulneſſe of the receiver, may 
contribure mach to the undervaluiog of good coin, as I 
have ſeen by ſome the Croſs dolar Hanj: oWn ( becauſe 
of its circular ſhape ) preferred to a 5pa»i/b Ryal of Eight, of 
a Polygonal Form; the inſufficiency, by the touchſtone of the 
eye, conſiſting in the . 

2+ Even ſo have thele mellifluently reliſbing deviſes, ſa- 

ſtained detrimentin the eſtimation of many, partly by 

reaſon of the blind ſuperſtiion of ſome puſillanimous Zelots, 

addicted to that kind of devotion ; ade ar tan 
cauie 


1 be feurth Book 
caufe of the uncharitable miſtakes therein of ſome ſupercilivus 
coxcombs, who avoiding to be inſtructed aright, are every jot 
as perem in their doom, as they are certain in their un - 


| ” 

+ Both which, the one, for depraving a thi the in» 
ecfiome badneſs with it, and Ao) eine 
ning that as ill, whereof he knows not the nefle , are like 
the Syrees, and Sywplegades : or Rocks, and Quickſands of er» 
rour, to be ſhun'd by thoſe, that would lail into the baven of 
.cruth. 

74. As for my ſelf, I never yet had fuch prejudicate aver{- 
neſle from old Tenets, nor implicit adherence to new poſiti- 
ons, whither at home, or abroad, but that I always thoughe it 
moſt beſeeming one of a liberal education,to keep the middle 
courſe that tends to trurhwards, without regard to cither pri- 
ſtin, or modern opinion; Epheſtien, or Exerich, 

75. Which reiolution of mine, to hold on in an even 
to what is righteſt , withour iraying to cither ſide, begot 
ſuch oppoſition in others , to w condut 1 was loath to 
deliver up my judgement , that becauſe of faſkination jncuba- 


tion, ſuccubation , pamgratien with fairies , and other fuch 


communication with foul ſpirits , 1 had y purged many 
of both ſexes, whom they eſteemed guilty, [ was torthwith re- 
puted an obſtinate aſſertor of erronious dorine,and that with 
the greater vebemency 0! bitterneſle, that I who was but raw, 
young, and lately come from my travels, would not withour 
examination give truſt to aged men of long —_— albeic 
in matters contrary to both common ſenſe, and reaſon. 

e—- 76. Yetas a child ( h but of ten years old) is not ob- 
liged to beleeve it is dark,when the Sun ſhines, although a man 

threeſcore ſhould ſwear it ro bim : ſo ſuch weak ar 

4 teſt imenio having never been of great prevalercy wich me, 1 
cauſed ſend for one of either (ex, that were ſuppoſed Rivals in 
Diabolical venerie, the male, with the ſuccub; and the female 
with the incub And after 1 had ſpoken kindly to them in ge- 
nerals, I intreated them with all gentleneſſe poſlible, to tell me 
F eely, whether it was ſo, orao , as it was reported of them , 
( the Reader muſt underſtand , that theſe two knew not 


other 


The fourth Bock, 
other, and that it was not at one time, nor in one place, 'that 
I chus examined them ) their anſwer was ( for they were nor 
coy hm bem me) that it was true enough, yer 
ſhe becaule of their ſo ingenuous confeſſion, that I would 
never to bear teſtimonie againſt them ; I promiſed to 
oe fo, bue withall conſidering how, ia all ocher 1ncidenc pur- 
poſes, they were alwayes every whit as pertinent, as any what 
ever man or woman elſe of their condition, 1 ſtrezght concei- 
ved there might bea crack in their imagination- 

7. The young man was two and twenty years old, very 
baſhyull, yet prone to laſciviouſneis. and a handſom youth : ſhe 
was ſome five and twentie, nothing ſo pleaſant as be, and had 
it not been for a lictle modeſtic that reſtrained her , a very ſink 
of luſt : Allthis | perceived at the firſt view, and cherefore the 
berrer to try an experiment thereon, I commanded , at the 
time they were in my Fathers houſe, an infomniatorie and ex- 
oniretick potion, for ſtirring up of a libidinous facie, to be 
given unto each of them : 1 alſo direted one of my Footboys 
ro arrend the woman, with all poſſible reſpet , and outward 
ſhew of affeRtion ; the like 1 5d dnnds, mothers 
Chambermaids, to be done in behalf of the young man : which 
injunRtions of mine were by theſe two ſervants with ſuch dex - 
terity proſecuted, that the day after each their nights __ . 
of thoie two hypochondriacks, which happened to be within a 
moneth of one another, when I had called for them, and after 
I had fairely infinuated my ſelf into their minds by a ſmooth 
diſcourſe , asked whether, that nighe as formerly, they bad in 
cheir bodies felt any carnal application of the fowl c rips or if 
they did, in what likeness they received him : To this both of 
them made anſwer, That of all che nights which ever they had 
rug oma was that nightreſpeRively,wherein unto them both 
the ſpirit was moſt intirely communicative in feats of dalliance, 
and that in the repreſentation of the Boy, and Chamber- 
maid, whom I had appointed to wait on them, as they went 
to bed, | 

5$. This i declaration of theirs confirmed me in 
my former opimon, which with more degrees of certainty in- 
creaſed, when | beard that within a ſhort while after, the ima- 
M ginauon 


The fourth Bock, 


pination of two, had rurned to a fornication of four : for 
which, though 1 cauſed ro puniſh them all , the Fantaſiaſts 
were thereby totally cured , who ( becomming afterwards 
Y oke- mates in wedlock to the two ſervants of our houſe) were 
in all times comming ſound enough in fancie , and never any 
more diſquiered with inch like apprehenſions. 

79. In theſe the cure proved ele, bur in many that kind of 
diſeaſe takerh ſuch deep root , that no remedie can prevail. 1 
ſaw at Madrid a bald-pated fe low, who beleeved he was /»ls- 
w Ceſar, and therefore went conſtantly on the ſtreets with a 
Laurel Crown on his head : and another ar T«leds.who would 
not adventure to goe abroad, unlefle it were in a Coach, 
Chariot, or Sedane , for fear the heavens ſhould tall down 
upou him 

80- 1 likewiſe ſaw one in S-ragof*, who imagining bimſell 
to be the lawfull King of Aragon, went no where without a 
Scepter in his hand ; and another in the Kingdome of Grane- 
ds, who beleeved he was the valiant Cd, that conquered the 
Morer. 

81, At Meſſing in Sicilie , Tallo fiw a man, that conceived 
himſelf to be the great Alexander of Wacedone, and that ina 
ten years ſpace he ſhould be maſter of a'l the territories, which 

- be ſubdued : bur the beſt is , that the better to reſemble him , 
he always held bis neck awry , which naturally was ſtreight 
and upright enough ; and another at Yenice , who imagined 
he was Soveraign of the whole Ariatich Sea, and ſole owner 
of all the ſhips, chat came from the Levante. 

$2. Of men that fancied chemſelves to be women , beaſts, 
trees, ſtones, pirchers, glaſſe, angels, and of women whoſe 
ſtrained imaginations have falne upon the like extray 78 
even in the midſt of fire , fortune, and the — 
there is ſuch variety of examples , amongſt which I have ſeen 
ſome at Rowe, Naples, Florence, Grana, Paris, and other emi» 
nent Cities , that ro mvitiply any moe words therein, were to 
load your ears with old wives tales , and the trivial cattle of 
idly imployed , To vo ian bumer ſts. 

#3 Thus am | forced to deliver my opinion, in oppoſition 
to ſome of our Kirkiſts , who w burden wy conſcience 

we 


The fourth Book, 
with more tenets then are fir for it , and lighten my eſtate of 
more mony then is due to them : for proof of the latter where- 
of, - vm Nr — pos _ 
| what was legally unned ring one pariſh into 
we deduced ring reaſons , w hens fore- 
mentioned Churches remain as one Church, belon- 


ing to one pariſh , I will in | of the ſixth Article of che 
= ng Hind 


84. Fourthly , that inthe up-lifting of allTaxes , and im- 

itions in former times , theſe two pretended Churches have 

ſtill rared as one parſonage , as the rolls of the ſtint can 
ſuffic1 bear record. % 

85. Fifthly , there are in both rheſe pretended pariſhes, 
not above three hundred communicants , ſo that eat 
charge of ſoules neederh not much obfrut the union , Ning 
we yt > Sr} ſhire not far _ thence , eight thou- 

pariſhioners reſort ing to one pariſh Kirk. 

$6. Sixthly , that che whole pariſhioners of both nemine 
tomwadicente , did , and doe as yet, moſt unanimouſly ac- 
yrg——— HY have the uni ified by the G 

$7. , that to have the union rati the Ge- 
nerall —_—y of the Land, asit was paſtin the days of Kin 
Tamer the ſixth , 1 offered , R_—_ pitc 
upon more expedient , for the caſe of thele two half pariſhes , 
to cauſe build a church cherein upon my own charges. 

88. Tet for anſwer to theſe aforeſaid reaſons ( in my opini- 
qn relevam enough ) a decreet by the Commiſion of the kirk, 
was againſt me, in favours of the 2 men ſerving at 
the cure of that Kirk'and chappel , providing yearly to each of 
them 4 chalders victual end 400 marks Scorch in monie, beſides 
their Glebe ( as they call it ) and vicarage: although before 
that time(by reaſon of the ſmalneſſe of the tirhs of the Pariſh) 
their expeQation did never reach to above five chalders renc 
for both , without any monie at all, and that they wou!ld have 
been exceedingly well pleaſed , to have accepted of le's, had 
ey bead free of a brotherly ſuggeſtion co my prejudice, which 
for fear of deprivation , they were forced to lay hold on. 

89. With this ecclefiaſticall prefſure , whereby my rents 
| M 2 are 


7s 


The fourth Faok:. 


are diminiſhed , another from the ſame fountain, though of a 
higber nature ,\was inflicted on me by a kirk-man, whoſe cor 
vetouſneſle reaching the procurement of an unjuſt decree , 
through non defence in my abſence, atan inferiour court, ay 
gainſt tour of my eſpecial tenants, for ſome farmes pretended 
to be Cue to his mother,as the wife of an eccleſiaſtical dignary, 
he proſecuted the aRtion with fuch indignation , violence,a- 
varice, and extortion, ſo prevaricatly and* contrarily to both 
divine and humane Laws, that ] purpoſely conceal his name, 
leaſt the divulging thereof hould prove ſcandalous. to. his fel- 
low Labourers in the ſpirituall Vineyard, for tollerating a man 
of ſuch oppreſſive courſes, to domineer in the Pulpit, by 
_—_ of a ſuppoſed call from God for the preaching of bis 
word. 

90. Many things may be { of the unſtreight carriage 
ſe benny, _ , _—_—_—_— , is about ns _—_ 
my Tenants in Far»eſe as formerly he hath done thoſe of my 
Townes of Daviſtone and Petriſftene , which if he doe, let bim 
aſſure himſelf, chat I will lay open the wickednefle of his dil- 

ſition to the view of the whole Ifle, xs perſgicuoully as his 
Rook weekly apparent to his Pariſh at Ks markney,.., - 

91+ But for the time I will forbear , in hope of his repen- 
tance , which no ſooner can appear then I ſhall be apt to for- 
give, my bumour leading me never to inſiſt in ewitting any 
that is not of an obdur'd ipirit , nor had theſe three Miniſters 
againſt whom | writ, in that book of mine entituled Exſciba- 
lawron ſuſtained the laſh of my pen, had they then been ſen- 
ſi le of the wrong done me , or acknowledged their faults, as 
afterwards they did; for, although | hagediflimulation, 1 can 
upon a cordial remorſe for any injurie committed, pardon my 
cruclleſt, and moſt invererate enemie, 

92. Why men that ſhould make profeſſion of Learning , 
doe goe abour to vex and diſquiet me, is moſt went: 
ſeeing it is pot unknown to all, that are acquainted with me , 
that there is none breathing doth more reſpet and reverence 
itthen I, and chat by all appearance | am like ( by Gods aſſi- 
ſtance ) to give greater proofs thereof to poſterity , then any 
whoſ1ever that hath been, is, or will be ready to diiplay open 
banner again | me. . 93. Bavins 


The fourth Book. 

94, Begics and Mavine were both envious of the worth 
of YVirgil,and coveruous of his means but alchough the ruine of 
Virgil had acquired them an Empire , yet had not fo vaſt a 
purchaſe been able to contrevalue the infamie , which by that 
one Hexameter, Vs Bavinns non edit amet ina carmins Mavs 


CETaIS Toa 

94, I willa ing, it being the ers part 
times to infer 6. n— where the modeſty of the writer 
will not permit ic, bur ſetting forward in the propoſed Method, 
doe make account to glance a hetle at- the other branch of the 
dichoromie , mentioned in the forty ſecond Article of the third 
book ; as very obſtruftive co the deirayment of private dedts , 
to wit publique dues. 


Epig- Primum. 


Ardoche dwri fodicbant arva Colow, 
Laſſabatg, graves terra profunda brues, 
Finratus :»vaſit : 11nc longe raftra quiets 
T radidit, Of non oft quo foliatur ager, 
Stire bet quanam fit ir if 14 canſa rapine, 
Quid peter ant — ms 
Iphigenia dou nimwir wm wabilis ills 
Do' anda ef, prop 40 non tamen illa ſolo, 
Debit s fallaci ſocers nam Burgius hero? 
Detulit, imuſta quis rapit 4704 manu. 
Sponſam ambit juwvents : pater aqres ambit, + ili 
[nde Ligne carent : idla Ligone ſwo, 
Protinus armatds tr abit in [na yore cobortes, 
Amnthorc1 cnlpe ſubilitmitg, ſue. 
Arva novo tibs [mnt a > m—_——_ 
Sic fediet wr amany : fic fodietur ager. 
fodvetar aman jc fie ge 
Echeiam quondams Pairio Cromartius berer 
Inre habuit y apt am nane tamen alter babet: 
Ry» 19; fallaces alnerunt drvia wilves 
Semper & het laqneo ducere mori erat ;\ Pp 


& 4 | Is 
fac apoooantiboryw efeig, ye 
E ertiums 
It ſurcum tote _—_. 

E vacuare trahens 6a liquore [no 
Torrida due tot is concreſcant viſcers fibyic, 
Et ſmbite in rugas cedat aduſta ents 
Divitias populi toras fic Creditor bawrit 
Segue unum nunmi Hydrove peyer alit 
Argen's vena remarar quer 
BY” -—— 
fr” + 9m — 

Vat ſols buic mor bo ferre pot eſtis opens. 

Epig. Quartum. 


Socratici fertmr patienti 4 marits, 
Xanti 4 ina, 
Heme pelfes emer obdarats oof, 
Ling ua lace ſſito ft are ſonora mags 
Huc ader, 6 venerand: ſencx, terntanins lingue, 
T alia virints now (at aqud tne 
ou {na turbet ſolum te creditor _ 
Swfficiunty; t due treſne 
£ "m—— 
PRI Innnng beating Or. 


ju tha three th 

The Scripture ſays, three things always crave, 
The raging ſea, the barren womb, and grave ; 

I dare not adde to Scripture, bur I ſay, 

That Creditors do crave far worſe then they. 
When I have render'd by mortalitie, 

To th* grave her due, ſhe craves no more of me ; 
No ftryng defire can make me (atisfy'r, 

Nor womb command my appetite : 

Beſides ther*es pleaſure bere,in deb: there's none, 
And when once laid in grave, all griet is gone. 
No ſea conſtrains you, to entruſt your frayl 
Plank to the waves, or forceth to hoile ſayl ; 

Or yet ſuppoic it could, againſt your will, 


There's hopes of Calm, or of a Harbour fi! : 
There's ſtorm on form, when Credicors do crave, 
And ev'ry lntereſt a rolling wave ; 

O let me debror be rorh” orher rhree , 
Free me from Fa'chey, Fraſer, Fendrafie. 
Epig. Jerrons. 
That he might in oppreſfiortbe free, 
Fendr aþrtook the Kirk tis fide, 
Who were of avarice & full zyhe , 
And for the goods of aff mers gap'd as wide, 
Thoſe that beheld hint Saint- like veyFd did wonder, 

And marvelted that he was c d fo much, 

When Satan's claws feen under, 

And alt were ſtartled at tv» helliſh church : 

"Twas like his Father, who'srhe oor of evil, 

Who raking . ſhapes, 15 (ills Devil. 

Evie. Oe pro mens. 

Since your felves zre unto the Devil &s due, 
You Uſurers, a+ Debrors exſh foyou, 

To truſt youfs rhe Devit do's us 
For you*l not truſt debror hulf fo long ; 

Bur it's confeſs*d i their may be ters, 

And I may loſe their debes ; 

But though che Devil gets ac uſe ar all. 

Yet is he fare & obtain the Principall 

Epig. Ott eons. 

Like as the Tyrant plunder'd mightie 1-ve 
Out of his golden veſtare, and him rote, 

A woollen one might now fur fitrer prove ; 
Becauſe the ſeafon waxed (omewtriar cold.: 
And fromthe God of Phyfick; Phatas Son, 

The golden beard in bitter feorn he took, 
And (aid it was not fit be ſhould have on, 

Since his own Sire a beard could never brook. 
Even ſo my Creditors with charitie, 
And fellow-teeling piety poſleſt, 

In our Eſtates would make a paritie ; 

For conicience, ſay they, aot is deſt, * 

4 bo 


=. 


Fajoy a ts a berp your Clarin 


. O ereditornms tive, ff imumiti; cohort , 
Furiiſqg; cuntts ſevier. 
Quorum ſoner s clamor exanimnat meu. 
Wrig; petting tadis, 
SHTGHAID EWING VE 
Impune frandes pergere, Paſo 
Cum v0! biatn capict 1emnen|e niger, 
Sirw4q; clandet T artarus, 
Ty ( þ fas iſta mortal') liben 


M 


anfaibe. 
C rows Tiſiphone 
pneſen ereT quatir. Ss 
KN extenſ 
pane pr crane a 


Ex ale T itij exoſum jecur, 
v05 op inne1 adyolany. 
Saxumg; dirum Siſyphi vobir datny , 
Sirrſq; vebigTantali. 
Ifi/q; cantts pejw! interea mance , 
Mayuſq; termentss evit. 
Ab ſum ot heres onnia, of exoſot lares 


Proles parents 

Firig 66 je 10097 in abjells fo 
Alga jacebit vilier. 

Ft cuntts vobuc iHta Mercarine feret, 
Tbitg; certm nuncenn, 


The intent of the fifth Book, intituled, 
NELEODICASTES. 


D Hat is to be lait inthe execution, being con- 
monly firſt in the intention , the Amthor, 
: or 18 that order , begun this Iſageei- 
cal Treatiſt, as i apparent by the firſt Book 
thereef, intituled, The Wonders of the 
FT ——_ yp yrs 
Books following , be quits that Analytical 
bim 19 the Compeſitive , wherein pri- 
hath its citeriority in deſcription. Thus 
the third Book were deduced Reaſons, why 
eb ols ett mfleoataloanyery 

610 the fiftb, the A Fe expreſ- 
Dh y Sr Arg >. 74 wat 
pu h in the fourth, be bad diſcovered s 

d black which dnbhie in 


yo! 
Glen becauſe the 


the 

wed 
fron 
Firs 


3 
biegby ates > has 
Go H Cee anni aides, Le 


| | of greater 0nes y, the Pare 

ns A(ſembly : that, paſring under the nome 

of 4 Commitice z, and this, of a Commiſ1i0n, Bus truly, 

ſuch was the influence the Eccleſtaſtical party in on 
A 


over the Secylar in that, in imitation of the Larger ys 
which they re Kparages who ha4 the (ame aſcendemt , and 
ſuber diwnecy, in COD dependencie. that be was i 
planged into the more lamentable ſufferings , the hinber 
the exclamations ag ainit the Conſiitwrian Clergie on all 
ſodes ſoared 19 this Picrolovie, that wo la aſpef7 was to 
be expetted from a conjunttion of ſo pod." Laming- 
ries, Aſter the enumeration of many grievous loſſes 
from Souldiers, and others, which the Author, comrary to 
the Laws of the Nation, and Equity it ſelf , was enforced 
10 anderge withiut reparation, be fallr in the next place 10 
diſcuſs the Flagitator, whoſe poyſon, by reaſon of _ 
wer (ality of dt fluence on all bis beſt endeavours y _ 
4 careful adminiſtration of Amidotts to be ſe 
each of all the fix Books of this Imtroduttion. To thi 
parpoſe, in Soon particulars, be inflanceth their - war's 
cabilny, their wnnatwr ality , and wnconſcionebleneſy , 


diſcleſeth three plauſible overtares moſt untowerdly a 
{by them ; and in ens of their cunning and 
Pigee, baha learned rig ecmry concerning Prodig ality 


—_— m_ h ag ainſt them 
clene and Law , in it 
on ſemences of CLE 
fion , moſt accurately illuſtr ates them, The tender care 
ſhould be had of ancient —_ &, be again dnculcates : and 
pore 19 per (wade the « 18 exener bins of the fore 
mentioned burdens , 14 tr - 
mm , 1s men 
C—_— Do . to hone of 
mater «bundaw , for the ſaufation of the impartial 
The 


The Fifth B o © x 


INTRODUCTION, 


intituled, Neleodicaſtes, 
'Or, The pitileſs Fudge. 


Wherein the auſterity of the Law of Scotland, ro- 

her with the partiality of choſe that profeſſed 

ita while a —_ appear to be a hin» 

derance to promulgation of the Uni- 

verſal Speech , and fucure evolgemenc of ocher 
excellent Inventions. 


forc'd rs undergo, ( in matter of Taz and Loan, 
maintenance.addinional Sels-money, tran 


ce conf un a 
neer 3 000 oy onde” groths goods, 
Dogs Lens ide) under the hands 

auchoribed for Cotmmilliceers to take upon Oath and Proba- 
tion, the juſt account of their loſſes, molt :nd unworthily 
CEE from the Country) acd plundered 
Tenants : agaioft whom , no pretext of quarrel could 
be had, burthe love of their means , they being never ſufferers, 
but for their innocencie , mary 0 par 

did extend to fo valt a proportion , that 
mare todly dealt with then thoſe of _— always oF a 
minine; and my telf, a de Got 
terance of A 7" as would have been al- 
molt 


"TEr= which in Scot/and 1 was in- 


Nebul oft pro- 
feos mo'c/lins 
quem V 10mm 
ever, lays 
Fol, Duels. 


Srolidas iff qui 


pantry him 
mera vm 
pref wim & 
ceriam titel 
p£ vm zen 


ample tum. 


The fifth Book. 
wt inſpporable 19 a9 of tie Counnry, though of & fn 


3. " Bit that which made my condition the more bewailable, 
was, that in (pight of that diſtribuxive juftice according to whuchy 
the then Eftatcs of tbe Nation eajayned cach oac mubls to lend 
his ſhoulder to the common burden, 1 was, by over-prizing of my 
Lands, emitting too great a jon of Horſe and Foce. and 


—_—T quigerng, at "Ps , put 2pert © 
wits = Lon mygin leo ere, cxllod 
Splat imm wiſer) of any other to ſhare with me theteia, 

3- Which had « been inflicted on me. as » puniſhment for an 
oftexce, albeir pretended , were ſowewbar tolerable : bur all the 
doers could {ay, was, that what they did then, they had warrant 
for ; uader the mack aod vizard whereot, the ford and corrupe 
Commiſſaries, with the ravenous dleman Prefidiaries, did 
> FI Ei $a and fack the very blood out of 


4+ Thu diſorder of Order ng multitudes (without pre- 
pudice þe x ſpoke of a well-dilci Souldiery) with 
the ſpecious preteaces that ſome have grained. imnquicy 
by a Law, hath truly run in ſuch an over-flowing ſpeat and inun- 
dation of yiolegce againlt me, that what by the cruchy and tugh 
hand of nei pn OR and others, 40d contungal cur- 
rehe of win bib axes , my poor tenants were fo ingpmmpaſ- 
ſonately mangked, torn in pieces, and ſhuffled, thaachey 
2nd 1 both, for all ogr eadeayours, LR Loa whey 
beſides other preſſures, ha ing in ſorne yeers (over and above the 
whole rene the Lind Yue mae 0 6 hundred poynde th 
money on the fore} have not been.able to give, in maxrer of the 
Princpal, a full repy#to the reſt of thoſe craving s Cre- 
ditors, who, by reaton'of the foreſaid obſtacles, barring, my de- 
termination remain as yet unſatisfied, 

5. Of whomnevernhelch not any almoſt (notwithRanding 
al} theſe difficulties, which yer procreate this ane and the great | 
of all ha no Meche o be ad fx Land, wig 

k tothe ditponer; men nſhing eſtates hav! 
bu Lud of huacatere, to un the preſſures of to tres, 
quent 


 - Tho fifth Book, 5 


| — umpoſitions, and Afciments) will abate « mice of the 
the Lav in memrnadin roms # not out of 2 fellow-feel. 
ing of ary fufferings. relent never (6 Frle ofthe extremity. 
6. Fox whether Land hath been wadone . hd Impoveriſhel Twyia lecre- 
by unſcatonable years ; or begger'd and extnuſted \by the 'tt- £204, & ve- 


proton lax #44 ine 
vos Por fruieful Crop, 2nd the Rene thereof © £4 male 


alwayes hive their money O \-s trucider. 
( of the fortune of the N hold molt at « dt« 
n dep off anon.) to our 77-2 nay e 


7. However, thoogh imine well-poyſed brain ; 
x would lem ing 9 CTR bar» ro — 
ren, ſhall be hill made fruitful. even when by the hardneſs of the = 144 


times, what is frontful, « (tl made barren. ſemper baben- 


8. Iconld i © for 44 comeerns my own parti» Gs ples Sen 
cular,be well nor to Hechine che of thetflenkty — 
(if the Seare rhink ſuch kind of men ſo nearly 
taken notice of) provided the judiertorys Frag 


ney hebearke of hae jultice whe which Con tno hon 
reality) cannot be denyed to a very ranger, " 


, HEVET ©O retro a 
9. Fee the welt of all that Fammand; fo bo the Sir James 
ewo branches : firſt. eerhoren ane of that wo Fraſer ofÞdark. 
caſly bath bern taken from me and my Tenancy , dnl 
mtcd to take my courtBagrinſt rhe mennes of he Ria, w 


| com be eraly 
who by difabled thorn. h 6 * {p6iF; from! poken bur 
te nnnobersfhlew ad hem yexry oem, t he is 
well, a3 formerly they did, wilt prejudge m+in thrice 23 grea: _ 

3 [urea Celhny repo OI canduries and feet, (6 


that King James his AR , concerni the moVermporexm choſe | wibal ret f 
19 decreees of Gag more niored 9 ages be) (ys Public 
fyvours ofthe thare moveadles of mite worthy then the Mims) ans 
cebt that iy ppb 
10. Now 1 hull fam wo pron im: 2nd mvobve vs, Nan phi 


rn ar tpotr this fo exaberang, non aliis pro- 
eintar hors! Ya Gay wow 
wand a Gb end at mfr nee MCL: 


C 


Fid. Ant, x8, 


"Cromartie, uad 


T be-fifth Book, 


' nifeſt by thoſe aporrectica! intertheres | have already couched 
Tate remoces Thar not the ewenneth it, nor 6ny 


Dn CO ns ny of 

rnqloanent 3 Linden ie vec were in the 

at Londow by the tor Dan- 
EST x” rr 


Libra wretchedly imbezled, and 
ra Jay hue yp -yrethrsy Clean paper to a» 
— in ate) wicker hoviegreenciognd frm: ner af th 
matter , climacotially propoſed in the feventiecth Article of the 
kecond book, make bold roconduGt the Reader tothe 
reom of a cloture , fe —— if it bim, 

time to require his town os Gi-cataghedle 
has, voy wt ricle of the firſt book. 

I, Sodiag the mance abaady fpeite of conminnt: ms wad 
A ena x Jr on 2nd - the fame 


to wit, the enzoyment »*& 

dehire the Reader, _—_ = am _ 4 to notice, 
which of us hath bet ri fultf conſcience, then ue» 
cording to Law. 


1 2. Conſcionably therefore to ralk thereof , afncoftn 
molt civil parts of the world, it 1s thought unjuſt, that the 1n- 
fethon of debr , like a hereditary <ifeaſe, ſhould be derived 
wars {ny IT TIITES 
rective a ( co thac 
each one be a faithful Adminiſtrator to his P 
means, which from his Predecefſors be hath — 
III DER, , but his own ; tus 
P | 745 209 Jonny ch ought 
tO expiate his 

= ef PEST elf _ 

neither a $, Hor —_—_ ; were 
= nga dans ry cobip 

neicher cheirefigee, —— > rode 7 went 

the which concerned us not + but ot ne] 
hum chat was the Parey-contragtr; whereby of 
Baroory of filhery in Scot land ; 6 patty 

40 be mine, forhaving belonged tomy Progeaitors 


—_ 


and ewenty Mace enacts 67 Fleas chat 
{py ee pry a yeer-of old renc , - which 
ae boerr ly ea. aways, 0c _ his own conquelt., and . 
moveablcy her to him or any other of ry Aace- - 
ſors. 


14. But the Pre Poſcicummios. lending a deaf ad- pms 
ders car to theſe kinde of motions, becauſe yp the '- 
Scotiſh Law agaiot the heirs of ancient famuhes (0196.6 po 
the admittance of fuch a defixe , to foften. the bardaets uf. hal 3 d:eque 
hearts, it was told them, (4/1. 

L 5. Firft. chat ſeeing 1 had an{werably io the anaual 
Rents of ORDER the Land, and "= «mm lay 
that eftates in Land ſhould be as well weghed in the balanee of "= eb, ſed 
Juttice, a3 ſtocks ia money, it ceald.aoct be. but realonable, thas 4,,ry pln 
as much were defalked from Creditors unerelts., as by pablike que cligud de 
dues have beea exhauſted our of my Land-rencs. /u@ je 1ele- 

- Boe} , that for the ant of wh Geof debe ***<- 
the Creditor could with reaſoa claim right tohe might be plealey ,,, 

_ to take peny-worths , not according}. to hs own cutting and E——_—_ 
> but as judicigus men employed thereio. ſhould dilcera 4 videntsr, 
of ther value 4 there being oothing more, comaen among * «tore <4 
(whom the Law certainly cannor with reaſon favour "en 
nr ag ran x 5 x thac if I 6476. 
\ia_ his. mea os (2 is remene) his 
rl eryeuapy gu Ar La TE Coe 


vue of thetows, they (hall we Rd to ar'po under- 


WEIe put tos Sed ills anf- 
ves, that bag ©1311 /rquittey 


''8 The fifth Book. 
former, with thoſe cunning Creditors , who, when my father 
—_ needed no » knowing his diſpofit: we Loads ro 
admittun', & - 7 ow thei own ends uno him whatever he 
lucri erate core pleated ; that thus by laying out a warm ( us it were) to catch 
pu & ama 2 Salmon, taking occaſion of his profuleneds , _——_— 
m—_ Peſt” their own covctoulnes the main ground-work carch- 
ment. 
19. For which | , Thave dil with all 
EIN ISI ng 
more , beſides ſeven or eight yeers rears of my Lands , which 1 
gave them tomlly , fave ſo much thereof , as for Publike durs 1 
could not get avoided to abalienate from their acceprance. 
20, Yer as if this their coverouſoels were ſuck aniliuftrioas 


pede, Tu fed inthe throm of an afs. 

want £4 ou. 20. They refuſed to take Land in part of 

Hor pins,4igue Faperples the debt , not but that in their own 
the 


Inf ammaz.. Land arch more worth then the mooey to 

eas v;. coarged for it, themfves havi 

leſexat merces for work Land, and lefs of it : bur thar bythi 

& pretia ſacals- fulal , to be free of their cruelty ocherways, 1 mi 

tate decreſeunt- rated, our of deſperation , 10 alt it inco rheir laps, half for 


Retia whique 
tendan ad , 
—— 21, "Which that 1 might the ſooner he enforced to do , 
F demanded, behides their principal ſums reorder. 
but failies of bargains) their intereſts, reer-incerefts, expences ia 
— ts oo frdrs—- without 
racam is ar. Bev ro ifhcntries times", which car 
—_ yriguc us disburiemencs x 20d had laid ſuch poli 
courſes for infnaring me in the trap of an unthrifry ba that 
by their foreſtalling the bank , there was no money to be had 
CR bur onely from themielyes. 
-22, Had this been the wort, ir ſhould never by me have berg 
mentioned ; but to conceal ic, 'f were, t© blame. After that 1 
wes akcertaingd of what inyrard joy was conceived _ 


The fifth Book. 


them, when they had fondly affured themſelves of the trath of 

_ at Woreefter-barte!, and for the gladaets of the 
- madified their nolls to ſome purpoſe with the liquor 

the b 

os, fond how when afterwards they underftood the contrary 
rr ns Mn hand ; and that by being 
(20 thanks to thers) in as good health as any of themlelves,they 
were like to be diſppointed of their abominable and unchriftan 
hopes , they then threw in the way of my credit all the impedi- 
ments _ m_—_ to debar roger” morey, 57 the = 
holdi neceſlary hel he (if poſſible) ſnatch away what 
the freed had Genel. a 

24. As allo, what underhand-dealing there was for arreſt- 
ing of muy perſcn at Londen, by men with whom neither my fa- 
ther nor 1 had ever any dealing (norwithftanding of my being a 


priſoner upen Parole to the Councel of Seate) and likewiſe what , 
ploning was in Scotland by that fry of men agaialt me, after 1 ,, 

owed by the Stare the fayour of five monchs time to go 11nd eff eevmes 
thither and return again , is well known by thote that were cm- 1 


was 2 
- A woatmony ne bn = who 

2 5. What congeeing cringiog.doffing of hats.making of legy, 
rod prong ther vas of the ] 'f Scorland he Core 

| forthe rations at Leith, and others, by many 
of thoſe men , that ( good ſonlr) who have always been 
found true and trufly (ts therr own profit) ſhould noc, for 
lawlels 20d unwarrantable  joyning with Charles (for fo fome 
called bim) in the invaſion "x = be debarred from theic 

In to the enjoyment thers lands appriſed 
Co Gncteir (moſt precrons and ine fPimable) , bs be 
unknown to any that for bufineſs did frequea: the of 
Joftice in that Country. 

26. Furthermore,o ſhew the craftines & ſubdolous pranks of 
aro uabaarodry > nn - wo rges I was content ſorne 
rwo ago £0 accrpe , T had given them 
condedethe defrayment of certain debts ur mod Bonds, which 
they (perceivieg my forwardoeſs to relieve them , and having a 
> ER dm. 

yd, 


I 


# at. form 


ud; & mes 


«s ltrum de- 
fderan's; 


T be fifth Book, 


lays, that they could not come 3t them , ſo 1oon as the urgencie 
and preſſing haſte of my then-incident occaſions might require, 
did, very fub:illy(or rather, knawiſhly)at my laſt going down to 
Edinburgh from Londen , demind paymear from me by vertue 
of thoſe Bonds , which then they had to ſhew readily caough, 
thinking the Diſcharges they had given me had been utterly lolt 
at Worcefter : and although ſome of them , by means of the 
Divitiar per Claules of Regiſtrarica whuch they contained , might have been 
falfrates ac- put upon Record, that nevertheleſs that ſhould help me nothing, 
5 70, oppre- becaule the Scouſh Regiſters were removed to the T ower of Low- 
- "mY. dawand therefore (in their conceit) never to beex hereafter 
tothe inſpeRtion of any of the Scotiſh Nation. So cunning this 
generation of Liſfurers is of late become in Scotland. 
27, But when they ſaw that thoſe their Acquittances (which 
by the diſcretion of one Captain Goodwin , in Colonel Pride's 
Regiment , had been recovered out of the ſpoil at Worcefter) 
were produced before them , they chen looking as it their noſes 
had been a bleeding , could not any longer for Chame retard my 
cancelling of the atoreſaid Bonds. 
28, doth not account fuch a trick a deep piece of ini- 
q , doth not poſitively kaow what belongs to fin : but who 
inketh any more of it, and of all the fi zoned abo- 
minations, then of a Flea-bite to the ſtinging of a Seorpiongia re- 
gard of Robert Leſly of Funraſe's far more wicked contrivan- 
ces againſt me, hath no skill in ratives. 
29. For albeit of all the friends he ever had , the moſtde- 
ſerving was my father , by whoſe interceſſion alone he obtained, 
Maxima cupj. for the ſpace of one and tweny yeers together, fourſcore pounds 
piditas 1atie- ferl. a yeer : yet for exchange (as it ſeemed har me great 
nem perverts, aur > 4rndr 572. ery hin erght hundred pounds iſh by 
ar enters 6 ,when ther neither needed nor required it avi 
= ow a: mw cotocadincnt fubtilty on the other, got bis Bood 
: thereupon.he was the firlt that led apprifings againtt his Laads ; 
and not content with that , to thamad he might obcain the mar- 
row of his eſtate to himſelf, procured the molt of all his other 
Creditors, to take the ſame violent courſe againſt him, 
30. And though whea in the time of my Lord Adontreſ7's 
over- 


T he fifth Book. 


over-runaing of the North of Scotland , he knew not what 

courſe to take for the feruring of his Gold, Silver, Evidences, 

and ccher things of value, from the hands of the /rifh, it pleated 

my mother, out of courteſie,to take into her own cuftody the ©xpicham turn 

Trunks wherein thoſe things were, and place them within my 7 kate df6- 

houſe of Crowartie : of all which akhough Che made fuch a 7 aytae, (.d me- 

good account unto him , that now he hath them at his own dif- aw rotcfianm 
ure , yet ( like that Snake mentioncd in the Fable, which, in {44 vicit impre- 

d of thanks for the warmth of a good fire bettowed on his 944 
almoft-flary'd-for-cold joynts , without which he had afluredly 
died, did leap up in the face of his Hoft, to deftroy him, with tus 
whole family) he hath ever fince applied the urmoſt of his wit to 
the undoing both of her and me , and the utter ſubverſion of all 
the remnant of our Houſe. 

3 1. That ſuch bad acquitals ſhould have by him been rendred Ty annian is 
to my father and mother tor thole fo coaſiders ble favors of theirs gr «1ſime pro 
con on him who wes born a Gentleman (for he is the third /4999s oÞcrary 
in deſcent frem Norman Leſlie.that for killiog his Mafter Card. 7” rea pores 
Retomn, was julily forfeited of his eftate) is truely very ftrange. _—_ 

3 2. Strange likewile it is, that by the continuance of his mi(- 
carriages rowards me] ſhould be necefſicated in my own defence 7, p18 officiis 
ag him { who + as if there were a Canmbal-like Leprotie 64 Fepans th 
over his heart, impeditive of the ſuſcepubilicy of thanks , hath 04/4 
never = been ſenſible , in the leaft meature, of the feveral _— Pm 

es done unto him) to aftord yer another evidence of the ,,, jg. 
of his ingraticude ; which is chis 

3 3- When jome four yeers ago , with all the Horſe and Foot 
he was able to command , he cam in a hoftile manner to take 

on of a Farm of mine. called Ardech ; unto which (as — 
Sir Rebers Barquharr c19 teſtifie)he had no more jult ticle,then _ benefs 
to the town of ferichs mentioned in the Scripeures + and that cis acreperint, 


at the offer of ſuck an indignity to our Houſe , ſome of the hot. '** maxime ad 
ſparited Gentlemen ot our name would even then have taken mal cc 4- 
him, with his three ſons, bound them hand and foot.and thrown OE" 
them within the Flood-mark , into a place called The yeres of 
Udel.there to expect the —- - the Sea in a full Tide,co car- 
in of a greater depth, and abler 
2 


ro 


ry hum along to be ſeized 


6 


Avarn liam 
<1 woliln 
fall «1.4. 


Fo predulime off 
fwor , «ti ft 

yr3 prricu'of [- 
6 ma my 1s be- 
meficia in &l1- 

gum conſeorne 7 
mam quii ly [Cl 
guilt Kon eas 


deve, nou vault 


eſſe (41 reddat. 


The fifth Book, 


"0 reſtraia the inſatiablenels of his immenſe deſires, then any of 
my Lands withia the Shire of Cromartie. 

34, Then, when in hopes he would behave himſelf more le- 
gally in mes coming, prove a better neighbour, and more con- 
A —_— , a reſtrained their fury , curbed their ſudden 
attempt » allowing him, together with thoſe were with him, 
a Paſs and Safe-conde to their own houſes, I did not 
ſomuch as a hair of any of their heads to be touched ; his re- 
tribution of thanks to me for my then fo publikely- manifeſted 
aftction to him in the preſervation of his life ( God) a 
peared in nothing elſe, (he like another Aſitbridates feeding bis 

all on no other nutriment but on the poyſon of that rancour he 
Pad molt maliciouſly conceived eapiaion and my family ) bur 
in the preſent ſetting of himſelf ro work for laying the placform 
of a molt milchieyous plot, to my total and unaycidable de- 
ſtrution. _ 

35- In purſuance whereof, having adj to himſelf Co- 
lonel Arch bald Strachan (then yo — 

ood febn Forb as of [nnernaſs ; Licuterant Hachiſon, and 0- 
vs + 2 ——_ my mare. 
renants from being qua upon (with whi i{hment 
m7, the Pulpit of Cromartie , by 
an intimation made to that efteRt from the Minifters own mouth, 
who nevertheleſs (25 1 believe) knew nothing of the Plor) unleſs 
I ſhould go to [anernaſe my elf, to conduce with the Officers 
for ſome eaſe of an extraordinary Sels was then to be i 
on me ; hoping by ſuch means, when I ſhould be in that Town, 
that by vertue of a Caption fiollen out againſt me by James Su- 
therland Tucor of Deaf «s, I ſhould be deprived of my liberty, 
and bept in durance there , till Finrafe (hould betully fatisfied 
in all hs demands. 

36. This wicked device proved ſo univerſally odious to all the 
inge-uous ſpirits that heard of it, that his own wite having it in a 
perfect abomination, becauic of the bad ſequeles ſhe was certain 
could nct chuſe but enſue upon ſuch pernicious machinations, did 
not enjoy her {df long after , but died very difcontented at the 
wilfulnets of hex husbacd : ray Rove my lm 
judicious 


The fifeb Book 


judicious woman , and fo was his mother , who, ſhe 
loved him as well as any mother could do her fon , was ftill, ia 
all differences berwixt him and m* , more for me then him , be- 
cauſe ſhe fludied always to have reaſon on her fide, 

37. The above-writen Rebere finding that chis his fubcil 
contrivance had failed of its aimed-at , and thatthere ap- 
peared as much baſeneſs in the one, as raſhaels in the other at- 
temp, did forecaft anocher way how to bring about his covetous 
+ which that he might the berter do , after that he had 
molt glibly infinuated bimſelt into the favour of the afore-named 


Ing/aiitude of 


venting Wrens, 


Archibald Strachan, and that he had 2 p while before Socans [antes 
that, moved — Gentleman is Aferray ( who afterwards 114% © us 
his 


married one aughters, and who he been free from 
the infection of his father-in-law's untoward ſuggeſtions) would 
have affuredly dealt very courteouſly with me, he being the heir 
of one of my fathers Creditors) to make over his rights to him, 
to be conſolidated with his other pretended claims, for the which 
he was to give him a good round fum of money, acd his daugh- 
ter to the boot. - 

38. Now tott e end he might beſtow his daughter with the 


(na £/Uidte 


Ingraum dixee 


leaſt charve he could to humſelf, he red an Order for Colo. 1, & anai« 


nel Str to quarter a whole of Horſe uv Te- 
wo dn to or um 0 be paid © i fol 
hw ; whi ily was the rt of his portion : he 
OED Eh. 
were not well laboured. 
39. The injuftice of this ation, againſt which Strachan, 
even at firſt, had ſome inward relutancie, ſtamped within a lit 
tle thereafter into the Colonels minde thoſe deep impreflions of 
regret for the perperratics thereof , from whence ſprung forth fo 
many various prickles of foul-difturbing thoughts for it,2nd ſome 
other of his more notorious aCtings the advice of # fo 
ſive counleller,as that his conſcience being exceedingly lung wich 
remerie, he was not able (a while before he died)co refrain from 
theſe abrupe exclamations, #+ to thee Finrafie, accurſed be 
thy conſultations, (bane fall on there, 11nd (o forth : after this 
raanner fretting and yeanng himlelf feyeral times in private, at the 
very 


dixerts. 


he waſte, then that his daughter g ;mps's ! 


0 mwert 


F 


14 


ſefſioa of thoſe my Lands he had apprized for moneyes due by 


The fifth Book, 


very ſingle memory of that one man, as ſorne of thoſe that heard 
hun in his Scloquie a little before his deceale , can bear re- 
cord. 

40. And truly thus much 1 can teftife my ſelf, that ro my 
own heating he did acknowledge his hearty for the iade- 


| _—_— ins he took for neer upon twelve months together, ar 


of the ſaid Fimraſie,in procuring a Garilon to be ferled 
within my houſe at Cremartie , whereof the Governour (being 
Ayn 7 Gentle. 
man) i in a yery ſhort ſpace with ſuch corrupt documents 
from his coulen Rebert, that before the dizbanding of that Ga- 
riſon ( for which courtcfie I owe the thanks to Licutenance-Ge- 
neral David Leſlie, who | perſwade my (elf did never a 
of Finraſie's proceedings againſt me) begun to keep ſuch a high 
hand in my abſence over all that had in me any intereſt , that in 
the molt unreaſonable of his demands ( as his written Order as 
yet can _ witnefs) his loftineſs _ ſuch, ; he - a firain 
ke that of So/ the t, tO rinces 
tha an—_— petty & 
41- Net without a defga (as is ) to indear himſelf 
the more intrinſeeally in the favours of the y 
Finr afie's daughters whole father(like another Charles of Bu r- 
gundie) keeps them (by all appearance) the longer unhusband- 
cd, that they may ſerve him for lo mary ftalking-hories, where» 
by to intangle ſome neighbouring Woodeocks (through an ex. 
petation of wiving them) in a confederacy with him, and 
oppoſition to my Family, againſt which he hath (o injuſtly de> 
nounced War 


2, The Gariſon being removed from Cremartie,and honeſt 
K thereby dilappointed My afliftance from Go- 
vernor Leſlie in the driving on of his projects, he betakes him» 
ſelfro another courſe ; and laying hold on the occafion of a 

10g a the Gentlemen of the name of Mackenzie, 
pucinbis ſuit unto them, that they would be pleaſed to 
move the Earl of Seafertb (their chief and his ſuperior) to al- 
low him the favour of procetion, and to further him to the poſ 


my 


T he fifth Book. 


my Fatber to him ; which diſcourſe as he amplified after the 
bett manner he could for his own advantage, ſo had he an e- 
ſpecial care to make no mention of his uagrueful milcarriage 
within a year before that, unto my Lords own felf z whoſe law- 
ful commands (though both his Father and he had formerly an- 
to that Honourable Family fworn unfrigned obedience) he noe 
onely (leighted, in not undergoing thoſe duties which (as a Val-. 
fal) it became hum to diſcharge , and which the primeſt Gentle- 
men theres bouts (out of the meer tye of Neighbour-hood) did 
unanimouſly yorm ; bur centrary to the homage he did owe 
unto my Lord, and perſonal good Offices he had received from 
him, adjoyned himlclt with might and main , in both counſel 
and adion, to thoſe, that had vowed the ruine of both him aad 
his name, had plundred his and their Lands, dipe their hands in 
the blood of his ſervants, and burnt ſome of the beſt houſes of 
”w Ro h things being lk the worthy 
43+ All which thi | well known to the wort 
JunRto of the aforeſaid a bo Petition was juſtly re- 
zjeRed ; not ſo much for that in both Conſanguinity and Ally- 
ance Ihad unto his Lordſhip a very aear relatioa , or that 
Predeceſſors of us both, had for theſe many hundreds of years 
kept a moſt entire and amicable correſpondence , as that his dev 
mands were totally of themſelves unreaſocable, and that (al- 
is mp0 {nnd es rounded) my Lord was not con- 
ceived to be in honour to protect him, who had infr; 
ed his faith, aad forfeited his loyaltie to him, whoſe Vaſſal 
was. 


44- Whereas theſe rubs in the way of a plain-meaning man 146% [pes 
would have quickly made bim to defilt from luch violent under» 99% 4ffcdia 
takings, be on the contrary was by ſuch repulſcs the more eagar facit jucunda.. 


on his game 2 what w have proved dilcouragements to 0s 
thers, did animate him ; and the greateſt ſpur to his ation , ras 
the iniquity of the cauſe : he left no Winde — nor 
Oar un he could make uſe of : he importuned the Kirk, ſo- 
licited the State, courted the Soldierie, fealted the Lawyers, ca- 
joled, ſmoothed, an4 flattered Gentlemen, Merchants, and men 
of all degrees, to gain friends both in Heayen and Hell for ; "4 


\ 


The fifth Book. 
| ,and that with fuch nd i 
ar a hd th ve td nt 
po rt rents oe Pere on 
a ing hrs on ine his tra cha 
me pos. Hoc wr \ wy Bi froms bis to af ma 
ſnares, been ſpent after the manner 1 intended , 1 would ( by 


Gods afſtance)n that ſpace of leifare have emitted thoſe things, 
which (to the Iſle of Brirain) would have been of greater e- 


molument, then all the eſtare he is worth in the world , ewenty 


cimes rold. 

5- But he mi{-regarding theſe things, which did no more 
reliſh wich him, then « Preach Galli in the ears of a Spaniſh 
Mule, and ſetting at enjoyment of any ſpare hours 
upon what occaſion ſoever, did even at my laft being in Cre- 
martic (where I was nor to ftay above two months , by reaſon 

ing engaged to the State upon Parole to return toLow- 

plod and forecalt how without offending 

Authority (I being 2 of War)he might fo ſerure my 

perſon in Scot {and, 25 nor to be releaſed till he were contented 
in all his demands. 

46. In the ing of this Plot by his two elder ſons and 
brother George.many of the Engliſh bottrof Horſe and 
Foot , together with the Dy nn of rhat Engliſh 
Gariſoa in my houſe, bring earneſtly ſpoke to , he 
them of ſuch another then the P ian Comman- 
ders he had formerly em . —_— EIS 

of his daughters nor gliſtering of h -being ab'e ro tempe 

10a jerks apais fuller many in ſpight of his 
way-laying of me , and conducing wh Eng Meng 
Blows in Bferrey oapprebend me, 1 ſecurely rraveled 
all che beſt Towns of Scotland, 104 thereby miking x (ate retreat 


to London , wilht bim for the furure wemploy his Motto of 
Gripe-faft , with the Griff pounces of EI ſore 


other prey then me , who Knows him 4 ſo well, that he 
CE ee tins, hav ate Viend/ts can 
fidy applied to him , then that of Qual# Corow, tale 


TL 
46, Se» 


The fifth Book. 

47- Several Gentlemen of account , and others of his 
P3./ w \neance havi ; very ſeriouſly expo- 
ftulaced with tirm, why he did lo implacably demean himſelf 
towards me, and with fueh irrecoociliability of rancor, that no- 
ing could ſeem to pleaſe him that was conſiſtent with my 
; his anſwers molt readily were theſe : 1 have (ſee ye?) ma. 
ny Daughters (ſee ye ? )co provide Portions for (leeye? ) and 
that (ee ye now ? ) cannot be done (fe ye ? ) without money ; 
the Iacerelt (ſee ye? ) of what I lent (ſer ye? ) had it been 
termel yet yt mould hareaforde me (rye nom) 
nr / for new Intereſts: I have (ſeeye?) apprized 
_— "77 lummes (fe ye ? ) borrowed _ 
mc now? ) and (ke ye? ) the ing exp! 

Cs ran it (heed oe $7) oo 

have poſſeſſion nr td e my Lands (ſee ye? ) ac- 
cording to my vadoubed Right (lee ye now ? ) 

48. With theſe over-words of ſee ye, and ſor ye now. as if 
they had been no leſs material then the PL Selab 20d 
Hig gaion Selab, Gd be nauſeace the cars of his Hear- 
ers, when hs was in the career of | 
concerning me, who alwayes thoughe that bs had wary 
reaſon to make uſe of ER, Þ gry ? and do 
you ſer now t becauſe there being but hetle eandour in tus mean- 
og, whatever he did or ſpoke was under fone colour, 

49. For under colour of on, he did ſow the feeds of 
divifioa berwizt me 2nd the Kirk, and deviſed ſuch zhominable 
lyes of me.as the like were never hatchc in Hell : under colour of 
being agaialt Tyrannyhe fent his ſons along with Col. Strachan 
tothe overthrow of Mentreſr, whom he called James Grabam 
the. &c. as now he doth his Maſter by the name of Charles 
Stmart : under colour of being for Monarchy , be hyed away 
has Eldeſt Son to Dunbar, being taken Priſoner, he was 
kept faſt for a twelvemonth atN le ; and under what co- 
lour foever he can (hew himſelf with the leaſt detriment in pub- 


kck, dorh he alwayes with the greaceft ſecurity drive oa bus pri” 
yate benefic. 
50, Sorhat ſuch as tak a0d diſcourſe with han who goes 


The fifth Book, 


alwayes Masked and Vizarded with colours and pretences to 
what he jarends not, not onely to fee , to fee well , and 
em enl Sor der prerore rp gets hr 
per{picacy ht, and prying in{petion that may be, to look 
Objects, pore into them, and caſt an eye on 

open view he purpoſely withholdeth, to the end that 
In diſcovering by ſuch opricks the fallacies of the fight of our 
mind. we be not by finding under the Cloak of Righte- 
oulgels, nothing elle bur the Babyſonſh Garmene and accuried 


Fi. Lerthe Reader (1becſcech him) excuſe my having fo 
loag detained him upon the wretched ſubjeEt of thisman, who 
like a Fox in his Den, living in my Progenitors Lands of Erie, 
hides or ſhews his Pawes as he ſees the Prey in __ 
to let go or lay hold upon : and in compenſation (ſerving - con- 
= > on eff ee I will fer before him > of my 
Fathers Creditors, who in the commendative deleryeth as much 
to be infilted upon,as the other in the vituperatory part. 

Rueſtms matg- x52, As of the ten Lepers whom Chriſt healed, oe believed 
mg" in him ; and yy yo a fm Theeves , one was ſaved: - 
wh were it a pity. if amongſt ſo many Creditors there could not 
Sr ens adborteaics rhande crmreging it were, that (he be- 
catzm is (8% ing a man of ſuch approved integrity) 1 ſhould be filent in this 

ſecnus. praiſes: and not extol his worth, 
Weme iniaffium. $3+ Vertue was the foundation of his wealth, and he never 
babet lurruam loved to gain any thing by the fols of another : of the many 
ny Debtors that have been hero poltm. bo com phradies 
the Bonds of asy in the Regiſter : yet hath God in his 
f de yroy "" towards him bleſſed hin oth eboin whulft others that had 
non, blamed him for his lenity, and had themlelves extended the ris 
pour of the Seatiſh Law to the extreameſt cruelty imaginary, 
till chey had obcained to the ourmaſt farthing all that out of 
the depth of their coverouſneſs they could have required from 
my Father, and afterward had in their jollgy vaunted of the 
immenſe profit that thereby accrued uato them , are now (al< 
h it be not long fince the tume of their cfientive rigour). is 
a deipicable conduion, and fir objefts of Diyine wrach , to. be 


pu- 


The fifth Book. 


puniſhed with chat which moſt unmercifully for their 
Gen nee thee would have infloted upon their berters. 


o—__—_ Roburtfon of Kindeaſſe, or rather 


f, (for lo they a) for nas con- 
Sr Fartarts ys tres bare] his 
ors to the black fa of unchriftian-like dea 


19 


Honfum if 
[uc7 wm,q00 ne 
me lediiey 
Jul: acquiriters 
* © null; p14(#- 


enjoy a long life in this world, attended with health, wealth, a dicarer. 


hopeful P and all the happineſs conducible to erernal 
falyation : aad may his children after him, 2s Heices both of his 
yertues and means, derive his Lands and riches to their ſons, to 
continue fuccefhively ia that Line from generation to tion, 
= RITES Thc Afar ebbe and 


45- This hearty wiſh of miae, as chief of my kinred, I be- 
queath to all that do and are to carry the name of Vrqubert, 
and adjure them , by the reſpeRt they owe to the Stock whence 
they are deſcended, Fathers love and mine to this mangto 
IO gue to each one that bears the name of 
Robert ſon, both tor the Perſonal deſervings of the Gentleman [ 
have now mentioaed, as for that (as it is a common layiag that 
the Skeens ought to be _ there is nothing more cer- 
tain then that the Robert ſons be Urguberes; or befdes 
that their own Coat- Armour doth \n forme meaſure manifeſt ir, 
the firſt of that name was a ſon of Reberr, the ſecond brother of 
_— which Robert, a little after the deceaic 

barlemais. \n eulition of his Uncle Carels, was fo re- 
nowned-for his Chivalrie and valiant atchievements in [taly 
and other forrain Countries, that his Oft-ſpcing mr warn 
been by his name, as the Forbaſſes were by that of 
$iehar, the ſecond brother of YVocompes. 

$6. Othat I might continue looger upon this ſubject! Bar 
the ſcope of this Treatiſe nor permitting it, 1 muſt of neceſſicy 
— — —— 


remper. 

like wolves the ingocent flock, war>=— ol 
a—_ Gb, rar. ar acer v os = ard 748Chryiol 
wars Fs rene ELIT 


ora, 
& inſatia- 


roman on or Coalcience , Tay bi hes 


20 T be fifth Book, 


by avouch (conform to that ancient ſaying, Arwa tenentromnie 
dat qui jnfla nega) that. expedit, ut, jou tenenti, qui juſt a 
negar, aloguid fakes de ſue amittar. 
Tantus of me. 53 Thus is it dear, in regard of their flubbornock, and me- 
{um nes ſe can- fraGtary carriage, againit all conſcience, equity, and reaſon , as 
| ſaid is, that they get gether wrong nor injuſhce dooe them , al- 
ca tg mexe onde 10 the pbk rnd ar: 


cual ; it mare conducibile to the good, that the in= 
mm—_ nocent enzoy the means of their forefa then that the moou- 
ments of vertue become the inheritance of the vicious. 
Prje exiflima- 59. I know now they will exclaim, that they are ſcandalized, 
tas jv ſ@ne- in being called vicious for daing what the Law allows them : bur 
——_— truely ] muſt anſwer them that Fornication is accounted to be a 
_— fin, even by thole from whom a permilhon Rowerth to camanic it, 
| 2s at Rowe and Avignon ; and that hkewile for the hardnets 
Ujarainsſope! f the hearts, Adoſes did tolerate Adulcery ; and what 
torer, off male. Alle can laid of Faxery. more then + bur that, as too 
diftus , oy: much Wicke biadack occahonrh ie ene, meer lack of cha- 
Chry'et. in his rity admits the other to be coonived at, for the lefs prey of 
37 Hom-up®® the poor, in behalf of whory, the Law fuftererh rather that chey 
. - as I EE 


Avaritis amnis 60. Yet not to call it a fin, were to bely both Divine and Hu 
improbicatu, ef mane Law ; uoder pretext of either whereof , that they ſhould 
meirejeln. go about to undermine ancient and worthy Families, doth make 
Nalam of + their fin to be ſo aweh the more prodigious. 

wveritie: nam  ©1+ Tholethatare any thing verſed in the Morals , will ac 
mote pace Know Prodi not t© be a vice half fo as Co- 
une aven- becauſe it frververh leſs from Juſtice, which is the com- 
La malls, mon meaſure of all Verwes + for as it is webiline dave 
Avariins ©%% accigers ; fo may it be truely faid, that he doth rather p 
vet envgne ſuns ha; giveth 100 much of hs own, then who exeved 
wil tam fo- int ing from his neighbou Cf. 

man pref G62. Now the propereſt ejects of Juſtice, being to reward 20d 
babar, quad & puſh, according to the recervers dernerit, there s eo doubt bur 
ns =Þ*” tha bach P and Covnouſnets ſbould fall under the 
as rowers, compa of the ——_— Cc 


T he fifth Book. 


ESSE all evil. 
63- Tris a revert, that faules being perſonal, the puniſhmene 
& cher net to be transferred wo aftet-+ges, as is ſaid in the 
ewelfth Aracle of this Book unle6 they did milicate crea 
agaioft a Pritce or Commeaweal ; in which caſe, for the publike 
good, at «mer filieruns terrorem parentibus incutias incur- 
rends erimen leaſe Majeſtatis, neceſſs off, rdeoque juſtur, 
alrguantiflum drfictere ab ta juſtttia, que privatss accom- 
medar! ſoles wegotiis ; even us we finde, contrary to the ordi- 
racy courſe of oature, for the weal of the Univerſe ad evitandans 
Wo gn pj 

64- nature | + I have been pazricipant 
with all my predeceſſors of the Paternal Line , ro, Reign 
of Engenins Oftawie , in the days of my fore-father Zeron, 
who had che greaceft part of his eftate taken from him 4 for no 
other treipais then his too great hoſpitality to a Prince of his 
own kigred, 25 in the , or ie of qur 

Buc kind of nee Is ml 
65. other kinde of cranſereflion , being in a matter wal 
| arch kefor > __ 


cute, as the A 


inft common ſenſe 10% inde cine 
be the reward of ** 


that the ſucceſſorof the - 

Prodigal , for no ocher reaſon bur his predecefſors prodigality, <©fi* «fe 
ſhall have his whole inherirance diſcerned to be the inheritance of ?9'7") 1,0 1a” 
the ſon of # coverous man, and tha: for his covetoulnes ? ,.uus, a 
the cncly recommendable for which he obtains it being a quoque ſemper 
conftane purpoſe 2nd reſolution to hook his geighbours means Mat mores pore, . 
unto him, by eights and tens in the hundred,and other ſuch bairs, * 5 8 
whereby improvident and inconfiderate men of great Revenues 
are ofremtomes emtangled> f 

67. Were it noe lefs-prejudicial t© the Publikt , and more 
equitable in ir R1f, chat 2 coveious mvp find forgo both off his 

"ST prigs 


22 The fifth Book. 


Avare tom dt+ qo. , . 

priveipal and intereſt, then that he whe is netther , ac 
ef good bebe! coretous, ſhould be denuded of the oftate of tin roefinher, 
baber, quia aut Which never was acquired by him that contraRted the debe ? 
ven baba con * 68, Although the Lords of the Sefſhon,or any other inferiour 
comcapiſeis us Judicature, were never inveſted with power to judge acberways 
des aac oe ts to the Cuftoms of the polavely wrizzen, 
amitiat;& dum and Municipal Laws of the Tand of Scotland ; yet the high 
—_ þe- Court of theParliament nb area wy vertue of their 
i popere, ® Legiſlative authority , , for the weal of the Publike, cranſ- 
fopers {om cond the bounds of any writen Law much more that unto which 

they were never tied, and of a (tranger-Country now under their 

command. 

' G9. And as it is a common laying, /mtereft Reignblice we- 
guts re ſua male ntatwr ; lo doth it very much concern the re» 
py of a Commonwealth, that ancient conſiderable families 

preſerved frem ruine, if poſſible. 
"Falls of res * 70+ If Creditors lay, they get injuſtice done to them by it, 
que ad malsfi- I ankwer with Tacitas , (Dato, ſel non conceſſa) qued habet 
011m magys 1 imiqui contra fingulor wiilhuate publica rependiiur ; orwith 
pellar quam & Plutarch, A juſtitia in yarvis negetits defietendum off, þ 
jofitie 7 in. £4 wth volem wu 1m mag ni. 

”_ 71. For if it belawtulto cut oft an arm, for the preſervation 
of the body , how much more lawful is it to defalk fomewhart 
from the exorbitant ſums of mercileſs Creditors, for the preferva- 
tion of an ancient family, in fayour of him , that cever was the 
debtor ? ſeeing the Commonweal , for his appearance of good 
ſervice thereto, may be tyghly concerned in his fortune. 

72. Theic few points 1 have premitted, to make thoſe Credi- 
tors plizble to Reaſon, in undergoing any luch courſe as it (hall 
P >a buy 4 

pleaſe the Stare ro command or pertwade them to ; , who, as 1 
make account, will take them from off my haad , aod fettle me 
with freedem in the inheritance of my predeceſſors, and that for 

the reaſons formerly mentioned. 
73+ Akhough the State pay them nor to-the full, or perhaps 
them (for to much as concerns me ) with, a pardon x yet 
they to be thankful to the State for what is left them, and 
not grumble at the Publike ſeyerity that others nolels faulty then 


The fifth Book. 


they, have ſuſtained a milder laſh ; feeing ( a8 in the Edecima» 
yon of er paar any þ— 0m have no reaſon to 
complain of partialiry, becauie the pes unpuniſhed) it 
becomerth theſe aforciaid Creditors to remain contented with 
that mercy to others, which proceeds from thoſe who are juſt to 
them. although they ſuffer by it : naw plarimes damnune in 
fligitar , qurbus nulla fit injuria. And (uch of them as are 
molt clamorous in ſeeking , conkdering what benefit by uſurious 
bargains they had from my father, though they neithes from the 
Scate nor me get any thing at all, can be ao lors. 

74. However it go , 1 ſhould not be deprived of my fore-fa- 
fachers Lands , becauſe of many reaſons which 1 have already 
deduced. Nor is this unwillingaets in me to part from my Land 
a vice.as is their tenaczouſne(s 10 keeping of money : tor, f# pearvs 
licet componere magnis . as the King of Spain (pent in the de- 
fence of Flanders more Ryals of eight then would cover the 
face of the whole Country ( as is commonly reported ) (o to 
preſerve my inheritance (whatever it colt) ic defends the honour: 
and reputation of the Hauſe which I repreſent. 

7 5- And ingenuouſly, as when I collationed in the fiftjerh 
Article of this fare Book, Prodigahty with Covetoulnels (viz. 
that Prodigality, whereby one laviſhly expendeth his rears, and 
uaneceſſarily inyolveth himdelf into a Labyriath of debe ; and 


23 


Shnam (8qu2 


not that other. which by aheoavns his Pradecefſors aacient 40» 1,/chr an. 


heritagce, deſtroyer? the whole fiock in fo far as lies ws him) 1 
did prefer Prodigality to Covetoulneſs as the lefſer vice : {o 
ſhould I now compare with the covetoulaects of an Uturer , the 


fencls of him that makerth no conſcience _——_ 
is fauk a 


traogers the Land of . bis Anceftors , 1 would find 
great deal more unpardonable the that of che Uturer. 

76. For who turneshus Lind into money, devirilizech and 
emaſculates what is naturally procieatye. and by conlequenee, 


- blame thea who to the Eunuch and Spadonian moneys, a 


a conltagc pregnancy, by ima to be beth fra of in- 
K; bl oinctiag x ond ul - ſatiabils cu 


Father and Mother, bearing , nnd the 


E# amv & 16+ 
beading his cout lc to what is moxe impertet, deferverh _— _—_— | m—— 


mee 1g" mat- 


cluld full growing per juxia Fotionem; whom it the —_ dns abola (ft 


22 The fifth Book, 


Avare tom dt+ y,qo. X X ; 
priveipatand intereſt, then that he who is neither l, nor 
tet non Covetous, ſhould be denuded of the eſtate of his froefathers, 
baber, 9414 aut Which never was acquired by him that cootrated the debe ? 
non baba cone - GS, Although the Lords of the Seſſion,or any other inferiour 
Judicature, were never inveſied with power to judge atherways 
| then wo EpOlfeme of Ge Gaynny pailebecly wei, 
amitiat,& dum 2nd Municipal Laws of the Land of Scotland ; yet the high 
in adverſ: þe- Court of theParliament of the Commonweal! vertue of their 
ra peſþers, ® Legiſlative authority , may, for the weal of the Publike, craat- 


papers {2 cend the bounds of any written Law much more that unto which 


they were never tied, and of a (tranger-Country now under their 
command. 
' G9. And as it is a common ſaying, /mtereft Reignblice ne- 
guus re ſua male ntatwr ; lo doth it very much concern the re» 
tation of a Commonwealth, that ancient conſiderable families 
be preſerved frem ruine, if poſſible. 
"Halls of res * 70+ If Creditors lay, they get injuſtice done to hem by it, 
que ad mal-fi- I ankwer with Tacitas , (Dato, ſel non conceſſa) quod habet 
01mm magy 1 iniqui contra fingulor wiilutate publicarependityr ; ormith 
—_ em © Plutarch, A juſtitia in yarvis negetits defleltendum oft, þ 
taftitie "ft in. £4 uti wvolem ww tn Mag ni . 
frfbor. 71. For if it belawtulto cut off an arm, for the preſervation 
of the body , how much more lawful is it to defalk ſomewhat 
from the exorbitant ſums of mercileſs Creditors, for the preſerva- 
tion of an ancient family, in fayour of him , that cever was the 
debtor ? ſeeing the Commonweal, for his appearance of good 
ſervice thereto, may be tighly concerned in his forcune. 

72. Theſe few points ] have premitted, to make thoſe Credi- 
tors plizble to Reaſon, in undergoing any luch courſe as it ſhall 
pleaſe the Stare to command or pertwade them to ; , who, «s I 
make account, will take them from oft my hand , and fettle me 
with freedom in the inheritance of my predeceſſors, and that for 
the reaſons formerly mentioned. 

73+ Akhough the State pay them not to the full, or perhaps 
pay them (for to much as concerns me ) wich, a pardon x yer 
ought they to be thankful to the State for what is left them, and 
not grumble at the Publike ſeyerity that others no lels faulty thea 


The fifth Book. 
they, have ſuſtained a milder laſh ; feeing ( 45 in the Edecim» 
ton of Criminal Souldiers, Opcapynoan have no reaſon to 
complain of partialiry, becaule the tenth eſcapes unpuniſhed) it 
becomerh theſe aforclaid Creditors to remain contented with 
that mercy > others, which proceeds from thoſe who are juſt ro 
them. although they ſuffer by it : naw plarimes damnun in- 
fligitar , qurbucs nulla fit injuria. And (ch of them as are 

clamorous in ſeeking , conſidering what benefit by uſurious 
bargains they had from my father, though they neithes from the 
Scate cor me get any thing at all, can be ao loſers. 

74. However it go , 1 ſhould not be deprived of my fore-fa- 
fathers Lands , becauſe of many reaſons which 1 have already 
deduced. Nor is this unwillingaets in me to part from my Land 
a vice.as is their tenaczouſne(s 10 keeping of money : tor, ff parva 
licet componere magnis . as the King of Spain (peat in the de» 
fence of Flanders more Ryals. of eight then would cover the 
face of the whole Country ( as is commoaly reported ) fo to 
preſerve my inheritance (whatever it colt) i defrads the honour: 
and reputation of the Hauſe which 1 e 

75- And ingenuouſly, 2s when I collationed in the fiftjerh 
Article of ap Book, — wich Covetoutnels (viz. 
that Prodigahty, whereby one la expendeth his rears, and 
uaneceſlanily inyolverh himſelf into a Labynath of debe ; and 


23 


Shnam (442 


no that other. which by alenavns bis Prodecefſors aacient 40» y./chr um. 


heritagce, deſtroyer? the whole (Hock in fo far as Jies ws him) 1 
did prefer Prodigality to Covetoulneſs as the lefſer vice : (+ 
ſhould I now compare with the coyetoulaects of an Uturer , the 
ſenels of him that makerh no conſcience to gilpone unto 
aogers the Land'of his Anceftors , 1 would find his fauk a ». 
great deal more unpardonable thes that of che Uiurer. / 
76. For who turneshus Land into money, devirilizech and 
emaſculates what is naturally procieatve. and by conlequenee, 


- blame thea who to the Eunuch and Spadonizn moneys, a | 


a conltagc nancy, by wma be beth Ave of in- 
Mor & mart md R ſauabils cu 


Father and Mother, { g + und the 
cluld full growing per juxi4 Pojrrionem; whom it the —_— 


E# amer & 16+ 
beading his courſe to what is more impertect, deterverh _ ——_ rn, 


me 1 mt 


dns obolia itt. 


= Theffth Bat 


feſt j"s- hath act Gich 
de Other eborabarl 
29s ihe ſe mpuation; he nem of makin what i barren fuk, 
Cwwarkas reoraF apes Aya commendable then of ex- 
what us nature fertile, for that which producerh and 
forth but ruſt and drots. 


77. However, « h what is already faid — 
077 Hovcnn ag x = 00.65 woe 


4, Equity towards them in having received 
—— ch Gem an, = vr any ng 6 
multaplac at quis nl; my nons to them preſcinded 7 penal 
© | Rs ſhew neuher 
F car adrpins has nor when. nor time, nor place, nor any other circumſtance 
| 29 vg, ak whatloever,denorating the exiſterce of any tag oo earth, where- 
plans anbelae, with $0 upbraid my accepea ace: yer I ſhall with, (if ſoit pleaſe 

the Publike ) tare) be na 1nd unirel of what hey 
can with any kin reaſor; demand 
78. For as Julrws Caſar , after be had lated his wife, 
defired to call her home, becauſe the J had abfolved 
her trom that whereof with Clodiaw Ihe was accuſed, 
eappny , that the wie of Ceſar mult be free 
of Sufj 2s bm ſo, though 1 may vindicate 
wy ſelf, and the land of from the Ran of that 
debe, - many reads and malicious men would ad ul- 
terate the bitherto-immaculace puricy of our Family ; yer would 
I rather chuſe ſome lirtle coin (ſhould be on them, 
therewith to ffop their bawling mmuches , thus Kave'any! the 
meanelt diſtrufi or jea loufie remvining though gerepbiowel 
9. Lexpet, that the Publike will be _—__ 
(a = whet extrccr when ral fenehagh ) rn 
ance thereof : which chat they do , even in the molt expenſive 
ww , is no new thing - rr kg 6-1 worn | 
©. have had their eftates made up 
and whe exaGtions , who afterwards 
the urmoſt of their power for ſubyerting the State,to which w/ 


The fifth Book. 
had been ſo much beholding. although before that time they bad 
hever made Cqeient hel Teorion fo ſo wor has, | 

81. "How many have there been abourthe Courts of Kings, 
who having no higher qualificatioa , then to veep the Privie 
roons, or at molt, to make the Kings bed, were ſhort while after 
fo bedaubed with Honours, that (al 1 their endowments 
continued fill in the ſame degree of ba they diſdained the 
touching of a Miſſive direed tothem, whereof the Superſcrip- 
tion ſpoke not, Ts the moſt noble, bigh, and potent Earl, with 
other Signorial Titles, attended by an & cetera in the reer? 

82, Cheating at Cards, Dice, Bowling, Tenais, or any ocher 
Game, where confederacie or betraying of cruft hath at any time 
proved adyantzgious, and all theſe other ſneaking means-chat are 


atc Courts praiſed, for crammine their 
ff mevey upon na." have been apa; nook 
time,the uſual Scale of Promotion, and very oh the mol? 
infallible way for attzining co moſt ſublime and ſplendid Digni 
ies + which fort of Nobilry, without Valour, Wir, of Leatni 
ray be fily termed a kinde of Metaphyſical wonder, or relation 
ne bf marn bor * FI 
83. I have ſeen beyoad fea a Marqueſs of twenty thou 
Crowns « yerr , who albeic he obtained boch his Title and 
Rencs , for having ſerved his Priace in the quality of. a Paader, 
would neverthelets haye frorn with as much Grandeur, and 
pretended conſcience upon his Honour, as if he had been a Con- 
of ſeveral mighty Nigons, I have likewiſe kaown of 
hae hove der denalone hel; Cheer Caron for 
their grearer dexterity in ind! a Huating-horo 
which _ nevertheleſs, the \e w0s of a Shepherd Wag 
lion was ſufficient romake one in a yery ſhort ſpace by fat toex- 
ce] them. 
84. This evidenceth many to have been enriched by the 
e , whole ſervice thereto, or meric otherways, deſerverh 
ſcarcely the retribution of private thanks. As for my ſelf, be» 
cauſe I have promiſed to do for the Publike that which ſhall be 
berter then ten times my eftare , I cannot think i will be. impu- 
7 AAA” a 1 Lay = 


The fifth Book. 


ſervice ; and for doing thereof, ſuch debt as ſhall be thought fic 
to defray, be ith made a Publike burthen, wich the pub- 
like expence to be diſcharged , if ſo to them it leem expectient, 
and no othe1 ways. 

86. Bur fecing it hath been ſaid by ſome, whe aot long fince 
did fit at the Helm of the Scotilh State, when by one of the moſt 
emiacnt perſons in the Army, an exemption but from ſome few 
months maintenance (aoww called the Sefs) of my own lands was 
demanded,in compenſation of thrice as much which I had disbur- 
ſed upon Warrants from the Publike, for which, by an AR of 
Parliamen:, there was allowed retention in future dues of that 
nature, with wr pn. 2 yours to the honour of my 
Country, ſhould quickly appear for deſerving , worth a 
cones, That when och endes ſhould be made efechual, 


, the like got having been denied to any 
bur my (elf ; nor taking notice, that by thoſe and ſuch- 
—_— preſſures , 1 haye been thele rwelye yeers paſt 
otherwiſe I would have ran: kad Lew ne of cha mpedr> 
ments. . 


to their acceptance , then they have done of i 
tancie, by their ſudden rejedting the grant of my molt equita 


The 


The proje& of the ſixth Book, intituled, 
PHILOPONAUXESIS, 


gHe Author in the frft five Books having 


[ wery dicefted the cauſes 

4M gr Ul edfecls ab wv 
> the expoſal of bu brain-endeavenrs doth in 
| = thi fixth and left of his Imir 
pro ns Gy ef theſe bis juſt demands, will prove_- 
conduc ible 19 all induſtrious negati ations and employments 
whatſoever. And whereas by the Uſurer the contrary 
was wpbraided, he retorts back the dart of that obloquic un 
whence it came, and ſheweth what innumerable prejudices 
have redounded to Merchandizing , Scholarſhip, H 
bandry, Mechaniſm, Nobility, Gentry, Diſport, Exerciſe, 
77 nd wm, ts all the perſons, profeſrions, and diver ſions 
of 

G 


men, of what degree or quality ſoever, by thes 
angrene wherewith Uſury and Avarice bath ſeixad 

the Land, ſince the domination of Hypecrifie wver its in- 
habitats. He declareth likewiſe much of theſe calami- 
ties in bthalf of all theſe fore named Yoeations, Arts, 
Diſciplines, Recreations, and thoſe that all or either 
of them , 10 have occurred by reaſon of his own partics- 
lar preſſures wnder the Fanoratory yoak. And therefore, to 
extricute him out of theſe impeſterments, and diſ-imangle 
bu ef ate from the intricacies wherein the Flagitator keep- 
«hit involved, he ſues the Supreme Awmhority , and begs 
the favour of a Fudge whoſe qualifications be delintates, 
D 2 He 


He ſolvtth all the __ that oppoſe his ſuit , and ev). 
rapes wb lo endanger the 
priper ative of 1 es in anytime to come. 
Finaly, he knewing that TEES in a chamber, defirone 
to exjoythe lizht o 4 vo oy woen'd be offended at bim, who, 
by bolding the windews ſhut , ſhenld detain bim in dok- 
neſs; 4s yt be diſpleaſed with ſach « one as would keep 
faſt the doer againſt he perſon did intend to preſent huinn 
with a rich Diamant , Seeing the expanſion of a devy and 
windats lexf is able ts admit the bigbewe 1of the ove, 
and weal'h of the other + Re expetts that the State, can- 
fidering how eaſily he may be dicburdened of the efareſaid 
letts, and how wpon their removal! an illumina- 
riow Ad evichmen of the Mind: in the knowledge of 
divers exquiſite things, will not wittingly loſe a matter of 
ſo great concernment, for the not- of « mean 
4 yt for whis —_ yon wth FHad 
: to with facility , it meedeth not 
robes -es go bere Wiſdew ſuper as og mt, that 
Cob partes Twill be rang Cn, ags*yoir- of for 
xr ne 1/ > Papayr—r" on, and with * fre. 
wary diſcharge of bia promiſe_, 
The . "aero Ar dntih cloſing this ſixth Book , puts a 
Cataſtrophe whol: jan ; the publ-(bing of 
the 9 i relates 18, depending u the removal 


of t be often- afor ementioned el F wr ks then which the 
Author arts no more for helys : for, Qui iapedimenta 
collir, praftar adminicula, 


Wane e of 


—_ 


The 


The jib Bu 


| & - < 
# \ I 4 i, S. 


US NADA Not SS 


The Srxxch B o © « : 


Of he © 


INTRODUCTION, 


intituled , Philoponauxeſis , 
Or, F urtherance of Induſtry. 


Wohertein is evidenced , that the grant of the Au- 
thors demands will prove ( betidesrhar of the 

' Univerſal Language, and ocher kindes of Lite- 
rature) conducible troall manner of other vertu« 
ous undertakings wharſoever. 


” 


1. Y Frhert happen to be any, rp wer > en. 77 bud 
my demands. wu aire ( all other reaſons falling 
) that the grant thereot might prove very damage- 
able to traders in py whoſe fortune hat conf 
19 the manag! their money ; it be ar 
tered (i 2 | Mduns who mor te det) 
chat by cafting in fuch a ſcruple, unjufHly i char 
arg dorms gar wel non oophrr, ky, 
ſceing under the title of Merchant , and mask of the 
chereof/they do that, which (of ay thing) is ro Merchandizing | 
Ti kad uſu ſuc oor 
3, MONEey UPON to none , bur ſuch as have » 
eſtates in land , alba coy maned to traſhque : for whether THe Papers: 
the 


The fifth Book, 
the intention of the Lender be conſidered, or uſe that the Borrow- 
"48h all Joe ee 55 of 


SQ 9 > 0-2 


25 pre. 73. Thee bin re being noting rr furer\, ' thea that for Wk Ga part 
Wencehing ory, 


ry ,Sw2 Fid Rioting, R - and other 
luch-like pr s, dry. A leg, Revlg vaſt expence, 
ſquander away the mbney fo lent, withour calling an eye to any 
thi antgSdofatmmagct fr erp are, to- 


Ds tgy's oh- 2 
Tau 4 £1, 


nz , require frem 


4 
fe dinting 1#'- their reſpeftive debcors the ture at firſt fo lent , with its uſurious 
96: bax;. attendants ;* which, if cbrained , they, poſſibly at the hands of 
ſome other no lefs deboſh'd then the tormer debtors , make pur- 
chaſe of ſome Land : if noe, then are hey fre, by Decres of 


yy phe Set 
kilon of the land of the debtor. 
5. So that however the matter go, 


Lind; which was the aimed at , _ 
healer ivveied chererth calt oft the Vizard ey 
chant, wherewith they cheated world, and turriing once 
landed men, they a|mgether corn to rrafhique any longet. 
PEE: 6. But the beft is, pee q mare beau wr fa 
Nuns thers having acquired Land, (though the faid fathers , by vertue 
Go rms of their oe econ) | oy yon ner 
mak "hb me- Cond ded ebt ) ſirive uſually ro be 
gave omnia | (ones the berter to appeyr nas, hke) for ſuch extra- 
0 cx/e10m — yagant aChons as cartying alorg with them profuſenels of charge, 
plornepe, 47" occafioned the fale of thoſe lands which by their fachers were 


reve, of 


Ly 

(5 ie 

_— . And av from the face cau'es with all their concomitances, 

Prodigms ef (_ always the fare efte&ts + © doth fuch a courſe of life as 

mn dang was kepe by that did dil-pidate the forefaid lands at firft, 
produce an incyitable neceſſity of rediiponing them , and thac 


EPL 


The foth Book; ”m 


oftentimes to the fiult abalienators ſons, who, bitten with penurys Prcwne 274- 
fog the laviſhack of their fachers, become mulerable ſcrape-goods '# /+7p{« um 
for their childrens tubliftence. oP. 
$. Aker which manner, the generation of one livelihood be» No» þ5i, [id «- 
ing the corruption of another, the for of the Covetous ſpending {4 4115 [a4 
what the facher of. the Prodigal had-gained ; and the ſon of the.g7"11s Moat 5 
Prodigal re-acquiring what the father of the Covetous had pur 7, yarn 
away : Prodigality and Coyrroulaets, in this akernative viculli- rs g7es. 
tude , were the two maſter -wheels that hurried Srarland into £1 [wor baud 
Confuſion and Hypocrifie ; the Fehw , that drove the Chariot —_ qu | 
with ſuch velccity, that fince che Nacional fublcribiog of the firſt gpl 7abnle” 
Covenane , one and the ſame eſtate in lands hach been obleryed, main 1090 
according to the manner of the fore-mencioned circulation of co» wricre fate. 
yerous men, and prodigals , ſucceeding in the veece of one aao- ' 
ther , TY bly been poſlefh by four leveral own- an org 
ers, bine inde, the ſeller being (till ( as ic were ) the buyers PIe* det, profigus 
deceſſor, in a diametral line, as in a direR ons, the Prodigal was heres. 
to the Covetous z or iaverſedly, the Coverousto the Prodigal: 
and this not onely in one, or two + but in aboye five hundred fe Crofus,, (ed 
yeral parts of the Country wherein what the covetous father vs peuper us 
of one family had bought the prodigal-father of anocher, 1rus- 
the covetous {on of that other did recover fromthe prodigal-ſ(on (* plus Gicet 
of the firft, and that with fo lictle vertue in cicher , that often- 442 1-7 «ff 
Gps the pouches flowed Gama the gran ries, mm 
9. By ſuch « vicious flux aod reflux(within theſe nicety yeers} 
U the chanel of Land-rents, lo great prejudice hath redound- £4 Cuptdlut cs 
agd daily redoundeth to the worthy profefſion of Merchane 5524s i/fos ine 
dizing, che diſponer not being accuſtomed with traffique , and 75 $0" 
the purchaſer diſdaining #oy longer to exerciſe it. ; that all Mas du ts 
ual T rades in that Nation are now almoſt failed , and wideaway, 
have fallen of lace into ſuch a palpable decadence , that hardly 
ſhall a man be found , where theſe men have being _ that can 
make a pair of Boots aright, or Taylor skilful enough to apparel 
oac in the Faſhion, akhough he fee the patern before him. 
10. Other Trades of weaving Silver Lace , knitting Silk 
Stockins, ſowing of Cut-work, with five hundred more depend- 


ing oa the hammer, acedle, or pencil (in ocher Coancries as com- 


. en w/a 


The ſixth Book. 


monly practiſed, 24 Cookery with a) try in Scot land now, 
where-ever the Uſurer ſives, be as well pur 3 the ant ima 
deperdita. us the malleability of glats, of Rone, or 
incombuttibility of linen. | 

It. And t they had the dexterity 


Artificers diſcouraged, 
and Civility it ſelf trod under foor, ant of Commerce. 
Loram virtwis 12. Thusirbeing dear, that promiſcuous Ufury (the Gentle- 
4 /uu1 & %- man beirg ro more aſhamed of it, then the ) hath been 
"* tar, qx ſem- the overthrow of Merchandiſe in Seer land , is ſo com- 
— mendable a profefſion , and ſo agreeable to Learning and true 
__ Wiſdom that as byLiterarure we are jullly called Aficrocoſan: ; 
for bring able to comprehend all m2nner of things under ſpecieſes 
in the predicatnent of quality : {6 may we beas well termed 
the (ame, for our ability handifing (were we fo inclined) 
to bring within the compats of our 109 whatever is in the 
——— vollpatby again Gick 
I 3. There is no dou to have ; © 
net ſers of honeſt Negoriation, is ro tire Tuba mos; ol 
&b #v4;e gralk. not to abbor them with a perfett hatred, ( in fo far as Chriftian 
an expetter. charity will allow us) is to be enemirs ro both Civility and Dif 
Cretion, 
1 4. What grear harm they have done tothe whole Iſle of By i- 
Avaritia ad i t aim by their violence ag me. (not mentioning their obſtcuA- 
Joes 49% ing inielleQual &, which,to the of Minkinde 
pejas. ic elf, they oftentimnes have” moſt inhumancely to ſup» 
)'T will inftru&t. how, in'my petfon ,, oheſe ten Have Hin- 
precijiter be: dered Navigation; Commerce, by the export, import, and tragſ- 
adigam: nunmi. port of Commo'\tet emer ages om for 
Coal and Miner1's. Avriculture for ew apt and Plants 


ing; and many ocher fuch fealible projefis of , Gding 


The ſixth Book. 
to the promoval of both wealth and civility in 2 


have (or at leaſt had, before I was ſequeſtred)- 2 
auto Bay gta niger ir agreed Aortyerm 
—_— is the head-T own of the Shire ; whereby | 
am! both Sherif,aad Proprietaty ; the Shire and Town 

of one and the ſame name with the Harbour, or 

on each fide. vu called Saxvers, from 
the Greek word earns that is to lay, Salvatores, or Savers, 
from the fafery that ſhips have , when once they are entred 
| pr ms —_ O_o 


Druyd, who , in the 
rat arteries bevy Argue Tork,, Gme 698 —= 


yd that whole never be- 
fore dilcovered the Greeky, was named Olbies by the faid 
Alypes, py in the Terre ,gorigceres doth (pecifie 
it more at 


Og we of Scotland.in called 
w ſaluts reaſog that ten t .ma 
Finkia «de me rene pe that is, = gry 74 
vertue of which coaveniency, ſome nch men, of five 
or (ix ſeveral Nations, Mafters of Ships. and Merchant-Adven- 
turers, promiſed to bring their beſt Veſſels, and ſtocks for trade- 
ing aloog with them, and dwell in that my lice Town with 
me, Mu rears have | + — with thern is their hazard, 
and inating faRtors to accompany them in their nego» 
tiation) admirted likewile for a partner in their profic , and ad- 
vanca 

17. By which meacs, far qe > Pas (foc 
ry —_ in a very nyt 


benig of which & 


34 T he fixth Book. 

in that my project f rom any Town fave, /anernaſſe aloge whoſe 
Mag iſtrates ( to the great diſhonour of our whole Nation) 
did moſt foully evidence their own baſenets, in going about to 

rob my. Town of its I berries and pri 
19. Yet w3s that plague of Flagicators, wherewith my houſe 
vel (by infected, fo permcious to that purpoſe of mine, that forne of 
Ciryſolon) fant tem lying in wait (25 a thief in the mght) both for my perion 
furs & lar and means Cannbal-like to fwallow me up at a breakfaſt, they 
xc, wh»: '*- did, by impoditing the fafery of my travelling abroad, arrethog 
wilt: 7 p19) whatever they unagined 1 bad right unto, and inhibiting ochers 
[mars frombargeining moſt barbarouſly and makciouſly cur off all 
pars bara is the directory preparative I had orderly digetted, for the ad- 
wo-be jallats/ vantage of a bufncis of ſuch miin conceramenat, and fo condu- 
c(04,m. cible to the weal of the whole Iſland, to the great diſcourage- 
ment of choſe gullant Forreners , of whach that ever-renown- 
ed Gentleman tor Wit and excelleace 1n many good parts , Sir 
Philbert Vernati by name, was one ; who being of ſeals pa* 


rents, by birth a Dutch-man, and by ceucation expert in all the 
good Larguages of the Chrithan world , beſides the Arabick 


and Sclayonian Tongues, wherem he furpab'd , had a great af- 
cendeat in counſel over all the Adventrow Merchancs of what 
Nation foever:whereot (wichour the forefaid lets of thoie barbe- 
rous obſtructers) fore by all appearance had fo concurred with 
me , that by «| cir afhiltance { would ere now bave baniſhed all 
idleneſs from the commons, maintained feveral thouſands of 
perſons of both ſexes. trom the infant to the decrepit age, found 
employments propornonabie to their abihuurs, baſtant to afford 
them both entertainment, and «pparel in a competent meature ; 
by various multicudes of (quameary flocks of ſeveral ſizes, co- 
Jours, and natures, educed out of the bowels of the Ocean both 
far and neer,and current of treſh-water fireams,more 2buadance 
of wealth then that whole Country IIS Come 
modity theie ma ; erected E ries for kee 

om ans 4 wes ey in ders kindes of Mes 
factures ; brought from beyond fea the skilfull't Artificers could 
be hired for , to inficuGt the natives in all manner of hoaeſt 
«ades ; the naclt jagenious hammer-men to ftay with 
mc, 


The fifth Book. 
me , aſſuring them of ready Coin re wget —_ 
able to pur forth to fale ; addicted the abject 
io the Gonindlary oor Canntod lo hor 
which in my ground cat appearance , and of the hit» 
ting on which I doube as 4 , as of the Lime and Free-fioge 
Quarries hard houſe of late found out , which have aor 
TG yeers remarked ; induced maſters of 
quake iy tenants , for teaching teachung them the 

7 nap 7 pd all 

—— ungiog, harrowing 

ing, miliog, bak | bepniog bas: 
= of herds, flocks, borie, 
pi ground, ww the excrelcenee of all chele; im 
proviog their Herbages, Dayries, Mellificiaries, Frunages ; (ec- 
ting up the moſt expedient Agricolary unftruments Waios, 
Cars, Slades, with their ſeveral devices of Wheels and Axle» 
trees, Plows and Harrows of | ma Feezes, Winders, Pul- 


mayoral v/ore nan hoe fn 
farm, or manual trade, 

20, I would have encouraged kkewile men of Literature, 
bc lang of invention, to 2% pts us , for the 


Rar ge Dore" age 2 
arts aQive and fadtive, ets 


cernes cicher  vertue or lea nn 
been cheriſhed, SR 


I had alſo procured | . 
DES oh oe erent 
and awskerche 


feacs of 

act of Gunnery "fortification, or any that in the Wars be- 

longerþ exther cred, p_ ſumming, running, 
lea 


p* 


36 The fixth Book, 


we. throwing the bar, a 
ring nerd 4 mms, 


fowling. anghiag, ſhooting, and what elſe might any 
p94 mn mr of either body or minds, excching 
6f men in their or promoving them co deſerved ho- 
non 15. 
22. All theſe things, and many more, for export 
modities of this JAend to the mon regions 
import from thence of other goods, or tra 
wn Nation to another, and all for the 
iſh inhabitane, wherher for their integrity and upri 
converſation, gain and utility in their mea nes, or and re. 
cteation in tha dif] I would und have ere now 
provided te the (as by a friend of mine was wiits 
ren of me. in an Epiſtle of his iled to a book intiruled The 
Gene of the family of the Urquharntst) = AMecana 
to the ar, a pattern to the Souldier, a favorer of the Mer-+ 
chant, a proteftor of the Trades-man. and upholder of the Yeo- 
man, had not the impetuofity of the uſurer overthrown my reſo- 
lutions, and blaſted my aims in the bud. 

Ad-quid fre- 3.Now if you would know what itis that theUfurer beſtow- 


deft mare 4 th on the in tion of ſo large a benefit whereof 

dem pefſpderes, he hath deprived it ; I will tell you, it is laziacſs, greed, obſli- 
LI ? \ : : 

cata nacy, pride, harred, envy, creathery, contempt of 


b-rters, n, hypocrife, crueky, contention, cowardlioeſs, 
ya = continual heart-burning, diſquietneſs, and miſcontentment of 
vita, 96 re rmande, miſregard of true honour , of yerme, and dif- 
predcende =- dain of learmng. with other many ſuch like perturbations of a 
mun (oe. molt odioufly wicked/- and grievouſly troubled ſpirit. * 
Melum an 24. Amongſt fuch;/he & accounted a thrifty Gentleman, 
babe: avarzi4, Who beſtirreth himiciF the fpace of two daies in bony ar 
nec capiendo about the ingerting of his interefts, although all che reſt of the 
expictargſedi®- time, he be more lither then s dormouſe; and when he bath gor 
gingrgs. and yl cope tat exvasadar— 
ul. AVaritia nes t xtinges Mu IOON'E 1 2 
que (0d ops £206 unde ety Ge ad cam Soammcanptad peak 
cr1Kw art. * 3 | TOLTTTAS - ”. mY Ti LARS. 


debtor 


T7 


T be fixth Book. 37 


CE eee 
joymung it to the parent, which did procxente xt. tO 
———— the Game kinde , caixible at ano* 
term 
will not be perſwaded to this faſhion of Sper mals luck 
ting HY it is eahe, although it be told, that goods mien of 14: 
lo acquired can never proper ; for that thew gaine is grounded ** 
oa the viſible lols of another, hi ecgh 1 tewe Digs 
26. The Tradew-ran no imployment ; for 
make ſome curious work fit for fale, the Merchant will nor buy Cora ——_— 
it, becaule his money beforehand is to beger interelt 8 jp, Ges _ 
nor yet the Gentleman; becauſe the monfler of the Metchants u: : bs aqua 7e- 
7g mm thus the Merchaac is idle, fert amptins 
the Gentleman begger'd, aod the Artificer arved for want, and {#4 4 


RN + ON ſo much cryed up in eee he 


37. Fear OO wr 
CIS th ja the acd uacer- 


tainty how the prizes may rule , deters them oa hazard 
of bargains by land; thus the Seas are not failed, nor the 
half nlled, nor doch that parcel thereof which is laboured, for 
lack of ape materials wherewich to manure it, yeeld half the ridels terre," 
increaſe, which otherwiſe it would ; and yer they would be rich : ifdele mare, 
whereby it is manitelt, that their ignorance is i great, their lazineſs */<iedv ts» 
o_ , bur their coverouſacls and avarice is far the greateſt *** 


. dv. IDES Wee vera ofS! 
ney ; which money, when they have obtained, know nor caje.6r ci9es 


de eeibhn ya cuchoe Qed apakace ies hay do what 4*dqvan be» 
will noe do, for "=> tonam 


(69 


riches, by pro- zaſanaels wr 


vie bh Blend add prtogs ere they mane mo- pn 
Z = 
- gs ep—eng re rp tn 


«ala, 
velgis pecars, vemert _— _— my} of porn ib w 


The fixth Book. 


29. They will not with us Merallurgize it, or dig one fachom 
deep unto the ground to ſearch for a Mine, or Mineral, alhhough 
the ſurface give apparent Ggnes thereof (beiog like the Pro- 
Raphereficians of late times, who could not (ce the invention 
of Logarithms, which they had lying before their oy cos yet 
their hes are fo immerſed in the earth, that the ſublimeſt of 

em met themdo reach a fathom above it ; nor would they for 

ned *" the moſt part reach that hight, but to derogate from their ſupe- 
riors, whom in duty they are bound to bear reſpeRt to, and to 
denude them in all they can of their rights, whereby the better 
to graſp at ſomewhat, for the farning of themſelves. 

30. Another way they have ao leſs detefiable then this , 
—_— they very ordinarily walk co get themſelves approved 
men of high ſpirit , and that is biyiated into two paths , one 
whereof they tread in for oppreſſing of the poor,and men of mea- 
ner cheviſance” then themſelves, and in the cther for centemning 
the worth, valour, learning. or whateyer elſe is moſt commenda- 
ble in him, whoſe means they aim at. 

Cumillornum af- © 3 1- Nay ,they go fofar on in this their ſordid and abominable 
f uen/1a creſcit humour, that (| ting all manner of learning, and inrichment 
| mopia:1%- of rhe _ —_ ſciences and liberal arts but con+ 
ayes ceits, 9 , compared to money, which by theſe cluſterfifts 

_— 4#"" is beld in fo 2rent flention, her though o Nh chuſe to be 
hanged, before they troable themſelves with taking any kinde of 

pivitem eſe vertuous courſe, for the obtaining of it, they do nevertheleſs re- 
. non eft hone- pure honeſty it ſelf roconfilt therein, and will commonly ſay, 
frm, ſed cx bv- that ſuch 2 one is honelter then anothet, by ſo many hundred 


meſtus droniem pounds a year. 
the. _— Nowichſtanding all theſe unworthy , and baſe endea- 
- mtg yours of theirs, I haye conſtantly obſerved them to remain fill 
tripſum putars, Poor and needy ; the reaſon whereof bs, that their lazineſs and 
quan'wm bebs- pufillanimity not permitting them to ſearch for wealth, in the 
= ts azure boſom of Therws or feceffive regions y > doncgearene the 
amp pot tile prom occupants would prove ri ieot h for 
nn et the pllGerghoy aim only at = beleGeerh ro their neighbous 
. one 


or ocher. | 
33- Who pollibly being of the fame diſpoſition of ayarice 
T to» 


The ſixth Book. 29 


rowards them, if the tenaciouſne(s of the one, interchangably 
encounter with the coverous humour of the other , + an _—_ _—_ 
equal number of degrees of intenſive greed, darted and receiv- 0 an 
ed to and from each on either fide : both parties , becauſe of ;arer opes 

the parity of reaRtion, will renin in the fame condition, as be- mendicus open. 
fore, without bertering or impairing their fortune. 

34. Burt if there be any difference ia the aforeſaid qualities, Avira dum 
betwixt the two contefters for each others means. he, in whom o7igys colligh- 
the thereof are molt remis, will, ( as by a Can- =_ & cu 
bal ) be devoured bythe other; which ocher perhaps, being 39547 "4'® 
to ſerved by a third , and he againe by another, there will fol» G4!a prime pa- 
low a perpetual conſecutive courſe of intergulping one an0- rent; abfu'ic 
ther, till che devil, by ſaarching up the laſt in him, have quite /©441/am,cvs- 
iIwallowed them all, and ſo rid the world of thole ignomin.ous = oo __ 
rakehels, by whom it had been (o long impettred. PO 

3 5. Such men/as is ſaid already in the 27 Article of this ſame 
book) will not apply themſelves to navigation, becauſe it is hx- 
zardous z nor totrad! land becaule it is paiatul ; nor yet toy; 
the-ripping up he ben of the earth for wealch, beewtic is — 
uncertain; and yer they would be rich and have ftore of money ; xs, & inberes 
whiclf to attain untogthey take this courſe for the mo't part, Such #* *//ceribus, 
2s have Land,make uſe of ſome aſcripticiary varlers, for the m1- es ca. 
nuring of it, who in their agricolary work follow not the preſcripe j,,., . —_ 
rules ——_— as they are molt approyable by reaſon , but tia, 
as they were molt in uſe m the daies of their fore-Fathers ; for 
whenloever the Land-Lords ate defired, for improving of the 
Lind, to do other wayes, their anſwer is. that they will not aleer 
the faſhion of their Grandfathers, who were honz{t men, and 
the times then were good. 

3 6. Nevertheleſs, when the Wife or Children gape for new 
proviſions, thea it is that the peeviſh ſhifts are ſet abroach, of 
tocroaching upon their neighbours palture-ground or corn-land, 
by removing of the march-ſtones, or as aforelaid : or it they 
have 2 liztle money , they pack it upin a clout, then upon good 
ſeeu-1ty concredi: it to tome one or other, who after the expi 
ring of a prefixed time mutually condeſcended 0n.ſhall be bouad 
to reftore the (aid clour- biuth.wit 1 an additional increaſes, which 
when ob:ained by its coaleicencie with the tormer heapyis _ 


40 T be fixth Book. 


ced a new parent, with parturiencic for more ſtore. 
Pecunid new 37+ This is called vertue, and hath bern of all other the 
—_— yy pg 4 9 ents. pwn marr gwen. 
Io ; yer bythe means , the whole country is impo- 
quod baber, ni- veriſh:d, and no man rich : for thole that, in the eſtimation of 
bil im c0u- the vulgar, are accounted mott wealthy, have nothing elſe bur 
ſtat babere. money, which not being wealth, but the meaſure of apprecia 
itzthey can no more(to ſpeak the truth of them) be reputed rich, 
then Straffords (my Lord Leiucenant of [reland's) ape, which 
had a thouſand pound ferling hid in a hole. 
Awarus eft te 38, I'll not deny. but that a vertuous man, with leſs money, 
quam balnea's- would quickly b:come rich ; becauſe with it he would purchaſe 
ns i thoſe commodities, which are the true riches that fortune beſtow- 
meniaq; deper- &tÞ on us:bur that maketh theſe men ſuch, lunerly diſavow 
aq me ene” Wy - 
tet amen [em- it for in their doaths they'are poor, in their attendance mean.their 
—__ _ _— and in their = ſo bare and naked, that unlebs it 
. the wite, or the daughter (and that peradvencure not much 
i Meine. worth neither) you ſhall not perceive a moveable chat mer.t; the 
qu? balnei, ne- looking on : and why? there is no Trades-man in the 
qu? tepors, tomake it, nor Merchant to bring ithome; and 
—my ene ug theſe were (whom, as in the 26 Ariacle of this ſame I aid 
- Vt CIO 
it, 


£1, C5) 6s "6% 


39. Whereby it is evident , that cicher the Uſurer Rtorech up 
but money, or if he exchange it for ware, the chaffer tha: 
he buyeth with it , is that which in many civil Countries, to ap» 
preciate at the rate of any Coin, hath been accounted Sacriledge, 
to wit, the inheritance of Land , the 108 whereof with 
Venue morbus Money is more irrational , then that of the Diagonal to the (1de, 
ny ——_ 
a ES ag, Ie rom the rich, is ki men, d e 
vide ? iqns ere in their mea, drink, cloathes, and ing z and all cheſe a 
veſte , quod al» Fox hath in and abour hisrerner : fo that who purve 
gear, neq; pane but what is mcerly neceſſary for the life of man, may be (aid to 
quod e/awiat, have but the providence of a beaſt : Doth not the Pilmire, and 
neque drow the Bee every whit as much and almoſt every fowl of the air ? 


ay 41. To what end our Knowledge , if it make not all thi 
— $. Tenant 


The ſixth Book, 
vendible conduce to our behalf, and wealth ſuppedicauve of 


whatever exccedeth not that extent : 1 would have cloth from 
the Draper, filks from the Mercer, lace from the Millener, 


11g3 from the r, trinkers from the Trigler, jewels from 
—_— from the Stationer, raacmalads from the , 
'oner, courſe dulciaries from the Grocer, efleaces from 


the Perfumer, nd any thing elſe either of Merchant or Artificer, 
Oy ——_ we, whereof I am the Gbithe 
word p 


42. Dothoſe men 1 have been ſpeaking of fo, I doube if they Peccaram ave- 
underſtand the names of he ny —_— nad affecer 
profeſſions co ſubFft by them, whoſe thoughts bei on - 
Toney, 6 Loud Neo the Par cond nf wh ye fob 
is convenient either for their minde ot body. . renda (ublimio 
Ju nr nr 7 +> Os , 006g aforeſaid, worth z \#Jt «on poſh 

nd pou z year, who no other book in his 
houſe, but he Bible, ofa Greats to have a chapter in readi- Þ jeoer can 
ne ls after meat, when the Minifter ſhould come to fee him : all 4bandeny, quot 
the paper he had was full of of ſneefing-powder, nor had he o» Shi deefſe «+ 
ther that wherewith he took it ; fo careful he was of ma- "1 ii poſi de- 
wrials for the exerciſe of the mind. tus 

for the preſervation of the health of the body, preventi- 

on of diſeaes, or remedies againſt them, they are (o well verſed 
in the terms of art concerning them , that the word Apotheca- 
ry may fignifie ſomewhat to ext for any thing they know ; Sur- 

and Phyhici =» centeelragidore Burgers of ſome 

owns to their Land-meers. but once in the five years. 

45- Thus hath the Ufurer in leſs then fourſcore and ten , 
years ſpace that he hath domiarcered in the Land , made ſome of qneERS 
us no lets favzge, and barbarous, then the wildeſt beaſt that is ; 114 


cm 147 wa * 
«uw 


a; vie rede, (wn jenſerint (atictaters |, ſed inlatiabils off avanitia drviturn 
46. Por he refieth not in the deftrutioa of the Merchant agd 
Artificer , but like wiſe layech his heavy hand upon the Scho- 
"x nin as pee. aaa 
nance 


The ſixth Book. 


RO CR Ge Reg 
ther, even when they have paſt their wholt courſe of earning) 
know how ts fell the Eng) uri 

47. By encans of wivech I now and then 
have ſuſtained my ſelf no ſal prejudice, in the expence of time ; 
for akhoogh I >ſe no Treaties (whether 11 profe or verſe) 
without fone © deliberation, yer for the moſt part, 
for couching them in 2 tend met (for truly I at 60 
good Scribe)and not being able to (neither in my owne fa. 
mily , dor withih a great many hikes about me , oft sKilful e- 


nough in vernacular Orthography ) 1 have ofrentitats been at a 
great deal of mote paines, in ending of them ro the weirers, 
and their errack'', chen arkiſt I wes id che froming 


Nos Aurwoarer my 
4 on 'n | wh ; for 
the moſt of CDI Rm aver the dayes bf 
eur Grandfathers, have by the triumphancic of Uſury, had the 
inclinations of their mides (o thechaniva upon the 
of Letters, chat their children have with their 
Mothers milk , imbued an sverſnfs form , und ul the 
Utenda's conducible theretosfearing they ſhoukd hinder the ud - 
yancement of their privace foitines, according to the tfiviel (ay- 
ing, U#; mulrum 1m eletw,bi param te forrmns,, wheteot 
(vo ſpeak nothing of the manifold great di which 
in the of Licerature 1 have from tny infincy lad 
hetible crak bf ray time el chis very jeſter cairtar'} 
the late courſe taken for ſequeſtraring whatever belanged to 


me, gave no ſmal ment. 
49. For 1 ave at home, even in thoſe that loved we 


bexer thea they did 2 ele, and in the eyts of the world 
woſt entice] ny qr hr deplorable vention , in raking 'a 
eourſe (like Afarthie, who was catly buſrd dbout enteral 
things ) for the preſervation of corn, cartel, plare, with oder 

and and ucenfils, whallt they were alr ledtwe 
of ſecuring what they themſelves knew 1 w all thee , 


bles ; as appeared even when the Libraty, 
Cee kck Geredfefaped ae touch uf Dipadeſi 0 hy” 


The fixth Rook. 


alcbough there were not three therein , which 
mige pwoe purchaſe. and all of them togetker 
who $508 ates! han) compar (hoggh cage 
gay) of flowery, which in my travels I had gathered 
of zboye ſixteen Kingdoms) by 
= 


orgs 

$age tor uagle 

were obcainable our owne doors : all which books 
ga that worthy 3nd moſt coalciencious Gentleman Col. The. 
Fugh(to whom 1 was then uakaown) coatremanded the 
(razors of ſending them to Leich in a Ship, then 
to ba fram Cr owarty) had affuredly been cthrowa ia- 
to the howom of the fra ( for the Velicl —— 


amoogh 


þ 
. 


F 
K 


ebb 


fl 


= 
v2 
FER 


FE 


our of the reach of Dwadaſſes bands ; unw | 
ous clechon , that any thing ould be 


pr pmrrS: | Lago aaa re, 7 
were 
py ar prngmar cy ua a” es 

08 at Leith to Caprain 7, requiring him to 
les ene have the refulal of them , yer he nar to come to - 
Cremartie , where they weze falt locked into » whereof 
kinaſelf bad the keys , I was nor able, for all the favour I could 


ke till chis hour, to obtain either the getting or buying of 
oF chow frdfn of hab which nds of the Seque: 
fiacors having medied with them, being and afterwards 
VEIL 

(1. cate had of any Papers and Books , by thoſe 
to whom they were intrufted, a braoch ſpringing from the 
epudeuucal tree of Igaorance , _ cogndr ih Pypacrcs, 


The ſixth Book. 


Uſury, and Jniquity, took root in theſe when 

Plaio-dealiong, and Charity, nid Hos, road 
O—_— Queen Mary of Scotland into Borland: where, 

incxement of thoſe her fubjefts who & om her 
own Dominion had expelled ber. (he loſt her ki : fince which 
time, what devaſtation hath by Ufury been made amongft the 
moſt ancient families of that Country , be that runs may read it 
jp tm = nate 


The Uturer thus (as is obyious to the eyes of any) 
add —rtds went x/Nory- 


deal of wickednefs beſides, 25 in my rticular may be 

: for as of any knowledge pe hat (by the favour of 
God) is in me, be would rob the whole wor goeth he a- 
bout to defpoil me of all mean 0d inhrtane gail al 
reaſon ; therefore could I-liy no lefs : but who would have 
more, 1 remic kim 00 Agcmellicelimureal, ia the Af 
paan Satyrs, whereot Se atnadinnce mak 
when the Order chained for recovering thoſe my Manufcripes 
which Dandaſe the Sequeſirazor mediced with at Cromartie, 
ſhall prove more cfteCtual. 

$3- > 1.7 ger wand ory r— ne 
ſome mealure to incite the State.to whom in all burmilit 
my addrels, tr 7s a v1" 
ly ſuſtained by them ; for reparation whereof, Theres de 

inhericance may be made free unto me , and the priviledges 
yr ancient Houle kept entire, after the aboye-wrinen propo- 
arr pra ry rr. poling of ſore move- 
ables ig excha nd currant paſs, I muſt 
acheouiatgn ay ff (mn the manner can be con- 
ceived) towards the diſcharye of that duty. 

$4- However , in licad of too haſte ing my intent 
therein, which for ſome reaſons mentioned in the four and fiſtiech 
af the ſecond Book, and other Articles to that fenſe, is molt ex- 


pedicat for the time to forbear ; 1 to cake this 
fa, forthe aft of te Publ The exper | 


form 008 , at a competent be prefixed 
a I haye promited , "Taal beg franc 


T he fixth Book. 
and lands ; ayer armed wer pe tre, rr 
craving men , d the worth of all the money that cans 
wich ay kinde of — ———— —— ——— 
adbibere cantionem Afntianans, and to preſcribe the readieft 
way how to avoid deluding. 

55. Onely thus far, I would have the judges of my offer to 


Vide Book »4 


be learned and judicious men, and not fuch as will prefer a filhes a... o. 10, 
eye to a Diamant, a Bable toa Scerrer, and Tilling, Harrowing: 11, 12,13, 46, 
Sowing, Reaping, Mowing, Planting. and feeding of the flocks 47 ,49,19-53- 


adcarel , roall the ſeven Liberal Arts ; their Encyclopedia 
_—_— for men of that nature, bemg meerly led by 
the Senie, will never diſcern of _ ariohe, 

$6. It was by fucha the Turks , that Famagufts in 
the Iſle of Cyprw ( none of them at that time ca any re«" 
ſpeRt rothe inward worth of a Chnitan) that the Earl of #- 
phos ( though the compleateſt Courtier , and gallanteft man of 
that Age) was madeto carry on his ſhoulders a packet full of 
mortar, for the repairing of a breach. 

$7- A horſe fit for the wars, is oftentimes, by the indiſcretion 
of his maſter , appointed to go round in a Mill, and ps 
eſteemed lets worth then a blinde Jade, that in the diſcharge of 
OY nes mayor be found to lurpaſs _ 

58. A Country-hoydon, ia carrying loads, will excel a Gen- 
teman of faſhion : and I have known 2 young handiom wo- 
man prefer a man, for building of a Peat-ftack in a pro» 
portion, to be her husband, before a Gencleraan , who, for his 
 — Ho became a Colonel of both Horſe and 

$9. Si —— and though Eagles 
= Camelenns do, Wi loch therefore whole thi 
rits ſoar not a Graſhoppers leap abvve the ground , we are nor 
to meddle , leſt, as Afrdas ewint Pan and Apollo, and the Al 
berween the Cuckow and the Nightingale , they pronounce an 
errogcous ſentence , to the diſgrace of themfelyes, and oppro- 

60. Iris generous ſpurit induced with , to 
whole judicious arbucremems I do heartily fubrmur my (clf, 204 ail 
ay 


The fixth Book. 


my endeavours ; becauſe ſuch a one will not deny, ut that a 

private Geatleman may eater in pation wane 7 proce ce 

that is , for matters rouching the furtherance of the good fame 

thereof : the though (as tr Row ſervice 

towards Almighty God we merit nothing, yer if in the perform» 
ance of good Fro the Publ: —orembet 
the ordinary duty of a fubjeR , we may juſtly be faid to ſuper- 
erogate at the hands of any Soveraiga Authority ia the warld : 
And that Learning, even in time of war, is to be held in eſtima» 
tion ; for that he who is the God of glory and peace, is likewiſe 
the Lord of bolts, 

61, Nor is there a0y doubt, but that be will acknowledge 
the profound Literature of a Native , wing, yp 
to his Country , That fuch a reputation is there far more 
worth theg riches, ny Gs oc Ave 
on for the promoval of that Learning , whecher it be by doga- 
Gent agel. palutively to give eacouraggemests © hu that 
is ſo qualified ; or by a allitagce , to ganovre (whazever 
i calt) the obſtruftons of thoſe , whecher Credicors os others, 
that meſchancly Rand in the gap , to hinder the progreks of the 

neonate, 

The Aquepet is there are remedi's appointed the debras { rauch 
be from whom qyzore the Fgwoper) who is nob wick Coany fioriets os 
cbs arc. well as (if gor ratherthen) the creditor , thac dat bet 
thoughhe ove for his own ends, without regard of the Publike + and likewiſe, 
them not, = that ſuch Credirors as arcuc Flagitatorss , cravi mg eur 
thoſe tro whom they never lene any , ſhould "will hey, a they) 
Qui fnt aliens, beenforced to courtelies (19 abatizg of their ſums) wpon 
+o/am ad) icc16, them that never were their debtors, but onely cachralled co them 
for the debts of others, + 
63. Norwill cha gallant man fail toafſever, butthatic is 
Hi ſ<piw if ore hapourable for Britain, that wy Family,which hath Rood 


ſoa be fu- | | 
: therein far the ſpace of ninety and four be eſtabliſh - 
F _—— ed for my doing unto — forclaid ry (ervice.chen per= 
aucred, the ngour of a dangerous Law , by the covet- 


auizels of thoic, whote monry acicher 1 at any of my progeni- 
| tors 


= 


The fixth Book. 


a 


47 


tors ever ſaw, to be ruined and overthrown , for ſenting up of 1 De male ports 
know not what , which ſhall not, nor ever yer hath been teen, in *9* £45062 
the like occaſion , to ſtand wil the third heir , or a fall age : and tertins haves. 


that the fall of an anciemt Houſe, which murilaces che Country, is 
more deplorable, then the detalking of ſore interefts , which 
doth bur, as it were, ſhave off the hair cf ſome greedy wrerch., 

64. 1am alſo confident , that in the option of fuch 2 man 
antiquity of Race ( carers paribrw) is to be preferred ; and 
that to reſcind x coerouſacls tor apublike good , is co do 
"0%. Thea of all theſe things being afferied, (as 4n 

65. ihe veri a 2 as40 rex 
for it ought ) tehres the Publike to make good my Parole, 
provided they liberate my ettate from the bondage ef the Flagi- 
ru 


Nc 447 rw 41- 
Titid Niue 
MuRIW2R ( avi 
ries av. 


for. 
66. di{-mhnallicg me thus from the ſlavery of the in Poarac ares tar 
te Ripoſcoars, | acc my part, the Publike will 1-14 & cats 


zin the reputation of reveſtabl:ſhing into irs priftine 
mily of great annquay, of furthering the courſe of Learning and 
good beners , of ing the innocenc from unjuſt ; 
and to do this, will abcain the unanimous conſent and approba- 
tion of all the Soultiers, Gentlemen, Commons, and People of 
echer ſex, within the whole Land, the Flagnators onely excepe- 
ed 


67. For which cauſe, ſceing 1 am drawing to a cloſure, if any 
lis] eo imagine , this «co be ce mare unobrainable , 
thee the Eve dewvol! any emlenger the difquintiog of the 
Scare with of Petitions, ro have publick charges allo- 
cared for rhe pa of private dens ; 

68, My anſwer is. that my cafe in this particular, being quire 
differen: from that of =: fs > the dominion of Scret- 
[med, \whiecher regard be bad to me, to my Fathers creditors, 6: 
the land in debace berwigr us there is none who by vertue of a+ 
wy facour by me remanded from the fupream power of the 
Land, can for his imereft in the like fair , pretend a right tothe 
{me corteſic to be performed on his behalh, 
69. For if weconfider the Land which 1 chim tide ro, os 


cheuadouetod miernance of ay prodeceiers , i: 454 land which 
never 


ity @ werpledilie. 


The fb Buck 


never was bought nor fold, nor otherways derived to my proge- 
agen, Cale ESeT 
their former rights ; { the like whereof cannot with truth 
be ayouched of any Land in the Ile of Britain) and therefore 
the more heedfully ro be preſerved from being a prey to the un- 
clean Harpyes of Uury. 

70. It again I be looked upon a8 one who for any perſonal 
courtelie done to my (elf, was never obliged to any one of them 
who call themſelves Creditors : how I have obliged every one 
of them by haviag given to each a hundred times more then ever 
I had received from them all together : how withal I am willing 
to renounce my right to any thing that ever was acquired 
father : mare bs ry yes_beyntod antes, fox 
ing of any title to thoſe many ſeyeral lands of my itocs 
within the Shires of Cremartie and Aberdeen , which in his 
— diſponed away and abahenated ; but alio 
to diſcharge them of che vaſt furs of money many of them ua- 

pilled out of my rears ever (ince my fathers deceaſe , 
I am certainly perſivaded no compatriot of mize-by luch reaſons 
will pretend to the like ; or if it happen he ſhculd, (which 1 be- 
lieve he cannot) Iran a” ne vrengy 5 
the reach of common imitation, will quell the ambition of that 
luic, the obtaining whereof torally dependeth upon examples he 
is not able I ſuppoſe to follow. 

71. To theleI furthermore adjoyn this other cixcumftance, 
That in all the Iſle of Brirain there (hall not be found a crew of 
ſuch rigorous and mercileſs Creditors, (William Robert ſon ooe> 
ly excepted )who without reſpeQt to any thing elſe then their own 
meer enrichment , care not what miſery their debcor and his po- 
flerity be brought into by their procurement ; which p_—_ 
(conhdeting how of eight or nine times I was ſurety for Coun. 
try-men of mine, | was always forced to pay the debt ; how like» 
wiſe, of a hundred times at leaſt, that money by others of chem 
had been borrowed from me,] would ever have been well 
to all incereſts for the bare ſum which Ilentz and how ne- 
Ido not plead immunity of 00 from any debt 


owe 


due by my {clf, my conditon (1 


The ſixth Book. 


with-all manner of people I have had todeal with, of what 
Country ſoever , that upon three hours warning I ſhall pay all I 
owe in the world, and to the utmolt farthing give farsfaRtion co 
all thoſe that properly can be called my credicors)may very well 
be thoughe to furniſh ground ſufficient for what | have deduced, 
by way of grievance agaiaſt the aforeſaid flagitators. 

72. Wherefore | likewiſe anfwer, -if ever there fall forth a 
contingencie of the like occaſion, wu all its ſpecialties and circum- 
ances, the lack of any one whereof will undoubtedly alter tl. 
caſe; that is to lay, if (beſides what I have already fad ) 2 
good deal of contiguous rent(pr with the vice of a Stire 
within it ſelf, and worthily poſſeſſed tor the tpace of rwo thou- 
ſagd thirty and nine years, by threſcore and twelve ſeveral gene» 
rations of heritable Sheriffs, and fole owners of the whole Shire, 
deſcended (for the molt part) of one another in a direRt conte- 
cutive, and uninterrupted line from father to fon, accordingly 
ſerved and retoured heirs to their immediately-foregoing pre- 
decefſors in the ſame family) happen to uadergs the-lamencable 
difafter of being legally threatned tobe taken away by cree1- 
tors , for vaſt fums of money, from the righteous heir, who ne- 
ver was bound,nor any of his anceſtors( fave his father alone)to 
them,or any of theirs in ſo much as the yalue of one bare groar, 
and hi nevertheleſs able, out of the nimble reach and per- 
ſpicacity of his wit, to afford (tuff equivalent to both land ard 
money 12 ONE. 

73+ If ever, I ſay it chance, that all theſe prenotated reftricti- 

and limited defgnatom , occur in any Country-man of 


ons, 
mine(which I truſt will firſt colt the reyolucioa of the great Pla- 


tonick year) the State ſhould have my advice, were there twen+ Vide art.42, 
ty of them, to inftal them (other means failing) upon the pub- $425 3,14619% 
lick charge, in the place of their fore-Fathers, withall emoly- 735 9*/c” | 
ments and —__—_— CO that like ſo many radi- , wm —_ 
dart ag ioflucace pro= dicaring the 
pious 10 the turtherance of the glory of this Iſland. Authe fron 
74. And in truth (for my owne part) before that in the per- Pail u/ me 


ant ftars in one conſtellation, they mig 


ſon of fach a ore , ſhould be ſeen the overthrow of the houſe 
of his progenitors , I _ O_ him the adminiculary fuc- 
; cour 


- 


« i. 


49 


The ſixth Book, 

cour of half my menaes, when at beſt, for his aid of ſupport , 

and think in ſo d gaine by the bargain z being certaine 

nn bi ay = on dir br for being 

held by all moralifts to be in the atina ic the very do- 

to paſs for a luſhicient reward) that for a gratuty of 

that imporrtance.ſo ſcaſonably admimſtred, from a ſpark of tuch 

a ature, would never be wanting a molt thankful acquital to 
the utmoſt of his power. 

75. After which manner, without Ririving for examples, the 

5reos Ju hly aad fully aſſured of me, acd of the in- 

ility annie. ty yarn ready ; 

for that my wut lndeh en, Nc tO receive any thing in 


dur hd woes eu yltly crogued, as it ſhall be accept» 


76. Therefore tocondlude, ſeeing there is not any Scouſh 
man breathing, who is aot as mach, if act rather aoce behold- 
ing to me, 6 þ nn ui nnd wy 
rather to tothe good 1a chea w 

be eddes any pul Gen Ly L humbly define fos chat 
cokbvmny fiCome yn eng ry 


ſubzeR to any wy ys. Authority, that by the {a- 


n 


—_ wherein he mt defervingly approve hunſelf thei 
erernally-devored (ervanc, 


T homas Urquhart. 


The Epilogue. 
8 te I (whilſt a priſoner) was able to 
d 


igeſt and write this Treatiſe, is an 

e& meerly proceeding from the 
courteſie of my Lord General Crom- 
wel , whoſe recommendation to the 
Councel of State , my Parole being taken 
for my true imprifonment,l was by their ta- 
vour enlarged to the extent of the Lines of 
London; Communication : for, had I con- 
tinued as before, cooprt up within Walls,or 
yet been attended Nil by a Guard, as for a 
while [ was,ſhould the houſe of my confine- 
ment have never been ſo pleaſant, or my 
Keepers a very Paragon of diſcretion, and 
that the converſation of the beſt Wits in 
the world, with affluence of all manner of 
Books, ſhould have been allowed me for 
the diverſion of my minde ; yet ſuch an 
antipathicI haye to any kinde of reſtrainr, 
2 wherein 


wherein my ſelf 1s not intrufted , that not- 
withſtanding all theſe advantages, which to 
ſome ſpirits would make a Jayl ſeem more 
delicious then Freedom without them, it 
could not in that eclipſe of Liberty lie in 
my power to frame my ſelf to the couching 
of, one fillable, or contriving of a Fancie 
worthy the labour of putting Pen to Paper, 
no more then a Nightingale can warble it 
in a Cage, or Linet in a Dungeon. 

Here muſt I not forget the obligation I 
owe to that mokt generous Gentleman 
Captain Gladwon, tor ſpeaking in my fa- 
vour to my Lord General ; which gallan- 
try in him ( upon ſo ſmall acquaintance) 
ſhall affluredly be remembred by me, with 
a ſtedfaſt reſolution to embrace all the op- 
portunitics wherewith Fortune ſhall pre- 
ſent me, for performance of the beſt offices 
| can, in teſtimony of my thank fulneſs. 

The kindly uſage of the Marſhal-Gene- 
ral Captain Alſop, whilſt I was in his cuſto- 
dy,l am bound in duty fo to acknowledge, 
that I may. without diſſimulation avouch, 
for courteſies conterred on {uch as were 


within 


within the Verge of his authority, and fide- 
lity to thoſe by whom he was intruſted with, 
their tuition in that reſtraint, That never 
any could by his faithfulneſs to the one, 
and loving carriage to theother , beſpeak 
himſelt more a Gentleman, nor, in the di(- 
charge of that Military place, acquit him- 
ſelf with a more univerſally-deſerved ap- 
plauſe and commendation. 

The enumeration of theſe aforeſaid. 
courtefies, will not permit me to forget 
my thanktulnc(s to that Reverend Preach- 
cr Mr. Roger Williams of Providence in 
New- England, for the manifold favours. 
wherein I ſtood obliged to him above a 
whole month, before either of us had fo 
much as {cen other, and that by his fre- 

aent and earneſt follicitation in my be- 
half, of the moſt eſpecial Members both of. 
the Parliament and Councel of State ; in 
doing whereof, he appeared fo truely gene- 
rous, that when it was told him how I, ha- 
ving got notice of his ſo undeſerved reſpe& 
towards me, was defirous to embrace ſome 
ſudden opportunity whereby to teſtific = 


affe&ion I did owe him , be purpoſely de- 
layed the occaſion of meeting with me, till 


he had (as he ſaid) performed ſome accept- 
able office worthy of my me : in 
n 


all which ( both before and after we had 
converſed with one another ) and by thoſe 
many worthyBooks ſet forth by him,to the 
advancement of piety and good order(with 
ſome whereof , he was vleaſed ro preſent 


me) hedid approve himſclt a man of ſuch 
diſcretion and inimitably-ſanRified parts, 
that an Arch-Angel from heaven could not 
have ſhewn moce goodneſs with leſs oſten- 


tation. 


>HSOSPERODEDOE 


To the Reader. 


Sweer 3nd nadicioes Reader, 


A b y——_—_ detained ail along thu lintle 
Trat#at , fennily, 
enteho ck pr3 oeg 4 the firſt rag years (cews to 


mind rather his owne prof, your : yet 
ſo mach confidence © repeſed iv your ingenanty, is 
credibly thoug ht, you will n#t expeds great es from 
him, whoſe beſt endeavours, you know already, have been 
much devoted to your ſervice; eſpecially for that your in- 


tereſt in the future eſtabliſhment of his fortane (all things 
being well conſidered ) appeareth every whit a4 great as bus 
owne : for in the eyes of the vulgar, moſt of the be- 
nefit of an eff ate ſeemeth to accrue to him that enjoyeth it 1 
get if the fruition theresf in hu perſon, be but a mean 19 4 
further end, communic able by many thouſand; unts each of 
whow © of 18 cxepoſed a: plenary « 4s to by 1 
his ſhare nusf} needs, by thet accom, 18 regard of theirs 
of ſo great a manber, be but wery hitnde + barein 
i it evides, that the Reader i» the Author i s 
4s much concerned as bienſclf, for who depretb any thing, 
# alſo - gd, whereby 44 s 18 be attained 
wnto, Thus there being no poſſibility of the Ambers 
publication of excellent Treatiſes, unleſs he be reſeated in 
the eflute of his predeceſſors, the Reader, of whatever con- 
dtion, with whom liter tore « in any eſtimation , ſhould 


Com- 


"0 

— the _— the contrary "1 
very clearly evidenced , in al 

the fore-geing Traftate). pores IR Soak 


—  — — —_ Ge OO —O OC 


Vade Liber, torumque refer mea damna per orbem, 
Hoſtibus affigens ſtigmara nigra mcis : 

Contingarque mihi Siculi forruna Poerz, 
Cui farale merrum non minus enſe fuit 5 

Nec poſthac demprum dices mihi credicor enſem, 
Si calamo poſſem re jugulare meo. 


Seeing 


GEcing the end of this fore-going TraQtate is to 
peri[wade the State, our of their wiſdew,to conde- 
ſcend to the jof demands of the Author; there can 
no number like that of Twe and thirty, which by the 
Rabies ym CCI _ and by _ 

« to juſtice , itc » ſoappoſice for 
Crmings the fam of theſe fibGquent Proquirita- 
tiews, according to the tenour of this Algebralcal 
Hexaſtick, 


0 414 ſurſolid, whoſe 
- Bcogror twice that e of Squares encloſe, 
Which i the dowble of the Cube of two, | 
Is here diſp! 's,for t& Author's ſake, to ſhew 
How 1 uare dealing will him beſt become, 
Whereby he gets bis owne in {olidum. 


I, 
t he» whoſe good _ = to be eEernized in the 
ve » hould not in his life- tirue be negiefted by the State 
of an immoral oe, is che hope of 7 
A. $. 


3. 
That to the overthrow of Equi in the perida of the Author, 
tofu diirancaplancl theirs to become the executioacr 
of the ſpleen and covetoulaeſs of his implacable adverfaries, is 
the humble defice of - 

B. H. 


Js 

That they who look meerly to the preſent time , without any 
of a the State | 

regard of che furure be ace praetedily My, 


him of his means , who, for the weal of after-ages, ſpends his 
time molt yerrucufly, is che deſire of Ky 
y 


4+ 
That outlandiſh Nations, with whom the Author hath much 
intance, may, for the States favour to him, when they ſhall 
reflore him to his own , after the above- written manner,offer up 
2 moſt cordial ſacrifice to their Authority , is the humble deſire 
of 


Ai. F#7. 


F+ 
That feeing the moſt of Scorland is ſubdued, thoſe that had 
long before that enſlaved remſelves tothe moſt abomig1ble vice 
of oppreſſing others, be not permitted by the Conqueror to med- 
dle with the eftate of him that never injured any , is the carneft 
fuit of 
E.G. 
6 


ing the Authors Treatiſes are conducible to poſterity , fog 
the weal whereof the now-eflabliſhed Authority hath u _ 
fo many difficulties, that for its reſpeR to them. and hopes of their 
retribution of praiſes, he may be berter rewarded, then if he were 


« preſent-ume.lerver, without confideration of the fururr, 's te 
deſire of 


Ei. Z. 


Seeing from the creation of che world, it hath pleaſed the Au- 
thor to deduce his extraQion, without baulking ſince the dayes 
of Adaw, fo much as one of his progenitors on the paternal 
hide, =_— youchſafe to put him in a conh of 
protrating 1s poſterity through as many hereditary ſuccefſors 
1 a lineal deſcent, ning Gs c—— of he procadig 
Trattate, is the defire of 


K, F, 
8 


Seeing the molt innocent of the Scoriſh Nation is no more 
blamelcts, then he,that his ſequeſtration ſhould be taken off and 


a conſiderable acknowledgment allowed him, for the great los 
he ſuſtained by the rigour of the ublequeſiracor, s the fefre of 
U. Fr. 


9. 

Seeing the Author hath been iill faichful eo his cruſt, never 
culpable of Parole-breaking, bat always true in word and 
acoa, That the generoſity of the State will not ſuffer him to 
be expoſed to the inhumane dealing of thoſe Country-men of 
his , who for their owne ends, make no bones of being guiky of 
greater breaches, is the defire of he 

.T 


10, 

ing he is born to the profir of a few , who thinketh oaely 
on the people of his age , and to that of ſewer, whoſe 
exceed not the reach of his own in'ereſt, That the illuſtri- 
ben. eng yr pun peed ——— 
competitors rk and narrow projects , and his owne fplen. 
did and ample endeavours, comprehenſive by appearance of the 
whole latitude of time, is the humble defire of 

* MX. Is 


It. 

The Authors family being of the greateſt antiquity in Scor- 
land, and by an _— dd Bt this ne from 
that urrer fron intended by the iniquity of his coverous 
and diflembled enemies, ſhould in my opinion obcain a larger 
meaſure of proxeRtion from the Sate, then any other race in that 
land, and himſelf favoured with the grant of all that in this 
foregoing Treatiſe is demanded by him, (which thatit be (o) is 
the le defue of 

Gh., Ex. 
12, 

That the ſhire of Crewarty, whichever from the beginning 
hath been the receptacle of the moſt harmle(s inhabirancs , be 
not beftowed on any other then the Author, whole predeceſſors, 
for upr' and integrity of carriage, had not their equals 
ia that Nation, is the defire of 


To. Bu. 
H 2 13. 


13, 

WNarthe nobleſt Stare in the world, will not now permit that 
to de expoſed to ſale, which never hitherto was made yendible 
in any preceding age , and that the Lands and ſhire of Cre- 
warty, (which by none that ever breathed were either 

or fold) ſhould by a grant from the State, be in the heri 
poſſeſſion of the Author, as neareſt in line ro the aboriginary 
owner, is the carneſt defire of i 


14. 

That the Author being bur us a dear ſpark, from whence 
jeameth the molt of the pure light that is to be ſeen of any 
Farned invention in that Counnry of Seartandit be ner 
ed and quite extinguiſhed , by the foul and black water of aa 

ous puddle druak up there, by the natives almoſt of all ſorts, 
1 the humble requeſt 

Bu. Ts. 


Is. 

The Authors education having been more abroad then az 
home , whereof Exg land may claim no (mall (hare ; that 
by the State of that Nation, he ſhould be fingled out to ſuffer 
more then the diſafteGters of both their rule and country-men, 
1s lot the expeRation of 

Wo. Ks. 
16 


That the Authors unwillingneſs to acknowledg an Ecclefiafti- 
cal ſoveraignuic above the ſupream eſtabliſhed Cril authority, be 
not a motive to deal more rigorouſly with him, then with any of 
thoſe other his compatriots, that turn tail to cyery governmeat, 
without afteAion toany, is the defite of 

V.Te, 


17, 

There being ſcarce any other Gentleman in Scotland, who 
to the preſs ſofreely adyenturech his name as himſelf, that the 
Author's thus favouricg this Ifle with clucubratiogs beyoad the 
reach of moſt of his compatriots, may not for his ſervice to the 
publick by the attolerance of the State ſuffer any detriment by 
bus owre countrymen in his private fortune, OE . 
| _ 


18. 

That the reaſons deduced by the Auther in the abore-writ» 
wn Treatiſe, why he ſhould act be made lyable twany other 
debt. then that of his own contraQting. may be {o reliſhed by the 
ſupream authority of the Land, as that he may be ex» 
onered of any echer burthen, is the bumble defice of 

CW, 


Their being aone in Scotland les coverous then he, nor more 
averſe from the exceſſive love of money, that it may pleaſe the 
Stare fo to protedt him, as that he be not made a prey to the 
molt ayaritious men of aay.and ſuch as reipeR Silver and Gold 
beyond whatever elle is melt precious in the world, is the hum- 
ble defire of 

L. Ch. 


Secing the Authors uaw ro _ —_— 
 oooranger an debarred him 


eee lng and that 


take be going rwroner Vould by all» leem 
po 1 to have proceeded from hs defire to ſhun old adverſaries 
at home, then to acquire new ones abroxd , that he ſhould be 
looked upon with a more amicable eye trom the State , is the 
humble opinion of 
AM. Gr. 


21, 
That the exemplary civility of the Author , for being ape to 
have influence on he minds of the rudeſt of his kinad and 
neighbours, even unto the remoreſt hills of Scerland , may pet- 
ſwade the State, whole endeavour it is to bring them into as neer 
a cooformity a5 may be, in Manners and Laoguage with the na- 
tives of England, to feede bias, without incumbrance, in the in- 
hericagce of bus predeceſſors, is the defire of Rs. 


the States adverfuries had kept ana wn ng, 
Gate the Autore houk for tivelye moaths together , and 


that for theſe many paſt , by ſeveral exaftions , tolerated 

ings, and fuch-bke unmerciful dealings , without 

any juſt occaſion given , his rents have been made totally 

vnſerviceable, thar he may now. for bis greater peace in the fu- 

and after its removal, have himſelf fully ferled in his own, with 
all manger of calc and tranquillity,is + oy - 7 
« Was 


23. 

Secing the grant of what is demanded in this Treatiſe, can no 
ways introduce a ratve of any dangerous conſequence, as 
hed bens evidently (hewn in the abovye-written I:troduRtion, 
That the State may be pleaſed, without any ſuſpicion of being 
troubled upon the hke grounds by any other of his Compatrios, 
c to his defires therein, is the hearty wiſh of 

P. Oi. 


2 4. 
That ſublime. Natural and Moral Philoſophy, Mathematicks, 
Porke, and many other kindes of good Literature ſhould not be 
any longer fuppreft by the injuſtice of deyouricg and inſatiable 
ers 14gnorant of every thing that is not lucrative for the bag, 

1s the dehire of 
As. Pr. 

27. 

Secing many in Scorland live at eaſe who enjoy org of their 
neighbours unlawfully-acquired goods then formerly was their 
own. That the Author who never yer could. for the mportraity 
of waſpiſh iekers, and terrour of a rigorous Law , molt often 
in the mouches of partial men , get applied, in the mot fertile 
yeer that was, for his own uſe the tenth part of his reaz. ſhould 
now. by the magnificence of the Seate, reap the fruits of his own. 
without the hazard of ſuch terrible ſoakers,s the carneſt defire of 

Gs, Dn. 
26, 

As the overthrow of Vice ſhould be the eftabliſhmeat (de 
tue That the conqueſt of his oppolers reſeat the Author in bi 
own inheritance, and that the State of Exgland do it, which 1-4 


fefſeth the ſwbdument of irregular ſpuics, is both the expeation 
and defire of 
Tm. Os. 


27, 

Seeing the Authors defigoe bath been theſe ma the 
fame, in matter of furthering Manufacture, Gramm wh all 
manner of Trading and Negotiation with the moſt induſtrious 
of the Engliſh now inhabiting Scotland That the State will nor, 
in favour of thoſe that have cbfirutted the performance of fo 
yory enterpriſes, denude hins of his juſt inheritance, is the de- 
lire 


Ti. Ps. 

5 18, 

As love to the Engliſh Nation more then to their money, de- 
ſerveth from that Governmene the larger influence of grace ; fo, 
that the A uthors affeQtion to the equitable Cuftorns, & innate Ci- 
vilty of that Nation, being of a more generous temper then that 
of others , who laboured their incroduction for pecunial inte- 
refts. may be regarded with an eye of greater fayour,is the hurn- 


ble defire of 
Gu. We. 


29. 
Seeing there are many ys in = who t for 
being actually in charge againit the Engliſh , as 
nefor of Preabytery, they did cither jarich themlelyes , i 
their levies and quarterings received great profits tothe no 
of. the > ama enics hos mea ns at 
this time (whoſe norwichſta I with 
LO mn toenvie) with as much tra ity 2s ; Thatthe 
Author, who never yet had any t to the prejudice of an- 
other. be placed rather in a better then worſe conditien then any 


of thoſe, the defice of 
Ts. }. 


30. 

That the vexatian uncefſantly for theſe ten yeers paſt (uſtained 
by the Author, from men of unſatisfiable appetites, in matter of 
worldly means, may not, as formerly, to the great hiaderaace of 
di- 


_ learned Treatiſes , be looger an unpediment wato 
carnelt defure of W 
KR. Ts. 


nr pan of ie ver demands ; —_ 
TraRtate of his IntroduRtion, will 
p51 to good qinels the proſecuung 

tous endeayours, is the opinion of 


Wwx. Fs. 
That this is te unnmows def of the good perſons of 


either ſex, with whom , of any Nation , in whatever Country, 
whether at home or abroad, the Author hath been formerly ac- 


quainted, is teſtified by 
Ts. F:. 


ALLA AA LA LA LLAAAL A ALES 
Parya peto : debens minus: & plus ſpondeo : at iſtis 
Plura dabir en ſh A Camzna meo, 


Little I ack : 5+ HAR 
Link Lt: Font _ Ho cid ad] 


TEX Z$0STDOE4 404-0004 FrEEGEN 44 FIX 0 


Hough in this almoſt extemporary Trexiſe, 


f ode amidſt moſt of the diftur! __—_ 
that are incident to one ___ deſtituce of encou- 
ragements from withour , or undertaking ener 
of the like nature ; and, by the Au: - munm- 
If, in ſcribled ſheers and half ſheers , before the 
Ink ofrentimes was well d - given out torws (e- 
veralPrigters,one alone nog fullyablero hold 
his quill a going : there ſhould ave occurred ma- 
nyer the Preſs then there are pages in 
the Book (confidering how the animadverfion 
the Reviſes, was alc recomme-ded co the 
C cors at the Cate, who were, through the 
$ of the Hand wherein the cop.e was wric- 
County apt to miſtake the ſenſe of 
bock fing _ , and full members of periods) 
at _—_ not © be choughr range. My the 
Reader therefore be pleaſed ro exculc all, and with 
his pen to correR theſe enſuing Errars, as it is here» 
after ſhewn how they ſhould be amended. 


Book 


Lib, Art, La, Errata, Emcndats, | Lib, Act, Lins. Errata Emendaca, 

| Tit gog-15 COregere Cedere. 4 40. 3 bagpipes Mpc b 

1 18 23 qu werſinced wares 14 8 Camlillr Carine. 
eſſunced, '4 #2 4 fre, ſetae, fre, and the 


» as 8 avkew lialian. and the tx- extremelt 
1 1484 3 Spur& twony fatimay! iremeſt pans pains fortune 
| could inflit 
k 1 ſ:4 _ 4 pee thew. 
z 17 may, [olice [olaubvs. '4 833 3 met mayer. 
> 18 aviry. 2c marnum. 4 gil 5 Exſcibelawen Exihybalaur 
mails maum. .o Exihybals- 
3» 35 $ wuiy pai 7 (14G mul its- chryſ#1 
danny dinny. S 5 bad bate. 
> Z393-aDdy. 8 £44 vecave tad. |4 p fo. 7 het ſeits mimnque ih 
> 44 1 & ſbatain that ſor ſha : 
nur. F202 the that. 
a MN [TIT finer. 6 mayy., delbatews dilabeiio. 


$ 
$ $ 
6 25 prifiden's preccdems. | 5 g mary. At arm Avaru. 
» $9 3 hirfcdd frvificth. | 5 13 may. Vid aria. Fid ans; 
z quid. | 5 
a 


67 10 aved 13 7 pony Fire pargniriet of 
Jo iz mmnanet mmm | ſberre Brey and Fi- 
PIT naw ot. | Py 
F 17may.  piciiis piridnia 
> as if Ovymal Orymel, |5 29 mar, remernd Temovt. 
TE i bim in him whom! 5 36 mary, ws at. 
had inirufted 5 4o 13 fr order7, 
with my aff aur! 
3 44. moy. dure daari. 5s 8 7 conſufmand confabonand 
deltuwrns Gu cur. lypeerige;s Iyperrifie, 
6 24 may, man nm 
4 20 6 ſeeceſive ſeceſpve. |6 37 3 een Axia, 


