( 


SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 
OF  CROMARTIE 


SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART. 


31 


BY 

JOHNWILLCOCK 

M.A.B.D. 
LERWICK. 


EDINBURGH  £,  LONDON 

OLIPHANT 
ANDERSON  6  FERRIER 


« 


SIGNATURE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART, 
SLIGHTLY  ENLARGED. 


[All  Rights  Reserved] 


PRINTED  BY  MORRISON  AND   OIBB  LIMITED,   EDINBURGH 


TO 

A.   B.   W. 

WHOSE  PRAISE,    SO  FREELY  GIVEN, 

is  THE  AUTHOR'S  MOST  COVETED 

REWARD. 


PREFACE 

EW  persons  who  take  an  interest  in 
general  literature  are  wholly  un 
acquainted  with  the  name  of  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart,  as  that  of  the 
translator  of  a  great  French  classic. 
Only  the  more  erudite  can  tell 
how  the  name  of  another  literary  man,  Pierre 
Antoine  Motteux,  comes  to  be  associated  with  his 
in  connexion  with  the  translation  in  question,  and 
are  aware  that  the  Scottish  knight  is  the  author  of 
original  compositions  in  such  diverse  departments 
as  poetry,  trigonometry,  genealogy,  and  biography, 
and  that  he  played  a  prominent  part  in  the  public 
life  of  his  time. 

It  has  been  my  object  to  bring  together  in  the 
following  volume  all  the  materials  which  are 
available  for  giving  a  vivid  picture  of  the  personality 
of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  and  of  the  circumstances 
in  which  his  life  was  passed,  as  I  think  it  would  be 
a  pity  if  his  romantic,  fantastical  figure  were  to 
pass  into  oblivion.  The  materials  for  his  life  are 
fairly  abundant,  though  they  have  to  be  sought  for 
in  many  out-of-the-way  corners.  The  slight  but 
fairly  accurate  sketch  prefixed  to  his  Works  in  the 


xii  PREFACE 

Maitland  Club  edition,  and  the  carefully  written 
articles  in  Dr  Irving's  Scottish  Writers,  and  the 
Dictionary  of  National  Biography,  contain  the  only 
previous  attempts  which  have  been  made  to  give 
his  history.  The  limits  within  which  the  authors 
of  these  notices  had  to  work,  have,  however, 
prevented  their  giving  more  than  a  bare  outline  of 
his  career.  I  have  attempted,  with  what  success  it 
is  for  my  readers  to  say,  to  clothe  the  skeleton  with 
sinews  and  flesh,  and  to  impart  to  the  figure  some 
measure  of  animation. 

As  I  have  had  to  do  my  work  at  a  great 
distance  from  public  libraries,  I  have  been  obliged 
to  enlist  the  services  of  friends,  more  fortunately 
situated,  in  the  task  of  looking  up  multitudinous 
references  and  allusions,  which  bore  upon  the 
history  of  the  person  in  whom  I  was  interested,  or 
of  the  time  in  which  he  lived.  Miss  Kemp,  James 
Walter,  Esq.,  and  Alexander  Middlemass,  Esq., 
Edinburgh,  have  been  extremely  serviceable  to 
me  in  this  way. 

A  variety  of  details  of  historical  and  biographical 
interest  has  been  furnished  me  by  Dr  Milne,  King- 
Edward;  Garden  A.  Duff,  Esq.,  Hatton  Castle, 
Turriff ;  Capt.  Douglas  Wimberley,  Inverness ;  J.  L. 
Anderson,  Esq.,  Edinburgh ;  and  P.  J.  Anderson, 
Esq.,  of  Aberdeen  University  Library. 

Professors  Crum  Brown,  Saintsbury,  Butcher, 
and  Eggeling  of  my  own  Alma  Mater  have  been 
very  willing  to  give  the  information  I  have  sought 
from  them ;  and  through  Professor  Grierson  of 
Aberdeen  I  have  had  the  loan  of  many  books 
containing  material  of  value  for  my  purpose. 


PREFACE  xiii 

Sheriff  Mackenzie,  Wick,  and  Sheriff  Shennan, 
Lerwick,  have  aided  me  in  questions  of  literary 
taste  and  of  legal  information ;  and  from  W.  F. 
Smith,  Esq.,  Fellow  of  St  John's  College,  Cam 
bridge,  I  have  received  valuable  help  in  writing  the 
chapter  on  the  translation  of  Eabelais.  From  the 
latter's  scholarly  volumes  upon  the  great  French 
man  I  have  borrowed  some  notes,  which  appear 
with  his  initials  attached  to  them.  To  Professor 
Ferguson  of  Glasgow  I  am  indebted  for  the  photo 
graph  of  Urquhart's  handwriting. 

In  the  work  of  correcting  proofs — a  somewhat 
laborious  task  in  the  present  case — I  have  had 
kindly  assistance  from  Dr  Milne,  above  mentioned, 
and  also  from  A.  J.  Tedder,  Esq.,  London,  Kev.  T. 
Mathewson,  Eev.  D.  Houston,  M.A.,  and  J.  M. 
Goudie,  Esq.,  Lerwick. 

If  I  have  omitted  the  name  of  any  helper,  or  if 
by  frivolous  comment  I  have  done  wrong  to  the 
shade  of  Sir  Thomas,  I  would  adopt  the  language 
of  Mr  Collins  in  Pride  and  Prejudice.  "  We  are 
all  liable  to  err,"  he  says.  "  I  have  certainly  meant 
well  through  the  whole  affair ;  .  .  .  and  if  my 
manner  has  been  at  all  reprehensible,  I  here  beg 
leave  to  apologize." 

JOHN  WILLCOCK. 


UNITED  PRES.  MANSE,  LERWICK, 
SHETLAND. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

PREFACE    ,  xi 


CHAPTER  I 

The  Urquharts  and  their  Predecessors  in  Cromartie— Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart,  senior  —  Birth  of  our  Author — 
School  and  University  Days  —  Pecuniary  and  other 
Troubles  at  Home  — The  Castle  of  Cromartie  —  Our 
Author's  Studious  Bent— Foreign  Travel — The  English 
man  Abroad — The  Scot  Abroad  .....  1 

CHAPTER  II 

Recalled  Home— The  Covenanting  Movement — The  Trot  of 
Turriff—  Our  Author  escapes  to  England — Is  Knighted 
— Publishes  his  Epigrams— His  Father's  Embarrassments 
increase — Lesley  of  Findrassie — Death  of  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart,  senior — Our  Author  struggles  in  vain  to 
keep  his  Creditors  at  bay — Other  Wrongs  and  Losses — 
On  bad  Terms  with  the  Church 30 

CHAPTER  III 

Unsuccessful  Rioing  in  the  North— Sir  Thomas  makes  his 
Peace  with  the  Church— Return  of  Charles  ir.  to  Scot 
land—Invasion  of  England— Battle  of  Worcester — Sir 
Thomas  a  Prisoner  in  the  Tower— Makes  Friends — Is 
liberated  on  Parole— Great  Literary  Activity — Revisits 
Scotland— Dies— Later  History  of  the  Urquharts  of 
Cromartie  —  Characteristics  of  our  Author  —  Glover's 
Portraits  of  him 69 


xvi  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  IV 

PAGE 

EPIGRAMS:   DIVINE  AND  MORAL  — THE  TRISSO- 

TETRAS Ill 

CHAPTER  V 
HANTOXPONOXANON,  OR  THE  PEDIGREE      .  .       128 

CHAPTER  VI 

EK2KTBAAATPON,   on  THE    JEWEL  —  LOGOPANDEC- 

TEISION,  OR  THE  UNIVERSAL  LANGUAGE        .        .      1-18 

CHAPTER  VII 
TRANSLATION  OF  RABELAIS  184 


APPENDICES 209 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

1.  PORTRAIT  OF  SIR  THOMAS  URQTJHART 

2.  SIGNATURE  OF  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART       .  .        Page  vii 

3.  THE  POET  SURROUNDED  BY  THE  MUSES      .  Facing  page  109 

4.  FAG-SIMILE  OF  HIS  HANDWRITING       .  ,,          116 

5.  SCULPTURED  STONE  AT  KINBEAKIE  HOUSE  137 


SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

CHAPTEE    I 

The  Urquharts  and  their  Predecessors  in  Cromartie — Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart,  senior — Birth  of  our  Author — School 
and  University  Days — Pecuniary  and  other  Troubles  at 
Home— The  Castle  of  Cromartie— Our  Author's  Studious 
Bent — Foreign  Travel — The  Englishman  Abroad — The 
Scot  Abroad. 

HE  right  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  of 
Cromartie  to  be  included  in  the 
list  of  famous  Scots  will  scarcely 
be  granted  by  many  of  his  fellow- 
countrymen  without  some  inquiry 
into  the  grounds  upon  which  it 
is  based.  He  himself,  undoubtedly,  would  not 
have  been  backward  in  asserting  his  claim  to  such 
honourable  distinction,  though  he  would  have 
entered  a  protest  against  the  presence  of  some  of 
those  in  whose  company  he  would  find  himself. 
In  the  ecclesiastical  and  political  controversies  of 
the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century,  he  was, 
as  an  Episcopalian  and  a  Cavalier,  connected  with 


2  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

the  losing  side,  and,  consequently,  it  is  not  to  be 
expected  that  posterity  should  be  so  impartial  as 
to  cherish  his  name  along  with  those  of  the  victors 
in  the  conflict.  It  is  to  his  literary,  and  not  to 
his  martial  achievements,  that  he  owes  his  fame. 
His  translation  of  Eabelais  is  probably  the  most 
brilliant  feat  of  the  kind  ever  accomplished,  and 
casts  all  his  own  original  writings  into  the  shade. 
The  fantastical  character  of  his  own  compositions, 
indeed,  both  in  regard  to  their  subject-matter  and 
the  diction  in  which  they  are  clothed,  forbids  their 
ever  having  a  large  circle  of  readers.  An  author 
whose  phraseology  is  like  a  combination  of  that 
used  by  Ancient  Pistol  with  that  of  Sir  Thomas 
Browne  may  have  enthusiastic  admirers,  but  they 
are  almost  certain  to  be  few  in  number.  Yet  his 
works  contain  much  interesting  matter,  and  to 
them  we  are  indebted  for  many  details  of  the  life 
of  their  author. 

Though  it  is  hard  to  believe  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart's  assertion  that  the  connexion  of  the 
Urquharts  with  the  north-west  of  Scotland  dates  as 
far  back  as  the  year  B.C.  554,  when  an  ancestor  of  his 
named  Beltistos  crossed  over  from  Ireland,  and  built 
a  castle  near  Inverness,  the  family  was  of  consider 
able  antiquity,  and  for  many  generations  was  one  of 
the  most  distinguished  in  that  part  of  the  country. 
Nisbet,  the  great  authority  on  heraldry,  says  that 
"  they  enjoyed  not  only  the  honourable  office  of 
hereditary  Sheriff-Principal  of  the  Shire  of  Crom- 
artie,  but  the  far  greater  part,  if  not  the  whole  of 
the  said  shire  did  belong  to  them,  either  in  property 


MACBETH  THANE  OF  CROMARTIE        3 

or  superiority,  and  they  possessed  a  considerable 
estate  besides  in  the  Shire  of  Aberdeen."1  The 
admiralty  of  the  seas  from  Caithness  to  Inverness 
also  belonged  to  them. 

The  Urquharts  were  not,  however,  the  earliest 
to  bear  rule  in  the  part  of  Scotland  with  which 
their  name  is  connected  Cromartie  was  originally 
the  Crwmbawchty  (or  Crumbathy)  of  which 
Macbeth  was  reputed  thane,  before  he  became 
king.  Wyntown  in  his  Cronykil  relates  Macbeth's 
dream  that  he  was  first  Thane  of  Cromartie,  then 
Thane  of  Moray,  and  then  King  of  Scotland.2 
After  the  first  and  second  titles  had  been  conferred 
upon  him,  he  took  steps  to  secure  the  third. 
Probably  the  mote-hill  of  Cromartie  was  the  site 

1  System  of  Heraldry,  ii.  274. 

2  Wyntown's  narrative  is  as  follows  (quoted  in  Sir  William 
Eraser's  Earls  of  Cromartie} : — 

"A  nycht  lie  thowcht  in  hys  dreming, 
Dat  syttand  he  wes  besyd  }>e  Kyng 
At  a  Sete  in  hwnting ;  swa 
Intil  his  Leisch  had  Grewhundys  twa. 
He  thowcht,  quhile  he  wes  swa  syttand, 
He  sawe  thre  wemen  by  gangand  ; 
And  ]>ai  wemen  fan  thowcht  he 
Thre  word  Systrys  mast  lyk  to  be. 
Do  fyrst  he  hard  say  gangand  by, 
'Lo  yhondyr  ]>e  Thayne  of  Crwmbawchty. ' 
De  toyir  woman  sayd  agayne, 
'Of  Morave  yhondyre  I  se  J>e  Thayne.' 
De  thryd  |>an  sayd,  'I  se  >e  Kyng.' 
All  >is  he  herd  in  hys  dreming." 

Wyntown's  Cronykil,  i.  225. 

Wyntown's  date  is  about  A.D.  1395.  Macbeth  was  killed  at 
Lumphanan  by  Macduff,  5th  December  A.D.  1056. 


4  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

of  his  official  residence  as  thane  of  the  district  when 
he  was  at  the  beginning  of  his  ambitious  career. 

In  the  thirteenth  century  the  family  of  Mouat 
(then  de  Monte  Alto)  were  in  possession,1  but  early 
in  the  following  century  the  estate  had  accrued 
to  King  Kobert  the  Bruce,  probably  because  the 
Mouat  s  had  submitted  to  the  English  king, 
Edward  I.  King  Kobert  granted  Cromartie  to 
Sir  Hugh  Eoss,  eldest  son  of  William,  Earl  of 
Boss,  in  1315,  and  by  him  it  was  afterwards, 
in  the  reign  of  King  David  Bruce  (1329-70), 
given  to  an  Adam  of  Urquhart  ("  de  Vrquhartt  "),2 
with  whose  descendants  it  remained  for  many 
generations.  In  1357  he  got  from  the  Crown 
the  hereditary  sheriffdom  of  Cromartie,  and  eight 
years  later  the  same  Hugh  Ross  gave  him  the 
estate  of  Fisherie,  in  King-Edward,  Aberdeen- 
shire.  This  Adam  is  the  first  of  the  family  to 
emerge  from  the  darkness  of  antiquity  into  the 
light  of  history,  and  probably  his  name,  as  the 
founder  of  the  Urquhart  fortunes,  suggested  the 
still  more  famous  progenitor  to  whom  our  Sir 
Thomas  traced  back  his  pedigree  link  by  link,  as 
our  readers  will  afterwards  hear. 

1  A  charter  of  lands  in  Cromartie  granted  by  William  de  Monte 
Alto,  between  1252  and  1272,  is  still  in  existence.     The  granter  of 
the  charter,  having  been  owner  of  Cromartie,  was  claimed  by  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  as  one  of  his  Urquhart  ancestors,  but  with  no 
better  authority  than   the   earlier  ancestors  who  figure  in  our 
author's  Pedigree.     See  Earls  of  Cromartie,  by  Sir  William  Fraser. 

2  It  would  seem  from  this  that  Urquhart  was  originally  a  place- 
name,  probably  Gaelic.     There  were  two  parishes  of  Urquhart  in 
the  old  province  of  Moray — one  with  a  priory  near  Elgin,  and 
the  other  with  a  castle  in  what  is  now  Inverness-shire. 


THE  TUTOR  OF  CROMARTIE  5 

Our  author's  father,  also  a  Thomas,  and  the 
first  of  his  line  who  was  a  Protestant  in  religion, 
was  born  in  1585.  He  succeeded  to  the  property 
in  1603,  and  in  1617  was  knighted  by  James  VI. 
in  Edinburgh.  As  he  was  left  an  orphan  at  an 
early  age,  he  was  brought  up  under  the  care  of 
his  grand-uncle,  John  Urquhart  of  Craigfintray, 
who  has  been  commonly  called  from  this  circum 
stance  "  the  Tutor  of  Cromartie." l  His  great-grand- 
nephew,  our  Sir  Thomas,  has  celebrated  his  praise  in 
very  high  terms.  "  He  was,"  he  says,  "  over  all 
Britain  renowned  for  his  deep  reach  of  natural  wit, 
and  great  dexterity  in  acquiring  of  many  lands  and 
great  possessions,  with  all  men's  applause."2 

From  all  accounts,  it  seems  that  the  "  Tutor  "  was 

1  "Tutor"  here  simply  means  "legal  guardian" — for  boys  until 
fourteen  years  of  age,  and  for  girls  until  twelve.  After  these  ages 
and  before  that  of  twenty-one  such  wards  are  in  the  charge  of 
"Curators."  Owing  to  our  author's  having  the  same  Christian 
name  as  his  father,  the  mistake  is  often  made  of  asserting  that 
John  Urquhart  was  his  tutor. 

3  Works,  p.  172.  In  a  MS.  volume  of  unpublished  poems  by 
Sir  Thomas,  which  is  described  on  p.  116,  there  is  the  following  : — 
' '  Upon  the  tutor  of  Cromarty ,  my  great-grandfather's  younger 
brother,  and  my  father's  tutor  : 

"  The  present  tyme,  the  preterit,  nor  futur 
T'  ourselves,  our  fathers,  nor  posteritie, 
Do  now,  have  yet,  nor  will  produce  a  tutor, 
For's  Pupils  weil  of  more  dexteritie, 

For  he  left  free  th'  estate  he  had  in  charge : 
And  by  meer  industrie  did's  own  enlarge  "  (iii.  7). 
We  are  sorry  to  quote  a  poem  of  Sir  Thomas's  at  this  early  stage, 
before  the  atmosphere  has  been  created  which  is  needed  for  per 
ceiving  and  appreciating  its  true  value.     The  judicious  reader  will, 
however,  return  to  it  with  interest  when  that  process  has  been 
completed. 


6  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

faithful  in  the  discharge  of  all  the  duties  belonging 
to  his  office,1  though  he  did  not  succeed  in  imparting 
to  his  pupil  the  secret  of  acquiring  landed  property, 
either  with  or  without  applause. 

Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  senior,  received  his  estates, 
we  are  informed,  "  without  any  burthen  of  debt, 
how  little  soever,  or  provision  of  brother,  sister,  or 
any  other  of  his  kindred  or  allyance  wherewith 
to  affect  it." 2  He  married  Christian,  the  fourth 
daughter  of  Alexander,  fourth  Lord  Elphinstone 
(1552—1638),  and  received  with  her  a  dowry  of 
nine  thousand  merks  Scots  (i.e.  £500  Sterling). 
The  date  of  our  author's  birth  is  given  by  Maitland 
as  1605,  but  it  is  now  certain  that  this  is  an  error, 
and  that  the  true  date  is  161 1.3  Sir  Thomas  was 
the  eldest  of  the  family,  and  he  tells  us  that  he 
was  born  five  years  after  the  marriage  of  his 
parents.  He  also  informs  us  that  his  mother's 
father,  Lord  Elphinstone,  held  the  office  of  High 
Treasurer  in  Scotland  at  the  time  of  the  marriage. 
As  that  nobleman  was  High  Treasurer  only  from 
just  before  19th  April,  1599,  till  22nd  September, 
1601,  it  would  not  have  been  unreasonable  to  fix 
the  date  of  the  marriage  as  probably  some  time  in 
1600,  if  we  had  no  other  information  on  the 
subject.  But  it  so  happens  that  the  marriage - 

1  John  Urquliart,  "the  Tutor  of  Cromartie, "  died  in  1631,  at 
the  age  of  eighty-four,  and  was  buried  in  the  old  church  of  King- 
Edward,  Aberdeenshire,  where  there  is  a  marble  monument  to  his 
memory. 

2  Works,  p.  340. 

3  Another  erroneous  date  is  in  the  edition  of  the  Tracts  of  1774, 
where  1613  is  given  as  the  year  of  our  author's  birth. 


CONTEMPORARY  EVENTS  7 

contract  is  in  existence,1  and  is  dated  the  9th  of 
July,  1606,  and  consequently  Sir  Thomas's  birth 
would  fall  in  the  year  1611.  Our  author  must 
therefore  have  been  in  error  in  describing  his  grand 
father  as  being  High  Treasurer  at  the  time  of  his 
daughter's  marriage.  He  had,  indeed,  occupied  this 
office  some  years  before.  Sir  Thomas  should  have 
said  "  had  been,"  instead  of  "  was,"  but  his  lordly 
disposition  of  mind  would  probably  make  him  con 
temptuous  of  such  trifles. 

In  1611,  James  vi.  was  drawing  near  to  the  end 
of  the  first  period  of  his  reign,  during  which  he  had 
been  under  the  influence  of  the  traditions  of  the 
days  of  Elizabeth  and  Burghley,  and  had  not  yet 

1  Tliis  is  now  amongst  the  Gardenston  papers,  having  been 
formerly  in  the  possession  of  Mr  Dunbar  Dunbar.  An  account 
of  its  contents  is  given  in  Antiquarian  Notes,  by  C.  Fraser 
Mackintosh,  p.  195.  An  independent  corroboration  of  the  above 
date  of  the  marriage  is  given  by  a  document  now  in  the  Register 
House  in  Edinburgh  (Aberdeen  Sasines),  in  which  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart,  senior,  gives  sasine  of  the  barony  of  Fisherie  to  Lady 
Christian  Elphinstone.  The  "precept,"  or  clause  in  the  marriage- 
contract,  which  directs  the  notary  to  give  sasine  of  the  estate 
settled  on  the  bride,  is  also  dated  the  9th  of  July,  1606,  and  in  it  she 
is  described  as  being  in  sud  purd  virginitate.  Probably  the 
marriage  took  place  either  on  that  day  or  very  soon  afterwards. 
The  bridegroom  was  just  of  age,  while  Lady  Christian  was  under 
sixteen,  the  date  of  her  birth  being  19th  December,  1590  (TJie 
Lords  Elphinstone, ,  Fraser,  i.  167). 

The  issue  of  this  marriage  were  at  least  the  following  sons  and 
daughters  :— (1)  THOMAS  ;  (2)  Alexander  ;  (3)  George  ;  (4)  John  ; 
(5)  [name  unknown] ;  (6)  Henry  ;  and  (7)  Jane,  m.  Sir  Alexander 
Abercromby  of  Birkenbog ;  (8)  Helen,  m.  Sir  James  Gordon  of 
Lesmoir ;  (9)  Annas,  m.  Alexander  Strachan  of  Glenkindie ; 
(10)  Margaret,  m.  John  Irving  of  Brucklay  ;  (11)  [name  unknown], 
m.  Campbell  of  Calder. 


8  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

passed  into  his  own  keeping,  and  the  hands  of  pro 
fligate  favourites.  Bacon  was  still  in  the  shade  of 
distrust,  from  which,  however,  he  was  soon  to 
emerge :  he  was  now,  indeed,  Solicitor- General,  but 
his  ambition  was  not  satisfied  by  this  post.  The 
heir-apparent  to  the  throne  was  Prince  Henry,  who 
died  in  the  following  year.  Charles,  his  brother, 
was  now  eleven  years  of  age.  Shakespeare  brought 
out  this  year  his  play  of  The  Winters  Tale,  and 
Ben  Jonson  his  Catiline.  Sir  Walter  Ealeigh  was 
a  prisoner  in  the  Tower,  and  was  busily  engaged  in 
writing  his  History  of  the  World,  which  he  com 
pleted  in  the  following  year,  though  it  was  not 
published  until  1614.  The  Authorised  Version  of 
the  English  Bible  appeared  this  year.  Milton  was 
now  a  child  of  scarcely  three  years  old,  and  Crom 
well  a  boy  of  twelve. 

The  birthplace  of  our  author  is  unknown ;  for 
though  the  castle  of  Cromartie  was  the  official 
residence  of  the  sheriffs,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart, 
senior,  is  known  to  have  had  several  other  manor- 
houses,  one  of  which  was  Fisherie,1  in  the  parish  of 
King-Edward,  Aberdeenshire,  in  which  he  resided 
from  time  to  time.  It  is  probable  that  the  future 
translator  of  Eabelais  laid  the  foundation  of  the 
erudition  by  which  in  after  years  he  was  distin 
guished,  in  Banff,2  which  then  possessed  a  grammar- 

1  Fislierie  is  about  six  miles  from  Banff. 

2  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that,  in  the  parish  school  of  King- 
Edward,  our  author  could  have  got  the  rudiments  of  a  classical 
education.     In  1649  (15th  Nov. ),  Mr  James  Petrie,  who  was  school 
master  there,  applied  for  the  school  of  Bauff,  and,  as  a  test  of  his 
powers,    "  was  ordeined  to  teache  the  sext  satyr  of  Persius  to- 


UNIVERSITY  OF  ABERDEEN  9 

school,   rather   than  in   the    more    northern    town 
which  is  associated  with  his  name. 

Sir  Thomas  was  only  eleven  years  old  when,  in 
1622,  he  entered  the  University  of  Aberdeen,1  but 
there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  average  age 
of  the  "  men  "  of  his  year  would  be  in  excess  of  his 
own.  Donne  was  the  same  age  as  Urquhart  when 
he  entered  Oxford.  The  famous  Crichton  went  up 
to  St  Andrews  at  the  age  of  ten,  though  up  to  that 
time  he  had  not  given  evidence  of  any  extraordinary 
precocity.  A  generation  before,  Montaigne  had 
already  completed  his  collegiate  course  when  he 
attained  his  thirteenth  year.  It  seems  strange  to 
us  that  boys  of  such  tender  age  should  have  been 
found  able  to  pass  through  a  university  curriculum  ; 
and  we  are  forced  to  conclude  either  that  the  boys 
of  those  days  were  intellectually  superior  to  those 
with  whom  we  are  familiar,  or  that  the  studies 
which  occupied  them  were  less  deep  and  severe 
than  those  which  are  now  pursued  in  seats  of 
learning.  The  latter  is  probably  the  true  explana 
tion  of  the  matter.  University  education  in  Scot- 
morrow  in  the  school  of  Banf  be  nyne  hours  in  presence  of  the 
bailyies  and  others  in  the  tonne  who  wer  scholars."  He  passed 
through  the  test  successfully,  and  was  appointed  to  the  office 
(Annals  of  Banff,  ii.  30,  New  Spalding  Club). 

1  The  entry  of  his  name  as  a  student  on  the  roll  is  in  the  follow 
ing  terms:  "In  Academiam  regiam  Aberdonensem  recepti  sunt 
adolesceiites  quorum  nomina  sequuntur,  prseceptore  Alexandro 
Lunano,  Anno  1622. 

Thomas  Urquhardus  de  Cromartie. 

Fasti  Aberdancnses,  1854. 


io  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

land  had  been  remodelled,  and  adapted  to  the 
requirements  of  the  time  and  of  a  Protestant  society 
in  the  previous  generation,  and  in  this  work  Andrew 
Melville  had  a  very  notable  part.  In  1583  a  new 
constitution  had  been  drawn  up  for  the  University 
of  Aberdeen,  and  the  arrangements  prescribed  by  it 
may  have  existed  there  when  our  author  was  a 
student.  The  Principal,  according  to  this  constitu 
tion,  was  Professor  of  Theology,  as  well  as  incumbent 
of  the  parish  of  Old  Machar,  and  was  responsible 
for  the  government  and  discipline  of  the  college.1 
Under  him  were  four  Regents,  one  of  whom  was 
Sub-Principal,  and  to  them  was  assigned  the  duty  of 
training  students  in  various  departments  of  learning. 
Thus  physiology,  geography,  astrology,  history,  and 
Hebrew  were  assigned  to  the  Sub-Principal.  An 
other  Kegent  explained  "  the  principles  of  reasoning 
from  the  best  Greek  and  Latin  authors,  with  prac 
tice  in  writing  and  speaking " ;  while  a  third 
lectured  upon  Greek,  and  read  the  more  elementary 
Latin  and  Greek  authors.  The  fourth  Eegent 
taught  arithmetic  and  geometry,  and,  along  with 
them,  a  portion  of  Aristotle's  Organon,  Ethics,  and 
Politics,  and  Cicero's  DC  Officiis.  This  attempt  to 
assign  special  departments  to  the  various  regents 
respectively,  was  a  marked  improvement  upon  the 
older  system,  under  which  they  were  each  respons 
ible  for  teaching  all  the  subjects  included  in  the 
curriculum. 

The  students  paid  fees,  which  varied  in  amount 

1  King's   College:   Officers  and   Graduates,    by  P.  J.  Anderson, 
M.A.,  pp.  347,  348. 


THE  NOVA  FUNDATIO  n 

according  to  their  social  standing.  On  entering  the 
university  they  were  required  to  take  an  oath  of 
loyalty  to  the  Reformed  religion.  None  were 
allowed  to  carry  arms,  or  to  converse  in  any  other 
tongue  than  Greek  or  Latin.  Perhaps,  however, 
this  latter  rule  was  merely  an  attempt  to  restrain 
the  measureless  tide  of  human  speech.  And  in 
order  that  nothing  might  interfere  with  the  progress 
of  the  students,  the  Nova  Fundatio,  or  new  constitu 
tion  of  Aberdeen  University,  abolished  all  holidays 
("  omnes  consuetas  olim  a  studiis  vacationes  aboleri 
penitus  ").1 

Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  name  does  not  appear  in 

1  An  "eminent  Yorkshire  educationist "  introduced  the  same  rule 
into  the  establishment  under  his  charge.  It  is  probable,  however, 
that  in  Mr  Squeers's  case  the  arrangement  was  the  result  of  inde 
pendent  research  into  methods  of  education,  rather  than  a  hint 
borrowed  from  Andrew  Melville.  "No  holidays— none  of  those 
ill-judged  comings  home  twice  a  year  that  unsettle  children's 
•  minds  so  ! "  (Nicholas  Nicklcby,  chap.  iv. ). 

It  is  only  fair  to  say  that  there  are  doubts  as  to  how  far  the 
arrangements  under  the  Nova  Fundatio,  as  above  described,  were 
in  force  in  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  student  days.  If  the  older 
system  were  still  in  operation,  the  Alexander  Lunau,  who  is  men 
tioned  as  his  preceptor,  would  virtually  have  taught  our  author 
all  the  subjects  contained  in  the  curriculum  through  which  he 
passed.  As  there  is  no  proof  that  Alexander  Lunan  was  another 
Admirable  Crichton,  the  fact  of  his  doing  so  would  strengthen 
what  we  have  said  above  as  to  the  comparative  slightuess  of  the 
erudition  imparted  in  a  university  education  in  those  days.  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  speaks  of  having  "learned  the  elements  of 
his  philosophy"  in  the  University  of  Aberdeen  under  William 
Seaton  ( Works,  p.  263).  It  has  been  suggested  that  it  is  an  error 
for  John  Seaton,  and  that  it  indicates  that  our  author,  like  many 
other  students  of  King's  College,  took  a  session  or  two  at  Marischal 
College  (see  Anderson's  Fasti  Acad.  Marisc.  ii.  34,  588). 


12  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

the  list  of  graduates  in  1626,  so  that  there  are  no 
means  of  determining  from  the  records  of  King's 
College  how  many  years  he  spent  there.  For  the 
city  in  which  he  had  received  his  education  he  ever 
afterwards  had  a  high  regard.  Thus  he  says  of  it : 
"  For  honesty,  good  fashions,  and  learning,  Aberdeen 
surpasseth  as  far  all  other  cities  and  towns  in  Scot 
land,  as  London  doth  for  greatness,  wealth,  and  magni 
ficence,  the  smallest  hamlet  or  village  in  England."  l 
He  gives  unmeasured  praise  to  some  of  those 
eminent  men  who  were  associated  with  the  fame 
of  Aberdeen  University  in  what  has  been  called  its 
"  Augustan  age  " — the  first  four  or  five  decades  of 
the  seventeenth  century.  Thus,  according  to  him, 
William  Lesley,  D.D.,2  was  "  one  of  the  most  pro 
found  and  universal  scholars  then  living" — like 
Socrates  in  having  published  no  works,  but,  un 
fortunately,  unlike  that  philosopher  in  not  having 
among  his  disciples  a  Plato  and  an  Aristotle  to 
receive  their  master's  knowledge  and  transmit  it  to 
future  generations.3  Of  his  successor  in  the  prin- 
cipalship,  Dr  William  Guild,  he  says :  "  He  de- 
serveth  by  himself  to  be  remembered,  both  for  that 
he  hath  committed  to  the  press  many  good  books, 
tending  to  the  edification  of  the  soul,  and  bettering 
of  the  minde ;  and  that  of  all  the  divines  that  have 
lived  in  Scotland  these  hundred  yeers,  he  hath  been 

1  Works,  p.  395. 

2  Dr  Lesley  was  successively  Humanist,  Regent,  Sub-Principal, 
and  Principal  of  King's  College.     In  1639  he  was  deprived  of  his 
office  by  the  Covenanting  party. 

8  Works,  p.  262. 


PECUNIARY  DIFFICULTIES  13 

the  most  charitable,  and  who  bestowed  most  of  his 
own  to  publike  uses." l  At  the  time  when  he 
wrote  these  estimates  of  the  sages  at  whose  feet  he 
had  sat  as  a  student,  some  of  his  old  friends  were 
under  a  cloud,  and  he  had  to  be  careful  not  to 
compromise  them  by  his  praise.  And  so  he  says 
of  "Master  William  [?]  Seaton,"  who  had  been  his 
tutor,  "  [he  was]  a  very  able  preacher  truly,  and 
good  scholar,  and  [one]  whom  I  would  extoll  yet 
higher,  but  that  being  under  the  consistorian  lash, 
some  critick  Presbyters  may  do  him  injury,  by  pre 
tending  his  dislike  of  them,  for  being  praised  by 
him  who  idolizeth  not  their  authority." 2 

At  the  time  of  the  marriage  of  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart,  senior,  Lord  Elphinstone,  who  was  fully 
acquainted  with  the  prosperous  condition  of  his 
son-in-law's  affairs,  made  him  pledge  himself  to 
manage  his  property  so  that  it  might  descend  to 
his  heir  as  he  had  himself  received  it.  Unfortun 
ately  this  pledge  was  not  fulfilled.  Through  mis 
management  and  neglect  his  affairs  got  into  dis 
order,  and  the  later  years  of  his  life  were  troubled 
by  pecuniary  difficulties.3  His  son  says  of  him  : 

1  Works,  p.  263.     The  editor  of  the  Book  of  Bon  Accord  gives  a 
lower  estimate  of  Dr  Guild's  character  :  he  says  that  his  works  are  of 
no  literary  merit,  and  that  he  got  fame  by  his  wealth  and  ostenta 
tious  liberality.     He  was  minister  of  King- Edward  before  he  went  to 
Aberdeen ;  and  his  widow,  Catharine  Holland,  founded  a  bursary 
at  the  university  for  young  men  belonging  to  that  parish. 

2  Ibid.  p.  263  ;  see  p.  11,  note. 

8  Lord  Elphinstone  died  14th  January,  1638.  During  the  four 
preceding  years  his  son-in-law  had  "made  ducks  and  drakes"  of 
his  ancestral  possessions.  His  portrait,  which  is  still  preserved  at 
Carberry  Tower,  is  engraved  in  Sir  William  Eraser's  work,  The 


i4  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

"  Of  all  men  living  [he  was]  the  justest,  equallest, 
and  most  honest  in  his  dealings,  [and]  his  humour 
was,  rather  than  to  break  his  word,  to  lose  all  he  had, 
and  stand  to  his  most  undeliberate  promises,  what 
ever  they  might  cost ;  which  too  strict  adherence 
to  the  austerest  principles  of  veracity,  proved 
oftentimes  dammageable  to  him  in  his  negotiations 
with  many  cunning  sharks,  who  knew  with  what 
profitable  odds  they  could  scrue  themselves  in  upon 
the  windings  of  so  good  a  nature.  ...  By  the 
unfaithfulnes,  on  the  one  side,  of  some  of  his 
menial  servants,  in  filching  from  him  much  of  his 
personal  estate,  and  falsehood  of  several  chamber 
lains  and  bayliffs  to  whom  he  had  intrusted  the 
managing  of  his  rents,  in  the  unconscionable  dis 
charge  of  their  receits,  by  giving  up  one  account 
thrice,  and  of  such  accounts  many ;  and,  on  the 
other  part,  by  the  frequency  of  disadvantagious 
bargains,  which  the  slieness  of  the  subtil  merchant 
did  involve  him  in,  his  loss  came  unawares  upon 
him,  and  irresistibly,  like  an  armed  man ;  too  great 
trust  to  the  one,  and  facility  in  behalf  of  the  other, 
occasioning  so  grievous  a  misfortune,  which  never 
theless  did  not  proceed  from  want  of  knowledge  or 
abilitie  in  natural  parts,  for  in  the  business  of  other 
men  he  would  have  given  a  very  sound  advice,  and 
was  surpassing  dextrous  in  arbitrements,  upon  any 

Lords  Elphinstone.  It  gives  one  the  impression  of  a  grave, 
melancholy  man.  He  had  fourteen  sons  and  five  daughters.  It 
is  to  be  hoped  that  none  of  his  sons  and  no  other  of  his  sons-in- 
law  had  the  faculty  for  getting  into  difficulties  which  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart,  senior,  displayed. 


A  LETTER  OF  PROTECTION  15 

reference  submitted  to  him,  but  that  hee  thought  it 
did  derogate  from  the  nobility  of  his  house  and 
reputation  of  his  person,  to  look  to  petty  things  in 
matter  of  his  own  affairs." l 

One  of  the  ways  in  which  the  elder  Sir  Thomas 
succeeded  in  impoverishing  himself  and  his  family 
was  in  becoming  bail  for  people  who  absconded ;  so, 
at  least,  we  would  infer  from  an  entry  in  the 
Court-book  of  the  Burgh  of  Banff,  under  date  of 
21st  April,  1629,  in  which  we  find  that  "Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  of  Cromarty,  having  become 
caution  for  the  appearance  of  Alexander  Forbes, 
merchant  in  Balvenye,  alleged  forestaller,  and  the 
said  Alexander  not  having  appeared,  Sir  Thomas  is 
decerned  to  pay  £40  Scots  (£3,  6s.  8d.  Sterling)."2 

In  1637  we  find  that  he  was  obliged  to  appeal 
to  his  sovereign  against  the  urgency  of  his  creditors, 
and  a  Letter  of  Protection  was  issued  in  his  favour. 
It  ran  as  follows :  "  Letter  of  Protection  granted  by 
King  Charles  the  First,  under  his  great  seal,  to  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  of  Cromarty,  from  all  dilligence 
at  the  instance  of  his  creditors,  for  the  space  of  one 
year,  thereby  giving  him  a  persona  standi  in  judicio, 
notwithstanding  he  may  be  at  the  horn,  and  taking 

1  Works,  p.  336. 

2  The  offence  of  forestalling  consisted  in  buying  merchandise, 
victuals,  etc.,  before  they  appeared  in  a  fair  or  market-place  for 
sale,  or  in  taking  steps  to  raise  the  prices  of  such  things,  or  in 
dissuading  anyone  coming  to  market  from  carrying  his  goods 
thither.      The  amount  of  fine  for  a  first  offence  was,  as  above, 
£40  Scots  (or  £3,  6s.  8d.  Sterling) ;  for  a  second  offence,  100  merks 
(or  £5,  lls.  Id.  Sterling) ;  while  for  a  third  offence  it  was  forfeiture 
of  movable  goods. 


16  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

him  under  his  royal  protection  during  the  time. 
Dated  at  St  James's,  20th  March,  1637."  *  A 
somewhat  humorous  situation  is  suggested  by  this 
document.  The  creditors  might  "  put  him  to  the 
horn,"  i.e.,  according  to  the  usual  legal  form,  order 
him  in  the  king's  name  to  pay  his  debts  on  penalty 
of  being  outlawed  as  a  traitor,  while  the  king  himself 
authorised  him  to  take  no  notice  of  the  proceedings. 
In  the  same  year  we  have  intimation  of  the 
elder  Sir  Thomas's  pecuniary  misfortunes  being 
aggravated  by  domestic  strife,  for  we  find  him 
instructing  a  high  legal  functionary  to  raise  an 
action  against  his  sons,  Thomas  and  Alexander,  for 
their  unfilial  conduct.  The  charge  was  that  of 
"  putting  violent  hands  on  the  persone  of  the  said 
Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  of  Cromartie,  Knycht,  their 
father,  taking  him  captive  and  prissoner,  and 
detening  him  in  sure  firmance  within  ane  upper 
chalmer,  callit  the  Inner  Dortour,  within  his  place 
of  Cromertie,  tanquam  in  privato  carcere,  fra  the 
Mononday  to  the  Fryday  in  the  efter  none  therefter, 
committit  in  the  moneth  of  December  last,  1636." 
The  case  came  up  for  trial  before  the  Court  of 
Justiciary  on  the  19th  of  July,  and  was  postponed 
for  a  week,  when  it  was  abandoned.  The  Lords  of 
Council  had  appointed  a  commission  to  settle  all 
differences  between  the  father  and  sons,  and  on 
receiving  their  report  the  Court  dismissed  the 
case.2  We  have  no  particulars  as  to  the  causes  of 

1  M'Farlane's  Genealogical  Collections,  ii.  283.      MS.  Advocates' 
Library. 

Records  of  the  Court  of  Justiciary. 


CASTLE  OF  CROMARTIE  17 

disagreement  which  led  to  such  an  unhappy  state 
of  affairs,  hut  we  are  not  likely  to  be  far  wrong  in 
assuming  that  the  sons  wished  to  prevent  their 
father's  taking  some  legal  step  which  they  con 
sidered  would  be  detrimental  to  his  and  their 
interests.  The  affectionate  terms  in  which  our 
author  describes  his  father's  character  ten  years 
after  his  death,  in  the  words  above  quoted,  make 
us  sure  that  he  sincerely  regretted  any  wrong 
towards  him  of  which  he  may  have  been  guilty  at 
this  time. 

The  old  castle  of  Cromartie  has  now  long  dis 
appeared,  the  stones  of  which  it  was  built  having 
been  used  for  the  erection  of  a  modern  house  in 
1772,  after  the  estate  had  passed,  by  purchase, 
from  the  family  of  Urquhart  to  Mr  George  Eoss. 
It  was  a  building  of  considerable  antiquity.  In 
1470  a  royal  grant  was  made  by  James  in.  to 
William  Urquhart  of  the  Motehill,  or  Mount  of 
Cromartie,  with  permission  to  erect  on  this  a  tower 
or  fortalice.  Advantage  was  taken  of  this  per 
mission  to  fortify  the  family  mansion,  and  it  was 
converted  into  a  castle  of  considerable  strength.1 
Sir  Thomas  says  of  it :  "  The  stance  thereof  is 
stately,  and  the  house  it  selfe  of  a  notable  good 
fabrick  and  contrivance."2  An  interesting  description 

1  It  was  built  in  the  old  turreted  style,  and  defended  on  the 
south  by  a  moat  and  high  wall.  When  it  was  taken  down,  in  the 
surrounding  ground  were  found  human  skeletons,  and  urns  con 
taining  human  remains,  both  enclosed  in  graves  made  of  flags 
(Old  Slot.  Account). 

3  Works,  p.  312.     "  The  situation  appears  in  every  view  most 
delightful  "  (Pococke's  Tour,  1760). 
2 


i8  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

of  the  building  as  it  was  just  before  its  demolition 
is  given  by  Hugh  Miller.  "  Directly  behind  the 
site  of  the  old  town,"  he  says,  "  the  ground  rises 
abruptly  from  the  level  to  the  height  of  nearly  a 
hundred  feet,  after  which  it  forms  a  kind  of  table 
land  of  considerable  extent,  and  then  sweeps  gently 
to  the  top  of  the  hill.  A  deep  ravine,  with  a  little 
stream  running  through  it,  intersects  the  rising 
ground  at  nearly  right  angles  with  the  front  which 
it  presents  to  the  houses ;  and  on  the  eastern 
angle,  towering  over  the  ravine  on  the  one  side,  and 
the  edge  of  the  bank  on  the  other,  stood  the  old 
castle  of  Cromarty.  It  was  a  massy,  time-worn 
building,  rising  in  some  places  to  the  height  of  six 
storeys,  battlemented  at  the  top,  and  roofed  with 
grey  stone.  One  immense  turret  jutted  out  from 
the  corner,  which  occupied  the  extreme  point  of  the 
angle,  and  looking  down  from  an  altitude  of  at  least 
one  hundred  and  sixty  feet  on  the  little  stream, 
and  the  struggling  row  of  trees  which  sprung  up  at 
its  edge,  commanded  both  sides  of  the  declivity  and 
the  town  below."  Of  the  interior  we  are  told  by 
the  same  writer,  on  the  authority  of  an  old  woman 
who,  as  a  child,  had  lived  in  the  castle,  that  "  two 
threshers  could  have  plied  their  flails  within  the 
huge  chimney  of  the  kitchen ;  and  that,  in  the  great 
hall,  an  immense,  dark  chamber,  lined  with  oak,  a 
party  of  a  hundred  men  had  exercised  at  the  pike."1 
The  elder  Sir  Thomas  had  also  a  winter  residence 
in  Banff.2  In  the  Court-book  of  the  Burgh  of  Banff 

1  Scenes  and  Legends  of  the  North  of  Scotland,  pp.  78,  80. 

2  This  was  a  fortalice-tower,  with  gardens,  orchards,  dovecots, 


CONNEXION  WITH  BANFF  19 

we  have  the  following  entry:  "  1630,  July  21st,  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  of  Cromartie  gave  in  ane  Act  of 
the  Session  of  Banff,  geiveing  licence  to  him  to  erect 
ane  desk  and  loft  in  the  kirk  of  Banff  (seeing  he  is 
both  a  parochiner  and  resident  within  the  said  toun) 
for  his  accomodatione.  The  brethren  gave  their 
approbatione  with  express  provision  that  neither 
the  edifice  nor  lichtes  of  the  said  kirk  suld  be 
deteriorat." x 

Beyond  the  bare  fact  of  his  having  been  a 
student  in  the  University  of  Aberdeen,  we  have  no 
information  concerning  the  manner  in  which  the 
earlier  years  of  our  author's  life  were  passed,  or  the 

etc.,  in  the  south  part  of  Banff,  which  afterwards  came  into  the 
possession  of  the  Earl  of  Airlie.  The  bounds  are  thus  described  : 
"The  common  vennel  at  the  north,  the  loch  called  the  Saltlochs 
at  the  east,  the  lands  called  Little  Guishauch  at  the  south,  and  the 
road  to  Overak  at  the  west."  Shortly  before  its  demolition  it 
was  the  headquarters  of  the  Duke  of  Cumberland's  army  on 
its  passage  to  Culloden.  Besides  this  house  and  the  castle  of 
Cromartie,  the  Urquharts  occasionally  occupied  their  mansion- 
house  of  Fisherie.  This  stood  a  few  yards  to  the  south-west  of 
the  present  farmhouse  of  Mains  of  Fisherie.  It  was  taken  down 
some  sixty  years  ago.  Some  old  trees  still  stand  near  the  site  of 
the  house  and  garden. 

1  Annals  of  Banff  (New  Spalding  Club),  ii.  28.  The  old 
church  in  which  Sir  Thomas  had  a  "  desk"  or  pew,  and  a  "loft" 
or  small  gallery,  is  now  in  ruins.  Only  the  south  transept  is 
standing.  In  the  parish  church  of  King-Edward,  Aberdeenshire, 
the  handsome  silver  communion  cups  bear  an  inscription  to  the 
effect  that  they  were  a  joint  present  from  Dr  William  Guild,  the 
then  incumbent  of  the  parish,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  and  his 
uncle  John  Urquhart  of  Craigfintray.  That  the  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  here  named  is  not  our  author  but  his  father,  is  evident 
from  the  date  of  the  incumbency  of  his  fellow-donor,  Dr  Guild, 
who  was  minister  of  King-Edward  from  1608  to  1631.  The  cups 
bear  date  of  1619. 


20  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

circumstances  in  which  he  acquired  the  miscel 
laneous  erudition  which  his  writings  display.  The 
only  remark  he  makes  about  the  education  he 
received  is  to  the  effect  that  his  father  laid  out  but 
a  very  insignificant  portion  of  his  income  upon  this 
item  of  family  expenses.  Yet,  however  little  the 
expenditure  may  have  been,  Urquhart  evidently 
profited  fully  by  the  education  which  he  had 
received,  and  attained  to  something  more  than  a 
gentlemanly  acquaintance  with  some  of  the  abstruser 
departments  of  learning. 

The  special  bent  of  his  mind  in  early  years,  and 
his  love  for  study  rather  than  sport,  are  shown  in 
the  following  reminiscence  of  his  youth,  which  he 
narrates  with  his  characteristic  diffuseness.  "  There 
happening,"  he  says,  "  a  gentleman  of  very  good 
worth  to  stay  awhile  at  my  house,  who,  one  day 
amongst  many  other,  was  pleased,  in  the  deadst 
time  of  all  the  winter,  with  a  gun  upon  his  shoulder, 
to  search  for  a  shot  of  some  wild-fowl ;  and  after 
he  had  waded  through  many  waters,  taken  excessive 
pains  in  quest  of  his  game,  and  by  means  thereof 
had  killed  some  five  or  six  moor  fowls  and  partridges, 
which  he  brought  along  with  him  to  my  house,  he 
was  by  some  other  gentlemen,  who  chanced  to  alight 
at  my  gate,  as  he  entered  in,  very  much  commended 
for  his  love  to  sport ;  and,  as  the  fashion  of  most 
of  our  countrymen  is,  not  to  praise  one  without 
dispraising  another,  I  was  highly  blamed  for  not 
giving  my  self  in  that  kind  to  the  same  exercise, 
having  before  my  eys  so  commendable  a  pattern  to 
imitate ;  I  answered,  though  the  gentleman  deserved 


STUDIOUS  TASTES  21 

praise  for  the  evident  proof  he  had  given  that  day 
of  his  inclination  to  thrift  and  laboriousness,  that 
nevertheless  I  was  not  to  blame,  seeing  whilst  he 
was  busied  about  that  sport,  I  was  imployed  in  a 
diversion  of  another  nature,  such  as  optical  secrets, 
mysteries  of  natural  philosophic,  reasons  for  the 
variety  of  colours,  the  finding  out  of  the  longitude, 
the  squaring  of  a  circle,  and  wayes  to  accomplish 
all  trigonometrical  calculations  by  sines,  without 
tangents,  with  the  same  compendiousness  of  com 
putation, — which,  in  the  estimation  of  learned  men, 
would  be  accounted  worth  six  hundred  thousand 
partridges,  and  as  many  moor-fowles." 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Sir  Thomas  had 
the  best  of  the  argument.  But  he  was  not  satisfied 
with  this :  for  nothing  less  would  content  him  than 
vanquishing  his  opponent  on  his  own  ground,  as 
well  as  with  the  weapons  of  logic.  With  the  same 
lordliness  of  temper  which  had  led  him"  to  re 
capitulate  the  dignified  subjects  which  had  occupied 
his  studious  mind — the  squaring  of  the  circle  being 
but  one  of  them — he  chose  the  breaking-in  of  a 
horse  as  a  set-off  against  his  friend's  achievements 
of  the  day  before.  The  success  of  the  scientific 
student  and  the  discomfiture  of  the  mere  sportsman 
are  told  in  the  conclusion  of  the  story.  "In  the 
mean  while,"  he  says,  "  that  worthy  gentleman,  being 
wet  and  weary  after  travel,  was  not  able  to  eat  of 
what  he  had  so  much  toyled  for,  whilst  my  braine 
recreations  so  sharpened  my  appetite,  that  I  supped 
to  very  good  purpose.  That  night  past,  the  next 
morning  I  gave  six  pence  to  a  footman  of  mine,  to 


22  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

try  his  fortune  with  the  gun,  during  the  time  I 
should  disport  my  self  in  the  breaking  of  a  young 
horse ;  and  it  so  fell  out,  that  by  [the  time]  I  had 
given  my  selfe  a  good  heat  by  riding,  the  boy  re 
turned  with  a  dozen  of  wild  fouls,  half  moor  foule, 
half  partridge,  whereat  being  exceeding  well  pleased, 
I  alighted,  gave  him  my  horse  to  care  for,  and  forth 
with  entred  in  to  see  my  gentlemen,  the  most 
especiall  whereof  was  unable  to  rise  out  of  his  bed, 
by  reason  of  the  Gout  and  Sciatick,  wherewith  he 
was  seized  for  his  former  daye's  toyle."1 

In  the  early  years  of  his  manhood,  before  our 
author  felt  himself  qualified  to  take  part  in  public 
life,  he  spent  some  time  in  foreign  travel.  The 
kind  of  figure  cut  by  a  young  English  gentleman  of 
that  period  upon  the  Continent  w^e  know  from  the 
testimony  of  Portia,  for  it  can  scarcely  be  that 
much  change  had  taken  place  in  the  interval  of  a 
generation,  between  her  time  and  the  end  of  the 
first  quarter  of  the  seventeenth  century.  He  was 
generally  unversed  in  the  languages  of  the  countries 
he  visited,  and,  from  his  lack  of  Latin,  French,  or 
Italian,  was  apt  to  fail  in  understanding  the  natives, 
or  in  making  himself  understood  by  them.  He  might 
be  handsome  in  figure,  but  conversation  with  him 
was  reduced  to  the  level  of  a  dumb-show.  His 
dress  was  often  very  odd,  and  his  manners  eccentric, 
as  though  he  had  bought  his  doublet  in  Italy,  his 
round  hose  in  France,  his  bonnet  in  Germany,  and 
his  behaviour — everywhere.  A  strong  contrast  to 
him  in  the  matter  of  language  was  the  young 

1  Works,  p.  331. 


THE  SCOT  ABROAD  23 

Scotchman  of  the  period,  if  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart 
is  to  be  taken  as  at  all  an  average  specimen  of  his 
nation,  and  if  his  account  of  himself  can  be  relied 
upon.  He  says  of  himself  that  when  he  travelled 
through  France,  Spain,  and  Italy,  he  spoke  the 
languages  to  such  perfection  that  he  might  easily 
have  passed  himself  off  as  a  native  of  any  one  of 
these  countries.  Some  advised  him  to  do  so,  but 
his  patriotic  feelings  were  too  strong  to  allow  him 
to  follow  such  a  course :  "  he  plainly  told  them 
(without  making  bones  thereof),  that  truly  he  thought 
he  had  as  much  honour  by  his  own  country,  which 
did  contrevalue  the  riches  and  fertility  of  those 
nations,  by  the  valour,  learning,  and  honesty, 
wherein  it  did  parallel,  if  not  surpass  them."1 

It  is  somewhat  difficult  for  the  mind  to  grasp 
the  idea  of  a  Scotchman  in  those  days,  when  so 
many  of  the  tilings  which  we  now  associate  with 
the  nationality  were  not  in  existence — when  his 
Church  was  Episcopalian  in  constitution,  the  Shorter 
Catechism  not  yet  written  by  Englishmen  for  his 
use,  Burns  unborn,  and  distilled  spirits  not  exten 
sively  used  as  a  beverage.  We  could  scarcely  even 
know  him  by  his  costume.  For  no  self-respecting 
representative  of  that  country  would  assume  the 
Highland  garb  which  so  many  Englishmen  believe  to 
be  generally  worn  north  of  the  Tweed,  if  we  are  to 
credit  the  authoritative  statement  of  Macaulay  to 
the  effect  that  "  before  the  Union  it  was  considered 
by  nine  Scotchmen  out  of  ten  as  the  dress  of  a 
thief." 2  The  characteristics  by  which  "  a  Scot 

p.  272.  -  History  of  England,  chap.  xiii. 


24  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

abroad "  in  those  days  was  recognised,  were,  from 
some  accounts,  not  shrewdness  in  making  bargains, 
economical  habits,  indomitable  perseverance,  and 
unsleeping  caution,  but  the  pride  and  high-spirited- 
ness  which  made  him  keen  in  detecting  and  swift 
in  avenging  slights  that  might  be  cast  upon  the 
country  from  which  he  came.  So  deep  was  the 
impression  made  by  these  peculiarities  upon  foreign 
nations,  that  they  became  proverbial.  "  He  is  a 
Scot,  he  has  pepper  in  his  nose  ! " l  said  they,  some 
what  familiarly,  yet  with  a  touch  of  fear,  when  they 
noticed  the  flashing  eye,  and  the  hand  instinctively 
seeking  the  sword-hilt.  "  High-spirited  as  a  Scot !  "2 
they  exclaimed  with  admiration,  when  among  them 
selves  some  soul  was  moved  to  unwonted  courage. 
Such,  at  least,  is  the  impression  produced  upon  the 
mind  by  some  of  those  novels  in  which  Scott  and 
his  imitators  trace  the  wanderings  of  their  fellow- 
countrymen  through  European  lands  in  those 
earlier  times.  That  there  is  some  foundation  of 
truth  for  the  lofty  superstructure  is  rendered 
credible  by  the  case  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart. 
"  My  heart," 3  he  says,  "  gave  me  the  courage  for 
adventuring  in  a  forrain  climat,  thrice  to  enter 

1  "  Scotus  est,  piper  in  naso,"  Mediaeval  proverb. 

2  "  Fier  comme  un  Ecossais,"  French  proverb. 

3  It  may  be  as  well  to  warn  our  readers  at  this  point  that  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart's  vanity,  or  what  would  be  called  vanity  in  any 
other  man,  was  unbounded.     So  calm  and  unconscious  is  it,  that 
it  often  seems  to  betray  a  disordered  mind.     Those  who  seek  in 
his  estimates  of  himself  for  illustrations  of  the  grace  of  humility 
will  seek  in  vain.     They  may,  however,  find  other  things,  which, 
if  not  so  edifying,  are  far  more  amusing. 


SHAKESPEARE'S  SCOTCHMAN  25 

the  lists  against  men  of  three  severall  nations,  to 
vindicate  my  native  country l  from  the  calumnies 
wherewith  they  had  aspersed  it ;  wherein  it  pleased 
God  so  to  conduct  my  fortune,  that,  after  I  had 
disarmed  them,  they  in  such  sort  acknowledged 
their  error,  and  the  obligation  they  did  owe  me  for 
sparing  their  lives,  which  justly  by  the  law  of  arms 
I  might  have  taken,  that,  in  lieu  of  three  enemies 
that  formerly  they  were,  I  acquired  three  constant 
friends,  both  to  my  selfe  and  my  compatriots, 
whereof  by  severall  gallant  testimonies  they  gave 
evident  proofe,  to  the  improvement  of  my  country's 
credit  in  many  occasions." 2 

The  fair  critic,  whose  estimate  of  the  young 
Englishman  has  been  referred  to,  gives  her  opinion 
also  of  his  Scottish  rival;  but,  strangely  enough, 
she  observes  in  him  qualities  of  a  kind  opposite 
to  those  displayed  by  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart.  She 
was  struck  by  his  neighbourly  charity,  "for  he 
borrowed  a  box  of  the  ear  of  the  Englishman,  and 
swore  he  would  pay  him  back  again  when  he  was 
able."3  Can  it  be  that  the  words  put  into  her 
mouth  are  merely  the  ribald  wit  of  an  envious 

1  The  reader  who  has  sufficient  curiosity  and  leisure  may  compare 
with  the  above  the  account  which  his  contemporary,  Lord  Herbert 
of  Cherbury  (1581-1648),  gives  of  his  duels  in  his  Autobiography. 
That  nobleman  was  a  kind  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  in  water- 
colour,  and  his  single  combats  are  surrounded  with  a  propor 
tionately  milder  glow  of  romance.     Indeed,  they  seem  to  have  been 
generally  undertaken  in  order  to  compel  impudent  young  men  to 
give  back  pieces  of  riband  to  charming  young  ladies  from  whom 
they  had  snatched  them. 

2  Works,  p.  311. 

3  Merchant  of  Venice,  Act  I.  Scene  ii. 


26  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

Southron,  or  are  we  to  understand  that  the  spirit 
which  triumphed  over  so  many  inferiors  was  yet 
wise  enough  to  discern  when  it  stood  in  the  presence 
of  a  mightier  than  itself  ? 

How  a  young  man  on  his  travels  should  occupy 
his  time,  had  been  laid  down  in  a  little  volume 
which  had  been  published  just  before  Urquhart 
set  out  to  see  the  world  abroad.  In  this  he  might 
read  a  list  of  the  things  which  should  engage  his 
attention,  drawn  up  in  sonorous  language  by  no 
less  a  personage  than  a  late  Lord  Chancellor  of 
England — a  man  who  was  ready  to  give  advice  to 
all  his  fellow-creatures  in  all  conceivable  circum 
stances.  "  The  things,"  says  Lord  Bacon,  "  to  be 
seen  and  observed  are  :  the  courts  of  princes,  especi 
ally  when  they  give  audience  to  ambassadors ;  the 
courts  of  justice,  while  they  sit  and  hear  causes ; 
and  so  of  consistories  ecclesiastic ;  the  churches 
and  monasteries,  with  the  monuments  which  are 
therein  extant ;  the  walls  and  fortifications  of  cities 
and  towns,  and  so  the  havens  and  harbours ;  anti 
quities  and  ruins ;  libraries,  colleges,  disputations 
and  lectures,  where  any  are ;  shipping  and  navies ; 
house  and  gardens  of  state  and  pleasure  near  great 
cities;  armories,  arsenals,  magazines,  exchanges, 
burses,  warehouses ;  exercises  of  horsemanship, 
fencing,  training  of  soldiers,  and  the  like ;  comedies, 
such  whereunto  the  better  sort  of  persons  do  resort ; 
treasuries  of  jewels  and  robes,  cabinets  and  rarities ; 
and,  to  conclude,  whatsoever  is  memorable  in  the 
places  where  they  go.  ...  As  for  triumphs,  masks, 
feasts,  weddings,  funerals,  capital  executions,  and 


GLEANINGS  FROM  TRAVEL  27 

such  shows,  men  need  not  be  put  in  mind  of  them ; 
yet  they  are  not  to  be  neglected."1 

To  what  extent  Urquhart  followed  a  plan  of  this 
kind  it  is  impossible  to  say;  for,  though  his 
writings  are  so  discursive  that  we  might  expect 
to  find  in  them  allusions  to  anything  remarkable 
he  had  seen  or  heard,  he  has  very  little  to  say 
about  his  foreign  experiences.  Dr  Johnson  spoke 
with  contempt  of  an  English  peer,  who  had  extended 
his  travels  as  far  as  Egypt,  but  who  had  brought 
back  only  one  small  contribution  to  the  general 
stock  of  human  information — the  fact  that  he  had 
seen  "  a  large  serpent  in  one  of  the  pyramids  of 
Egypt."  Urquhart  was  not  quite  so  poverty- 
stricken  as  this ;  for  he  seems  to  have  observed 
examples  of  mental  infirmity,  illustrations  of  which 
he  might  doubtless  have  found  nearer  home. 

"  I  saw  at  Madrid,"  he  says,  "  a  bald-pated  fellow 
who  beleeved  he  was  Julius  Cresar,  and  therefore 
went  constantly  on  the  streets  with  a  laurel  crown 
on  his  head ;  and  another  at  Toledo,  who  would 
not  adventure  to  goe  abroad  unlesse  it  were  in  a 
coach,  chariot,  or  sedane,  for  fear  the  heavens  should 
fall  down  upon  him.  I  likewise  saw  one  in  Sara- 
gosa,  who,  imagining  himself  to  be  the  lawfull  King 
of  Aragon,  went  no  where  without  a  scepter  in  his 
hand ;  and  another  in  the  kingdome  of  Granada, 
who  beleeved  he  was  the  valiant  Cid  that  conquered 
the  Mores.  At  Messina,  in  Sicilie,  I  also  saw  a 
man  that  conceived  himself  to  be  the  great  Alex 
ander  of  Macedone,  and  that  in  a  ten  years  space  he 

1  Essays,  Civil  and  Moral,  xviii. 


28  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

should  be  master  of  all  the  territories  which  he 
subdued ;  but  the  best  is,  that  the  better  to 
resemble  him  he  always  held  his  neck  awry, 
which  naturally  was  streight  and  upright  enough ; 
and  another  at  Venice,  who  imagined  he  was 
Soveraign  of  the  whole  Adriatick  Sea,  and  sole 
owner  of  all  the  ships  that  came  from  the  Levante. 
Of  men  that  fancied  themselves  to  be  women,  beasts, 
trees,  stones,  pitchers,  glasse,  angels,  and  of  women 
whose  strained  imaginations  have  falne  upon  the 
like  extravagancies,  even  in  the  midst  of  fire  and 
the  extremes t  pains  fortune  could  inflict  upon  them, 
there  is  such  variety  of  examples,  amongst  which 
I  have  seen  some  at  Rome,  Naples,  Florence,  Genua, 
Paris,  and  other  eminent  cities,  that  to  multiply 
any  moe  [more]  words  therein,  were  to  load  your 
ears  with  old  wives'  tales,  and  the  trivial  tattle  of 
idly  imployed  and  shallow  braind  humorists." l 

He  also  tells,  though  not  in  the  same  connexion, 
of  his  having  been  witness  of  the  honour  and 
admiration  lavished  upon  one  of  his  fellow-country 
men,  Dr  Seaton,  by  the  dite  of  Parisian  society. 
"  I  have  seen  him,"  he  says,  "  circled  about  at 
the  Louvre  with  a  ring  of  French  lords  and 
gentlemen,  who  hearkned  to  his  discourse  with 
so  great  attention,  that  none  of  them,  so  long  as 
he  was  pleased  to  speak,  would  offer  to  interrupt 
him,  to  the  end  that  the  pearles  falling  from  his 
mouth  might  be  the  more  orderly  congested  in  the 
several  treasures  of  their  judgements." 2 

Part  of  his   time    abroad    was    devoted   to    the 

1  Works,  p.  364.  2  Ibid.  p.  256. 


SPOILS  OF  BOOK-HUNTING  29 

fascinating  occupation  of  book -hunting,  and  he  had 
great  pleasure  in  the  spoils  he  had  won.  When 
they  were  set  in  order  on  shelves  in  the  library  of 
the  castle  of  Cromartie,  he  looked  on  them  with  the 
joy  which  only  book-collectors  know.  "  They  were," 
he  says, "  like  to  a  compleat  nosegay  of  flowers,  which, 
in  my  travels,  I  had  gathered  out  of  the  gardens 
of  above  sixteen  several  kingdoms." l 

1  Works,  p.  402. 


CHAPTER    II 

Recalled  Home — The  Covenanting  Movement — The  Trot  of 
Turriff — Our  Author  escapes  to  England — Is  Knighted — 
Publishes  his  Epigrams — His  Father's  Embarrassments 
increase — Lesley  of  Findrassie — Death  of  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart,  senior — Our  Author  struggles  in  vain  to  keep 
his  Creditors  at  bay — Other  Wrongs  and  Losses — On  bad 
Terms  with  the  Church. 

HILE  Urquhart  was  engaged  in 
foreign  travel,  the  ecclesiast 
ical  and  political  controversies 
in  Scotland  came  to  such  a 
height,  that  it  was  evident 
that  matters  could  only  be  settled  by  an  appeal 
to  the  sword,  and,  accordingly,  he  returned  home 
to  assist  the  party  to  which  his  family  adhered. 
He,  doubtless,  like  Milton,  considered  it  disgraceful 
that,  while  his  fellow-countrymen  were  fighting  at 
home  for  liberty,  he  should  be  travelling  abroad  for 
amusement  and  intellectual  culture.  His  father, 
who  had  been  the  first  of  the  Urquharts  to  give 
up  Eoman  Catholicism  for  Protestantism,  took  the 
unpopular  side  in  the  conflict  that  agitated  the 
Church  of  Scotland.  He  was  a  staunch  Episco 
palian,  and  refused  to  accept  the  National  Covenant, 
when  those  who  had  voluntarily  and  enthusiastic- 


THE  COVENANT  31 

ally  entered  into  it  attempted  to  coerce  others 
into  following  their  example,  and  so  turned  it  into 
an  instrument  of  tyranny. 

The  determined  efforts  of  Charles  i.  and  his 
advisers  to  make  the  Church  of  Scotland  in  all 
respects  like  the  Church  of  England,  were  fiercely 
opposed,  and,  for  a  time,  the  party  which  was  resolved 
to  make  them  as  dissimilar  as  possible  prevailed. 
Episcopacy,  liturgy,  ancient  ecclesiastical  customs 
and  rites,  and  all  that  savoured  of  Prelacy  or 
Popery,  were  swept  away  by  the  rising  flood.  Yet, 
without  committing  oneself  to  the  doctrine  of 
passive  obedience,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  the 
course  of  policy  followed  by  the  Covenanters  was 
either  wise  or  scriptural.  For,  notwithstanding 
the  vehement  protestations  of  loyalty  expressed  in 
the  .National  Covenant,  armed  resistance  to  the 
royal  authority  was  not  obscurely  hinted  at  in  it. 
"-We,"  said  the  subscribers,  "  promise  and  swear 
by  the  great  name  of  the  Lord  our  God  to  continue 
in  the  profession  and  obedience  of  the  said  religion ; 
and  tKat  we  shall  defend  the  same,  and  resist  all 
those  contrary  errors  and  corruptions,  according  to 
our  vocation,  and  to  the  utmost  of  that  power  which 
God  hath  put  into  our  hands,  all  the  days  of  our 
life."  It  is  quite  possible,  it  may  be  hoped,  for  one 
to  be  in  sympathy  with  a  certain  political  party, 
and  yet  to  regret  that  the  Church  should  identify 
itself  with  that  party ;  and  it  certainly  was  not  in 
the  end  a  good  thing  for  the  cause  of  religion  that 
it  should  have  been  so  closely  allied  as  it  was  with 
party  politics  in  the  seventeenth  century.  "  My 


32  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

kingdom  is  not  of  this  world,"  said  Christ ;  "  if  My 
kingdom  were  of  this  world,  then  would  My  servants 
fight."  "  Put  up  again  thy  sword  into  his  place," 
He  said  to  St  Peter,  "  for  all  they  that  take  the 
sword,  shall  perish  with  the  sword."  It  is  difficult 
to  see  how  these  clear  and  emphatic  utterances  can 
be  made  to  harmonise  with  the  resolution  not  only 
to  use  force  in  the  correction  of  ecclesiastical  abuses 
and  religious  errors,  but  also  to  coerce  those  who  were 
not  prepared  to  follow  the  same  course  of  policy.1 

The  Covenanting  party  were  successful  beyond 
their  hopes.  The  influence  of  the  Marquis  of 
Argyle  secured  the  allegiance  to  the  cause  of  the 
Highlanders  in  the  west  of  Scotland;  while,  in 
Inverness  and  the  region  north  of  the  Moray 
Firth,  the  movement  was  enthusiastically  welcomed. 
Only  one  district  in  Scotland  held  aloof — that  of 
which  Aberdeen  was  the  centre.  The  community 
there  had  probably  but  little  sympathy  with  the 
innovations  which  Laud  was  bent  upon  bringing 
in,  but  they  had  still  less  with  the  Covenant. 
They  were  attached  to  the  modified  form  of  Episco 
pacy  which  had  now  existed  in  Scotland  since  the 

1  The  utter  chaos  which  resulted  from  the  fusion  of  religion  and 
politics  may  be  estimated  from  the  fact  that,  in  the  October  of  1650, 
there  were  in  the  narrow  bounds  of  Scotland  four  different  armies, 
at  enmity  with  each  other,  and  each  prepared  to  maintain  with 
the  sword  a  different  cause,  namely,  the  Scottish  (Presbyterian) 
army  under  General  Lesley,  for  King  and  Covenant  combined  ; 
the  English  (Independent)  army,  under  Cromwell,  which  was 
against  both ;  the  Highland  army,  under  General  Middleton, 
which  was  for  the  King  without  the  Covenant ;  and  the  Westland, 
or  ultra-Covenanting  army,  which  was  for  the  Covenant  without 
the  King. 


THE  MARQUIS  OF  HUNTLY  33 

Reformation  (with  the  exception  of  the  years  between 
1592  and  1610),  in  which  the  bishops  were  little 
more  than  permanent  moderators  of  Presbyteries, 
and  were  subject  to  the  General  Assembly,  and  in 
which  the  ritual  was  of  a  very  simple  character. 

As  a  University  and  Cathedral  city,  and  the  resid 
ence  of  a  large  number  of  wealthy  landed  proprietors, 
Aberdeen  occupied  a  position  of  great  importance 
in  Scotland,  and  was  by  no  means  under  the 
command  of  the  capital.  The  heads  of  the 
Covenanting  party  very  speedily  found  it  necessary 
to  take  steps  for  bringing  this  corner  of  the  king 
dom  into  subjection  to  themselves.  They  could 
scarcely  hope  to  succeed  in  overcoming  the  powerful 
forces  at  the  command  of  the  English  Government, 
if  they  were  to  allow  this  enemy  to  remain  undis 
turbed  in  their  rear. 

Accordingly,  at  a  very  early  stage  in  the  pro 
ceedings,  they  attempted  to  gain  over  to  their  side 
the  great  territorial  magnate  of  the  district,  the 
Marquis  of  Huntly,  who,  from  his  rank  and  wealth 
and  hereditary  loyalty  to  the  throne,  was  likely  to  be 
the  leader  of  the  King's  party  in  the  North.  Had 
they  succeeded,  they  would  virtually  have  had  the 
whole  country  at  their  back,  for  the  community 
of  Aberdeen,  and  the  few  neighbouring  lairds,  who, 
like  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  refused  to  accept  the 
Covenant,  would  not  have  dared  to  resist  the 
national  policy  by  force  of  arms.  In  the  negotia 
tions  between  the  Covenanting  leaders  and  the 
Marquis  of  Huntly,  we  have  an  illustration  of  the 
very  muddy  roads  along  which  religion  is  dragged, 

3 


34  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

when  it  forms  an  alliance  with  a  political  party. 
It  is  certainly  with  somewhat  of  a  shock  that  one 
who  is  under  the  impression  that  all  the  Cove 
nanters  were  saints  of  a  very  spiritually-minded 
type,  learns  of  the  grim  option  which  they  offered 
to  their  possible  opponent.  Colonel  Eobert  Munro, 
who  had  seen  service  iii  Germany,  was  appointed 
to  wait  upon  the  Marquis  at  Strathbogie,  and  to 
acquaint  him  with  the  resolutions  to  which  the 
Covenanters  had  come.  "  The  sum  of  his  com 
mission  to  Huntly  was,"  we  are  told,  "  that  the 
noblemen  Covenanters  were  desirous  that  he  should 
join  with  them  in  the  common  cause ;  that,  if  he 
would  do  so,  and  take  the  Covenant,  they  would 
give  him  the  first  place,  and  make  him  leader  of 
their  forces ;  and,  further,  they  would  make  his 
state  and  his  fortunes  greater  than  ever  they  were ; 
and.  moreover,  they  should  pay  off  and  discharge 
all  his  debts,  which  they  knew  to  be  about  one 
hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling ;  that  their 
forces  and  associates  were  a  hundred  to  one 
[in  comparison]  with  the  king;  and,  therefore,  it 
was  to  no  purpose  to  him  to  take  up  arms  against 
them,  for  if  he  refused  this  offer  and  declared 
against  them,  they  should  find  means  to  disable 
him  for  to  help  the  king;  and,  moreover,  they 
knew  how  to  undo  him,  and  bade  him  to  expect 
that  they  will  ruinate  his  family  and  estates." 
The  hands  were,  perhaps,  the  hands  of  Christian, 
the  voice  was  certainly  the  voice  of  Mr  Worldly 
Wiseman ! 

The  reply  of  the  Marquis  was  admirable  for  the 


ENVIRONED  WITH  COVENANTERS      35 

spirit  of  generosity  and  chivalry  which  it  breathed. 
"  To  this  proposition,"  we  are  told,  "  Huntly  gave 
a  short  and  resolute  repartee,  that  his  family  had 
risen  and  stood  by  the  kings  of  Scotland ;  and  for 
his  part,  if  the  event  proved  the  ruin  of  this  king, 
he  was  resolved  to  lay  his  life,  honours,  and  estate 
under  the  rubbish  of  the  king's  ruins."  l 

Though  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  senior,  was  a 
staunch  Episcopalian  and  a  devoted  Royalist,  the 
circumstances  iu  which  he  was  placed  forbade  his 
aiding  the  ecclesiastical  and  political  causes  which 
were  dear  to  him  with  more  than  good  wishes. 
He  was  surrounded  by  neighbours  of  -the  opposite 
party,2  and  isolated  from  those  with  whom  he  would 
gladly  have  co-operated.  Consequently,  it  remained 
for  his  eldest  son,  our  author,  who  apparently  was 
residing  at  that  time  at  Balquholly  Castle,  in 
Aberdeenshire,  where  the  adherents  of  the  Royalist 
cause  were  numerous,  to  play  a  more  heroic  part. 

Between  the  date  of  the  signing  of  the  Covenant 
and  that  of  the  meeting  of  the  General  Assembly 
in  Glasgow  in  1638,  The  Tables,  for  such  was  the 
name  by  which  the  executive  government  estab- 

1  Gordon's  Scots  A/airs,  i.  49,  50.  James  Gordon  (?  1615-1686) 
was  minister  of  Rothiemay  in  Ban  fish  ire.  His  History  of  Scots 
A/airs  from  1637  to  1641  is  one  of  the  principal  authorities  for 
this  period.  It  has  no  pretensions  to  style,  but  is  correct  and 
in  i  partial.  It  was  first  published  in  1841  by  the  Spalding  Club. 

a  Early  iu  the  year  1638  some  account  was  given  to  King 
Charles  of  the  chief  persons  in  the  north  of  Scotland  whom  he 
might  regard  as  faithful  to  his  cause.  "In  Rosse,"  it  was  said, 
"Sir  Thomas  Urqhward,  Sheriff  of  Cromerty,  with  his  following, 
but  they  [are]  environed  with  Covenanters,  ther  neighbours " 
(ibid.  i.  61), 


36  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

lished  by  the  revolutionary  party  was  designated, 
decided  to  subdue  the  city  of  Aberdeen  and  the 
neighbouring  country,  and  to  compel  the  people 
there  to  accept  the  Covenant.  Before  resorting 
to  force,  however,  an  attempt  was  made  to  persuade. 
A  committee  of  three  eminent  clergymen,  Hender 
son,  Dickson,  and  Cant,  with  the  Earl  of  Montrose 
as  president,  was  sent  north  to  deal  with  the 
somewhat  unimpressible  Aberdonians.  The  hos 
pitable  corporation  of  the  northern  city  invited  the 
visitors  to  a  banquet  of  wine,  but  their  invitation 
was  scornfully  declined.  The  deputation  "would 
drink  with  none  till  first  the  Covenant  was  sub 
scribed."  Such  incivility  was  new  in  the  history 
of  the  city,  and  a  very  satisfactory  rebuke  was 
given  to  it  by  the  materials  for  the  proposed 
banquet  being  distributed  among  the  poor.  It 
can  be  easily  imagined  that  after  this  unsatisfactory 
beginning  the  sermons  delivered  by  the  clerical 
deputation  fell  upon  unsympathetic  ears,  and  made 
but  few  converts.  "  The  commissioners  had  one 
powerful  ally  in  the  town,  in  the  person  of  Earl 
Marischal,  the  son  of  the  founder  of  the  College, 
who  had  died  in  1623;  and,  when  they  were 
refused  licence  to  preach  in  the  city  churches,  they 
adjourned  to  his  residence  at  the  north  end  of 
what  is  now  Marischal  Street.  The  mansion 
consisted  of  several  buildings  with  galleries  sur 
rounding  a  courtyard,  and  from  these  galleries  the 
three  Covenanting  ministers  held  forth  from  eight 
o'clock  in  the  morning  till  four  in  the  afternoon, 
trying  to  convince  the  people  of  the  truth  of  the 


THE  ABERDEEN  DOCTORS  37 

Covenant.  The  children  of  granite,  however, 
proved  absolutely  impervious  to  the  '  apostles,' 
\\ -hum  they  scornfully  pelted  with  mud."  1 

A  paper- war,  which  attracted  considerable  notice, 
sprang  up  between  the  commissioners  and  six  of 
the  Aberdeen  clergy — popularly  designated  in  con 
temporary  literature  as  "  the  Aberdeen  Doctors."  2 
In  this  warfare  the  representatives  of  the  Covenant 
ing  .  party  came  off  rather  badly.  "  The  position 
taken  by  the  Doctors,"  says  John  Hill  Burton, 
"  is  the  unassailable  one  of  the  dry  sarcastic 
negative.  Whatever  the  Covenant  might  be — good 
or  bad — and  whatever  right  its  approvers  had  to 
bind  themselves  to  it,  how  were  they  entitled  to 
force  it  on  those  who  desired  it  not  ?  And  when 
their  adversaries  became  eloquent  on  its  conformity 
to  Scripture  and  the  privileges  of  the  Christian 
Church,  the  Doctors  ever  went  back  to  the  same 
negative  position — even  if  it  were  so,  which  we 
do  not  admit,  yet  why  force  it  upon  us  ? " 3 

Early  in  the  following  year,  1639,  The  Tables 
resolved  to  suppress  the  northern  Malign  ants,  as 
they  were  called,  before  preparing  to  enter  on  a 
campaign  against  their  enemy  in  the  south,  and 

1  A  History  of  the  University  of  Aberdeen,  1495-1895,  by  J.  M. 
Bulloch,  p.  110. 

2  These  courageous  worthies  were  the  bishop's  son,  Dr  John 
Forbes,    Professor    of   Divinity  in   King's    College ;    Dr    Robert 
Baron,    Professor  of   Divinity,   and  minister  in   Aberdeen  ;  Dr 
Alexander  Scrogie,  minister  of  Old  Aberdeen  ;  Dr  William  Leslie, 
Principal    of    King's    College ;    and    Drs    James    Sibbald    and 
Alexander  Ross,  both  ministers  in  Aberdeen. 

3  History  of  Scotland,  vi.  235. 


38  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

thus  save  themselves  from  the  dangers  involved  in 
having  an  enemy  in  their  rear.  The  Earl  of  Mon- 
trose  went  north  at  the  head  of  a  considerable 
body  of  troops,  and  took  possession  of  Aberdeen. 
The  opponents  of  the  Covenant  fled  from  the  city, 
and  Huntly,  the  leader  of  the  Royalists,  felt  unable 
to  offer  effective  resistance.  In  spite  of  a  safe- 
conduct  granted  him  by  Montrose  on  his  coming  in 
to  a  conference,  he  was  taken  prisoner  to  Edin 
burgh  and  lodged  in  the  Castle. 

This  kidnapping  of  the  Eoyalist  chief  caused 
great  irritation ;  and  upon  a  rumour  of  the  fleet's 
coming  to  the  Firth  of  Forth,  and  of  the  Royal 
army's  approach  to  the  Scottish  border,  the 
northern  Royalists,  of  whom  our  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  was  one,  resolved  to  take  arms  on  the 
King's  side.  The  first  mention  of  our  author  in 
history  is  in  connexion  with  this  rising ;  and  the 
annalist  Spalding  relates  two  exciting  incidents  that 
occurred  in  one  week,  in  both  of  which  he  took  part. 

The  first,  which  happened  on  Friday,  the  10th  of 
May,  was  an  attempt  made  by  him  and  some  of 
the  other  Royalist  lairds  or  "  barons,"  as  they  are 
called,1  to  take  the  castle  of  Towie-Barclay,2  in 

1  See  note  on  p.  123. 

2  Towie-Barclay  is  the  name  of  an  estate  in  the  south-east  corner 
of  Turriff  parish,  Aberdeenshire,  near  Auchterless  Station,  and  four 
and  a  half  miles  south-east  of  Turriff.     The  castle  is  supposed  to 
have  been  built  in  1593.     It  remained  pretty"  per  feet  till  1792,  was 
re-roofed  in  1874,  and  retains  a  fine  baronial  hall  with  vaulted 
ceiling.     From  at  least  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century 
till  1733,  the  estate  belonged  to  the  Barclays,  one  of  whose  line 
was  the  celebrated  Russian  general,  Prince  Michael   Barclay  de 


THE  FIRST  SKIRMISH  39 

Aberclccnshirc.  It  seems  that  the  lairds  of  Delgatie 
and  Towie-Barclay  had  plundered  the  house  of 
Balquholly,1  which  was  occupied  by  our  author,  and 
carried  off  a  large  supply  of  "  muskets,  guns,  and 
carabines."  Sir  Thomas  was  not  a  man  to  submit 
quietly  to  such  an  outrage  as  this ;  and,  doubtless, 
to  his  desire  for  vengeance  was  added  a  strong  wish 
to  get  possession  of  the  firearms,  now  that  there 
was  a  good  cause  to  be  defended  and  brave  men  to 
use  the  weapons.  They  had  intended  to  surprise 
the  castle,  but  when  they  came  to  it  they  found 
the  gates  shut,  and  the  place  strongly  guarded. 
Lord  Fraser  and  the  eldest  son  of  Lord  Forbes 
had  already  known  that  an  attempt  was  to  be 
made  to  recover  the  weapons,  and  had  manned 

Tolly  (1759-1818).  In  1792  it  was  sold  to  the  governors  of 
Gordon's  Hospital,  Aberdeen,  for  £21,000.  Towie  is  a  corruption 
of  Tolly.  See  Billing's  Baronial  Antiquities,  vol.  iv. 

1  Balquholly,  now  Hatton  Castle :  a  square,  castellated  mansion 
of  1814,  with  finely  wooded  grounds,  in  Turriff  parish,  three  and  a 
quarter  miles  south-east  of  TurritF.  It  comprises  a  considerable 
fragment  of  the  ancient  baronial  castle  of  Balquholly  (Gael,  baile- 
coillc,  "town  in  the  wood"),  the  seat  of  the  Mowats  from  the 
thirteenth  century  till  1729,  when  the  estate  was  sold  to  Alexander 
Duff,  Esq.  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  must  either  have  rented  the 
house  from  the  Mowats,  or  have  obtained  leave  to  keep  arms 
there.  The  cellars  in  which  the  arms  were  probably  kept  are 
exactly  as  they  were  in  1638,  except  that  the  old  loop-holes  are 
partly  filled  up.  The  name  of  the  mansion  was  changed  to  Hatton 
Lodge  in  1745,  and  to  Hatton  Castle  in  1814,  when  the  modern  part 
was  built — Hatton  being  the  name  of  the  property  in  Auchterless, 
which  previously  belonged  to  the  Duff  family.  The  present  pro 
prietor  is  Garden  Alexander  Duff,  Esq.,  who  succeeded  to  the 
estates  in  1866.  There  is  behind  Hatton  Castle  a  small  croft 
called  Cromartie  (sue  Ordnance  Map),  probably  from  our  author's 
occupancy  of  Balquholly  or  connexion  with  it. 


40  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

the  castle  so  effectually  that  the  idea  of  storming 
it  was  out  of  the  question.  A  few  shots  were 
exchanged,  and  then  the  attacking  party  rode  away. 
The  only  casualty  was  the  death  of  a  David  Prott, 
who  was  a  servant  of  the  laird  of  Gight,1  one  of 
Urquhart's  friends.  "  This,"  the  historian  remarks, 
"  was  the  first  time  that  blood  was  drawn  here 
since  the  beginning  of  the  Covenant." 2 

Four  days  after,  a  more  serious  encounter  took 
place  between  the  two  forces.  The  Covenanters  of 
the  north  had  decided  to  assemble  in  force,  and 
fixed  upon  Turriff,  in  Aberdeenshire,  as  their  head 
quarters.  The  Eoyalists  drew  to  a  head  at  Strath- 
bogie,  some  eleven  miles  off,  and  resolved  to  disperse 
their  opponents.  The  Covenanting  party  was 
about  twelve  hundred  strong,  and  the  Eoyalists 
about  eight  hundred,  but  the  latter  had  four  brass 
cannon,  which  very  materially  strengthened  them 
as  an  attacking  force.  They  were  under  the 
leadership  of  skilful  officers,  among  whom  Arthur 
Forbes  of  Blacktown  [in  King-Edward]  is  speci 
ally  mentioned.  Sir  Thomas  himself  informs  us 
that,  "  having  obtained,  though  with  a  great  deal 
of  pain,  a  fifteen  hundreth  [hundred]  subscrip 
tions  to  a  bond  conceived  and  drawn  up  in 
opposition  of  the  vulgar  [popular]  Covenant,  he 
selected  from  amongst  them  so  many  as  he 
thought  fittest  for  holding  hand  to  [taking  in 

1  An  ancestor  of  Lord  Byron. 

2  Spalding's  Memorials,   i.    185,     Until  within  living  memory 
the  exact  site  of  Prott's  [or  Pratt's]  grave  was  pointed  out ;  but  it 
is  now  quite  obliterated  by  being  ploughed  over  repeatedly. 


THE  TROT  OF  TURRIFF  41 

hand]  the  dissolving  of  their  committees  and  un 
lawful  meetings." * 

About  ten  o'clock  on  the  night  of  Monday,  the 
13th  of  May,  they  started  for  Turriff,  inarching  in 
a  "very  quiet  and  sober  manner,"  and  by  day 
break  managed  to  steal  upon  the  village  by  an 
unguarded  path.  The  sound  of  trumpets  and  of 
drums  aroused  the  unsuspecting  Covenanters  to 
the  fact  that  they  had  been  fairly  surprised. 
"  Some  were  sleeping,  others  drinking,  and  smoak- 
ing  tobacco,  others  walking  up  and  down."  A 
few  volleys  of  musketry,  and  a  few  shots  discharged 
from  the  cannon,  served  to  disperse  them,  and  the 
village  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  attacking 
force.  It  was  but  a  slight  skirmish,2  in  which 
three  men  were  killed,  two  of  the  Covenanters, 
and  one  of  the  Eoyalists;  but  it  was  the  first 
of  the  battles  in  the  great  Civil  War,  which 
raged  for  so  many  years,  and  deluged  with  blood 

1  MS.  Epigrams  :  The  Animadversion. 

2  "Ther  fell  only  two  gentlemen  upon  the  Covenanters  syde  ; 
one  Mr  James  Stacker,  a  servant  to  the  Lord  Mucholles ;  and 
one  Alexander  Forbesse,  servante  to  Forbesse  of  Tolqhwone  :  upon 
the  Gordons  syde,  one  common  foote  souldiour  killed,    (by  the 
un.skilfullnesse  of  his  owne  comerades  fyring  ther  musketts,  as  was 
thoughte),  whom  the  Gordons  caused  burye  solemnly,  that  day, 
out  of  ane  idle  vante,  in  the  buriall  place  of  Walter  Barcley  of 
Towey,  within  the  church  of  Turreffe  ;  not  without  great  terror  to 
the  minister  of  the  place,  Mr  Thomas  Michell,  who  all  the  whyle, 
with  his  soime,  disgwysd  in  a  womans  habite,  had  gott  upp  and 
was  lurkinge  above  the  syling  of  the  churche,  whilst  the  soul- 
dionrs  wer  discharging  volleyes  of  shotte  within  the  churche,  and 
peircing  the  syling  with  ther  bulletts  in  severall  places  "  (Gordon's 
Scots  Affairs,    ii.    258).      The  reader  will    keep  in  mind   that 
Gordon  was  the  family  name  of  the  Marquis  of  Huntly. 


42  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

so  many  fruitful  plains  in  each  of  the  three  king 
doms.  On  this  account  "  the  Trot  of  Turriff,"  as 
it  was  called,  should  not  be  forgotten. 

After  this  victory,  the  Boyalists  being  masters  of 
the  village,  the  common  soldiers,  who  were  hungry 
after  their  night's  march,  plundered  the  houses  of 
those  they  thought  were  Covenanters,  and  supplied 
themselves  with  meat  and  drink.  The  greatest  loss 
fell  upon  the  minister,  Mr  Mitchell,  who,  however, 
received  very  liberal  compensation  from  Parliament 
in  the  following  year.  They  next  gathered  as  many 
of  the  inhabitants  of  Turriff  together  as  they  could 
find,  and  made  them  accept  and  subscribe  the  King's 
Covenant.1  This  device  for  securing  adherents  was, 
however,  ineffectual,  for,  a  few  weeks  later,  those 

1  This  was  originally  the  King's  Confession,  and  was  drawn  up 
in  1580  by  John  Craig,  minister  of  Holyrood  House,  and  subscribed 
by  James  vi.  and  his  household  on  28th  January,  1580-81.  It  is 
printed  at  length  in  Row's  Historic  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland.  It 
reaffirms  the  Confession  of  Faith  of  1560,  Lut  contains  also  a 
solemn  renunciation  in  great  detail  of  the  errors  of  Popery.  It 
was  approved  by  the  General  Assembly  in  April,  1581.  A 
"General  Band  [Bond]  for  Maintenance  of  the  true  Religion"  was 
added  in  1588.  The  National  Covenant  of  1637  was  an  ampli 
fication  of  the  previous  Confessions,  containing  in  addition  an 
abjuration  of  Episcopal  Church -government,  as  the  King's  Con 
fession  did  of  Popery.  In  September,  1638,  Charles  I.  issued  a 
proclamation  for  the  Scottish  people  to  subscribe  this  King's  Con 
fession  and  General  Band,  but  the  Covenanters  regarded  this  as  a 
subtle  plot  to  divide  them,  and  destroy  the  National  Covenant, 
and,  therefore,  protested  against  the  proclamation.  The  Confession 
and  Band  so  subscribed,  for  it  was  subscribed  by  some,  got  the 
name  of  the  "  King's  Covenant."  It  did  not,  of  course,  contain  the 
abjuration  of  Episcopal  Church-government.  Those  who  adhered  to 
it  were  called  Malignants  ;  while  the  name  Covenanters  was  applied 
to  those  who  subscribed  the  National  Covenant. 


ESCAPES  TO  ENGLAND  43 

who  had  sworn  to  the  King's  Covenant,  on  a 
declaration  that  they  had  acted  under  compulsion, 
were  solemnly  absolved  by  their  minister  from  all 
obligation  to  keep  it. 

The  Koyalist  leaders  now  began  to  think  of 
further  projects,  as  the  number  of  their  followers 
increased  after  the  victory  at  Turriff.  They  lost 
no  time  in  marching  upon  Aberdeen,  and  in  quarter 
ing  themselves  upon  its  inhabitants,  especially  upon 
those  who  were  known  to  belong  to  the  Covenant 
ing  party.  In  a  few  days,  however,  they  found 
their  position  untenable.  A  considerable  number 
of  their  Highland  forces  disbanded,  and  marched 
away  to  their  homes,  plundering  as  they  went — "  a 
thing,"  the  historian  remarks,  "  verye  usuall  with 
them."  The  others  retreated  from  Aberdeen,  when 
the  Covenanting  army  under  the  Earl  Marischal 
entered  the  city,  on  the  23rd  of  May,  1639. 

A  small  number  of  prominent  Eoyalists,1  of 
whom  our  Sir  Thomas  was  one,  now  resolved  to 
leave  Scotland,  where  the  cause  to  which  they 
were  devoted  was  at  such  a  low  ebb.  A  ship, 
belonging  to  one  Andrew  Findlay,  had  been  kept 
in  readiness  for  an  emergency  like  this,  and  on  it 
they  embarked  hastily,  and  sailed  away  to  England, 
to  offer  their  services  to  Charles  I.  "  Urquhart," 
says  Dr  Irving,  "  who  professes  to  have  launched 

1  Among  those  who  made  their  escape  from  Aberdeen  along  with 
Urquhart  were  Adam  B^llenden,  the  bishop  of  the  diocese  ;  Alex 
ander  Innes,  minister  of  Rothiemay  ;  Alexander  Scrogie,  a  Regent 
of  King's  College  ;  together  with  the  bishop's  son,  nephew,  and 
servant  (Spalding's  Memorials). 


44  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHAR.T 

forth  in  the  view  of  six  hundred  of  his  enemies, 
was,  within  two  days,  landed  at  Berwick,  where  he 
found  the  Marquis  of  Hamilton,  and  delivered  to 
him  a  letter  from  the  leaders  of  the  northern 
Boyalists.  He  had  likewise  undertaken  to  be  the 
bearer  of  despatches  to  the  King,  containing  the 
signatures  of  the  same  chieftains ;  and,  having 
proceeded  to  the  royal  quarters,  he  obtained  an 
audience  of  His  Majesty,  and  explained  to  him  their 
past  exertions  and  future  plans  for  his  service. 
He  appears  to  have  been  satisfied  with  his  own 
reception,  and  the  written  answer  '  gave  great  con 
tentment  to  all  the  gentlemen  of  the  north  that 
stood  for  the  king.'  "  1 

In  one  of  our  author's  tracts,  published  in  1652, 
we  have  a  pedigree  of  the  family  of  Urquhart. 
Under  his  own  name  he  states  that  "he  was 
knighted  by  King  Charles,  in  Whitehall  Gallery, 
in  the  yeer  1641,  the  7  of  April."  In  the  same 
year  he  first  made  his  appearance  as  an  author  in 
the  publication  of  his  three  books  of  Epigrams, 
Moral  and  Divine,  of  which  a  fuller  notice  will  be 
found  in  a  later  chapter.  Let  us  now  for  a  little 
leave  Sir  Thomas,  happy  in  his  sovereign's  favour, 
his  head  encircled  with  the  ivy- wreath  that  clothes 
the  brows  of  learned  poets,  and  his  eye  fixed  upon 
a  prominent  crag  of  Mount  Parnassus  as  hence 
forth  specially  his  own,  and  turn  to  his  father, 
whose  golden  dreams  have  long  since  fled  away, 
and  left  him  but  the  dreariest  and  shabbiest  prose. 

1  Lives  of  the  Scottish  Writers,  vol.  i. ;  Urquhart's  MS.  Epigrams  : 
The  Animadversion. 


CIVIL  WAR  A  RELIEF  45 

For  thirty-six  years  the  elder  Sir  Thomas  had 
been  in  possession  of  the  ample  estates  of  the 
house  of  Urquhart,  and  during  nearly  the  whole  of 
this  time  the  country  had  been  at  peace,  so  that 
he  had  no  one  but  himself  to  blame  for  the  im 
poverished  condition  in  which  they  were  when  his 
son  received  them.  The  latter  described  the  state 
of  matters  in  the  following  terms :  "  All  he  be 
queathed  unto  me,  his  eldest  Son,  in  matter  of 
worldly  means,  was  twelve  or  thirteen  thousand 
pounds  sterling  of  debt,  five  brethren  all  men,  and 
two  sisters  almost  manageable,  to  provide  for,  and 
lesse  to  defray  all  this  burden  with  by  six  hundred 
pounds  sterling  a  year,  although  [i.e.  even  if]  the 
warres  had  not  prejudiced  me  in  a  farthing,  then 
[than]  what  for  the  maintaining  of  himself  alone  in 
a  peaceable  age  he  inherited  for  nothing." l 

So  exasperated  was  the  old  man  by  the  impor 
tunity  of  his  creditors,  that  at  last,  we  are  told,  the 
sound  of  one  of  their  voices  was  in  his  ears  as  "  the 
hissing  of  a  basilisk."  The  great  Civil  War  itself, 
which  brought  calamity  and  grief  to  so  many 
homes,  was  almost  welcomed  by  him  for  the 
relief  it  brought  him  from  the  "  homings "  and 
"  apprisings,"  and  other  legal  processes,  which 
threatened  him  in  times  of  peace.  "  The  dis 
orderly  troubles  of  the  land,"  says  his  son  of  him, 
"  being  then  far  advanced,  though  otherways  he  dis 
liked  them,  were  a  kind  of  refreshment  to  him,  and 
intermitting  relaxation  from  a  more  stinging  dis- 
quietnesse.  For  that  our  intestin  troubles  and  dis- 
1  Works,  p.  340. 


46  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

tempers,  by  silencing  the  laws  for  a  while,  gave  some 
repose  to  those  that  longed  for  a  breathing  time, 
and  by  hudling  up  the  terms  of  Whitsuntide  and 
Martimass,  which  in  Scotland  are  the  destinated 
times  for  payment  of  debts,  promiscuously  with  the 
other  seasons  of  the  year,  were  as  an  oxymel  julip 
wherewith  to  indormiat  them  in  a  bitter  sweet 
security."  l 

The  most  importunate  of  all  the  creditors,  or, 
as  Urquhart  describes  them,  "  the  usurious  cor 
morants,"  who  harassed  the  unhappy  proprietor  of 
Cromartie,  was  a  certain  Robert  Lesley  of  Findrassie. 
He  held  a  mortgage  upon  the  estate,  and  though  he 
was  indebted  to  its  owner  for  many  acts  of  kind 
ness,  he  had  been  the  first  to  foreclose  upon  the 
property,  and  had  persuaded  other  creditors  to  join 
with  him  in  taking  this  step.  The  annoyance  and 
mortification  caused  by  these  proceedings  hastened 
Sir  Thomas's  death.  Two  days  before  that  event, 
animated  by  regret  for  the  wrong  he  had  done  his 
heir  by  the  impoverishment  of  the  family  property, 
he  assembled  his  younger  children,  and  bound 
them,  "  under  pain  of  his  everlasting  curse  and 
execration,"  to  do  all  in  their  power  to  help  their 
elder  brother.  The  terms  of  this  extraordinary 
bond,  his  son  tells  us,  were  these :  "  to  assist, 
concur  with,  follow,  and  serve  me,  to  the  utmost 
of  their  power,  industry,  and  means,  and  to  spare 
neither  charge  nor  travel,  though  it  should  cost 
them  all  they  had,  to  release  me  from  the  un 
deserved  bondage  of  the  domineering  creditor,  and 
1  Works,  p.  346. 


ATTEMPT  TO  REDUCE  DEBTS          47 

extricate  my  lands  from  the  impestreinents  wherein 
they  were  involved ;  yea,  to  bestow  nothing  of  their 
owne  upon  no  other  use,  till  that  should  be  done  ; 
and  all  this  under  their  own  handwriting,  secured 
with  the  clause  of  registration  to  make  the  oppro- 
brie  the  more  notorious  in  case  of  failing,  as  the 
paper  itself,  which  I  have  in  rctentis,  together  with 
another  signed  to  the  same  sense,  by  my  mother, 
and  also  my  brothers  and  sisters,  Dunbugar  [Dun- 
lugas]1  only  excepted,  will  more  evidently  testifie."2 
Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  the  elder,  died  in  April  [?], 
1642,  after  a  long  and  lingering  illness.3 

Our  author  now  returned  home  to  enter  on  pos 
session  of  his  estates,  and  to  attempt  to  reduce  to 
something  like  order  the  chaos  in  which  the  family 
affairs  were.  He  resolved  to  commit  the  manage 
ment  of  his  property  to  trustees,  who,  after  paying 
his  mother's  jointure,  were  to  devote  the  whole  of 
the  rest  of  the  rents  to  the  reduction  of  debt.  He 
himself  went  to  live  on  the  Continent,  in  the  hope 

1  Dunlugas  is  in  the  parish  of  Alvah,  close  by  the  river  Deveron, 
on  the  east  side. 

2  Works,  p.  341. 

1  "He  was  alive  last  Whitsuntide!  said  the  coachman.  .  .  . 
Whitsuntide !— alas  !  cried  Trim.  .  .  .  What  is  Whitsuntide, 
Jonathan,  or  Shrovetide,  or  any  tide  or  time  past,  to  this  ! " 
(Tristram  Shandy,  vol.  v.  chap.  vii.). 

Our  author  states  (Works,  p.  341)  that  "his  father's  death 
occurred  in  August  in  the  year  1642,  some  four  yeares  after  the 
hatching  of  the  Covenant."  He  is,  however,  very  careless  in  details 
of  fact,  and  is  in  error  concerning  this  date.  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart, 
senior,  is  termed  "umqll"  (i.e.  "the  late")  in  the  Burgess  Roll  of 
Banff,  on  14th  June,  1642  (Annals  of  Banff,  ii.  418).  Perhaps 
the  date  was  April  instead  of  August.  The  Covenant  was  signed 
1st  March,  1638. 


48  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

that  in  a  few  years  he  would  be  able  to  return 
home  and  enjoy  his  inheritance  unencumbered  by 
debt.  These  proceedings,  with  the  disappointing 
results  that  followed  them,  are  related  in  a  pas 
sage  of  his  Logopandecteision,  which  is  worth  quot 
ing.  "  Immediately  after  my  father's  decease,"  he 
says,  "  for  my  better  expedition  in  the  discharge  of 
those  burthens,  having  repaired  homewards,  I  did 
sequestrate  the  whole  rent  (my  mother's  joynture 
excepted)  to  that  use  only,  and,  as  I  had  done 
many  times  before,  betook  myself  to  my  hazards 
abroad,  that  by  vertue  of  the  industry  and  diligence 
of  those  whom,  by  the  advise  and  deliberation  of 
my  nearest  friends,  I  was  induced  to  intrust  with  my 
affairs,  the  debt  might  be  the  sooner  defrayed,  and 
the  ancient  house  releeved  out  of  the  thraldome  it 
was  so  unluckily  fain  into.  But  it  fell  out  so  far 
otherwayes,  that  after  some  few  years  residence 
abroad,  without  any  considerable  ex  pence  from 
home,  when  I  thought,  because  of  my  having  morti 
fied  and  set  apart  all  the  rent  to  no  other  end  then 
[than]  the  cutting  off  and  defalking  of  my  father's 
debt,  that  accordingly  a  great  part  of  my  father's 
debt  had  been  discharged,  I  was  so  far  disappointed 
of  my  expectation  therin,  that  whilst,  conform  to 
the  confidence  reposed  in  him  whom  I  had  intrusted 
with  my  affairs,  I  hoped  to  have  been  exonered 
and  relieved  of  many  creditors,  the  debt  was  only 
past  over  and  transferred  from  one  in  favours  of 
another,  or  rather  of  many  in  the  favours  of  one, 
who,  though  he  formerly  had  gained  much  at  my 
father's  hands,  was  notwithstanding  at  the  time  of 


EGYPTIAN  BONDAGE  49 

his  decease  none  of  his  creditors,  nor  at  any  time 
mine  ;  my  Egyptian  bondage  by  such  means  remain 
ing  still  the  same,  under  task  masters  different  only 
in  name,  and  the  rents  neverthelesse  taken  up  to  the 
full,  to  my  no  small  detriment  and  prejudice  of  the 
house  standing  in  my  person.  The  aime  of  some 
of  those  I  concredited  [committed]  my  weightiest 
adoes  [affairs]  unto,  being,  as  is  most  conspicuously 
apparent,  that  I  should  never  reap  the  fruition  nor 
enjoyment  of  any  portion,  parcell,  or  pendicle  of 
the  estate  of  my  predecessors,  unlesse  by  my  fortune 
and  endeavours  in  forrain  countries,  I  should  be 
able  to  acquire  as  much  as  might  suffice  to  buy  it, 
as  we  say,  out  of  the  ground.  And  verily,"  he 
concludes,  "  though  not  in  relation  to  these  ignoble 
and  unworthy  by-ends,  it  was  my  purpose  and 
resolution  to  have  done  so,  which  assuredly,  had 
not  the  turbulent  divisions  of  the  time  been  such 
as  to  have  crossed  and  thwarted  the  atchieve- 
ments  of  more  faisible  projects,  I  would  have 
accomplished  two  or  three  severall  ways  ere 
now." l 

One  is  inclined  to  wonder  what  the  two  or 
three  lucrative  undertakings  were,  which  this  High 
land  gentleman  had  in  view  when  he  spoke  in  this 
way  of  the  practicability  of  making  enough  money 
to  purchase  back  his  estates.  "  What  song  the 
syrens  sang,"  says  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  "  or  what 
name  Achilles  assumed  when  he  hid  himself  among 
women,  though  puzzling  questions  are  not  beyond 
all  conjecture."  But  even  as  wise  a  man  as  Sir 

1  Works,  pp.  346,  347. 
4 


50  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

Thomas  Browne  might  well  pause  before  venturing 
on  a  conjecture  in  connection  with  this  matter. 

In  one  of  the  official  records  of  the  time,1  there 
is  an  entry  which  shows  that  Urquhart  was  resi 
dent  in  London  in  1644.  On  the  9th  May  of  that 
year  he  is  assessed  for  a  forced  loan  at  £1000; 
and,  on  the  16th  of  the  same  month,  there  is  an 
order  for  him  to  be  brought  up  in  custody  to  pay 
his  assessment;  while,  on  the  21st,  it  is  noted  that 
his  assessment  is  "  respited  till  he  shall  speak  with 
the  Scottish  committee  and  take  further  orders,  he 
engaging  to  appear  whenever  required."  He  no 
doubt  proved  to  the  committee  that  he  had  no 
property  in  London,  but  was  only  a  sojourner  there, 
and  was  accordingly  virtually  discharged.  His 
place  of  residence  in  London  at  this  time  was 
Clare  Street,2  then  newly  erected  upon  St  Clement's 

1  Calendar  of  Proceedings  of  Committee  for  Advances  of  Moneys- 
Taxes,  i.  381. 

2  The  neighbourhood  is  now  a  cluster  of  narrow,  dirty  streets 
and  passages,    lined   chiefly  with   butchers'  and  grocers'  shops, 
which  overflow  into  the  adjacent  streets,  and  are  supplemented  by 
fishmongers'  and  miscellaneous  stalls  and  barrows — a  crowded, 
noisy,    and    unsavoury  place    on    Saturday    nights.      In   1640, 
Charles  i.  granted  his  licence  to  Thomas  York,  his  executors,  etc., 
to    erect  as  many  buildings  as  they   thought  proper  upon   St 
Clement's  Inn  Fields,  the  inheritance  of  the  Earl  of  Clare.     He 
issued  another  licence  in  1642,  permitting  Gervase  Holies,  Esq.,  to 
make  several  streets  of  the  width  of  thirty,  thirty-four,  and  forty 
feet.     These  streets  still  retain   the   names  and   titles   of  their 
founders — Clare  Street,  Denzil  Street,  and  Holies  Street.     Clare 
Street  is  somewhat  rich  in  interesting  associations.     There  is  a 
letter  of  Steele's  to  his  wife,  dated  from  the  Bull  Head  Tavern  in 
this  street,  24th  August,  1710.    It  seems  likely  that  he  was  hiding 
there.     Mrs  Bracegirdle,  a  celebrated  actress  of  that  time,  "was 
in  the  habit  of  going  into  that  neighbourhood,  and  giving  money 


A  BURDENED  ESTATE  51 

Inn  Fields,  on  the  east  side  of  Drury  Lane,  and 
called  after  John  Holies,1  second  Earl  of  Clare, 
whose  town-house  was  near  by. 

Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  now  resolved  to  take  the 
management  of  his  own  affairs,  and,  if  possible,  so 
to  conduct  matters  as  to  secure  subsistence  for 
himself,  as  well  as  satisfaction  for  his  father's 
creditors;  and,  in  the  year  1645,  he  went  to  live 
in  the  ancestral  home  at  Cromartie.  His  rental 
still  amounted  to  £1000  Sterling  a  year,  which 
represents  about  £7000  in  our  time,  but  a  debt  of 
twelve  or  thirteen  years'  income  was  a  very  serious 
burden  upon  such  an  estate. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  entanglement 
in  which  the  financial  affairs  of  the  house  of 
Urquhart  were  involved  became  none  the  less  con 
fused  and  confusing  when  the  gallant  knight  applied 
himself  to  unravel  it.  That  was  scarcely  a  task  for 
which  he  was  fitted.  Much  more  appropriate 
would  it  have  been  for  him  to  draw  the  sword,  like 
Alexander,  and  cut  the  Gordian  knot.  Perhaps  his 
failure,  as  in  another  well-known  case,2  is  partly  to 

to  the  poor  basket-women,  insomuch  that  she  could  not  pass 
without  having  thankful  acclamations  from  people  of  all  degrees." 
It  was  to  Clare  Street  and  Clare  Market  that  Jack  Sheppard  went, 
after  his  escape  from  Newgate  :  he  there  bought  a  butcher's  frock 
and  woollen  apron,  which  he  was  wearing  when  captured  at 
Finchley.  Here  was  Johnson's  Hotel,  celebrated  for  upwards  of 
seventy  years  for  its  d  la  mode  beef.  Isaac  Bickerstaffe,  too,  lived 
in  this  street. 

1  John  Holies,  created  Baron  Hough  ton  of  Hough  ton,  in  the 
county  of  Nottingham,  in  1616,  and  Earl  of  Clare  in  1624. 

2  "If  I  had  known  that  young  man  [Uriah  Heep],"    said  Mr 

LT,  "at  the  period  when  my  difficulties  came  to  a  crisis,  all 


52  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

be  attributed  to  his  not  having  had  a  legal  adviser, 
familiar  with  the  intricacies  of  the  law,  and  able  to 
prevent  his  creditors  getting  more  than  their  pound  of 
flesh,  if  not  to  save  even  that  from  them.  Charles  i. 
once  said  that  he  knew  as  much  law  as  a  gentleman 
ought  to  know.  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  seems  to  have 
had  a  somewhat  similar  acquaintance  with  the  same 
subject,  and  this,  like  that  of  the  person  mentioned 
in  the  foot-note  on  the  preceding  page,  was  probably 
acquired  "as  a  defendant  on  civil  process."  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  he  "made  an  effort"  more  than  once. 
In  vain  did  he  have  recourse  to  "  pecunial  charms, 
and  holy  water  out  of  Plutus'  cellar." 1  The  charms 
were  indeed  potent,  but  they  were  not  applied  long 
enough ;  the  holy  water  was  composed  of  the  right 
ingredients,  but  there  was  too  little  of  it  in  the 
cellars  at  Cromartie.  He  could  not,  with  all  his 
struggles,  succeed  in  curing  what  the  Limousin 
scholar  in  Rabelais  calls  "  the  penury  of  pecune  in 
the  marsupie  "  [i.e.  the  want  of  money  in  the  purse] 
—that  complaint  which  is  so  mortifying  to  the  pride 
of  any  gentleman,  but  which  is  specially  exasperat 
ing  to  a  Highland  gentleman.  His  cares  and  dis 
tresses,  or,  as  he  calls  them,  his  "  solicitudinary  and 
luctif  erous  discouragements,"  were  enough  "  to  appall 
the  most  undaunted  spirits,  and  kill  a  very  Paphla- 
gonian  partridge,  that  is  said  to  have  two  hearts." 2 

I  can  say  is,  that  I  believe  my  creditors  would  have  been  better 
managed  than  they  were"  (David  Copperficld,  chap.  xvii.). 

1  Works,  p.  347. 

2  Ibid.  p.   346.     For  the  authority  on  which  this  interesting 
ornithological  statement  is  made  the  reader  will  overhaul  his  Pliny 
(H.  N.  xi.  chap.  3). 


IMPORTUNATE  CREDITORS  53 

Probably  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  was  harshly  dealt 
with  by  his  father's  creditors,  though,  of  course,  it  is 
possible  that  iu  the  story  as  told  by  them  they 
would  appear  in  a  more  favourable  light.  They 
had  to  do  with  a  man  who  was  impractical  and 
fantastical  in  the  highest  degree,  and  morbidly 
sensitive  in  all  matters  that  seemed  to  lower  his 
dignity  or  to  cast  a  slur  upon  his  honour.  His 
brains  seethed  with  plans  for  the  improvement  of 
agriculture,  trade,  and  education,  but  none  of  these 
did  the  importunity  of  his  creditors  permit  him  to 
carry  into  effect.  "  Truly  I  may  say,"  he  complains, 
"  that  above  ten  thousand  severall  times  I  have  by 
these  flagitators  been  interrupted  for  money,  which 
never  came  to  my  use,  directly  or  indirectly  one 
way  or  other,  at  home  or  abroad,  any  one  time 
whereof  I  was  busied  about  speculations  of  greater 
consequence  then  [than]  all  that  they  were  worth 
in  the  world ;  from  which,  had  I  not  been  violently 
pi  tick 'd  away  by  their  importunity,  I  would  have 
emitted  to  publick  view  above  five  hundred  several 
treatises  on  inventions  never  hitherto  thought  upon 
by  any." l  Before  his  imagination  there  floated  the 
dream  of  what  he  might  have  been,  and  his  mind 
alternated  between  passionate  remonstrances  against 
his  unfortunate  circumstances  and  delusive  hopes 
and  anticipations. 

The  editor  of  the  Maitland  Club  edition  of 
Urquhart's  works  truly  remarks  that  there  is  a 
melancholy  earnestness,  almost  approaching  in 
sanity,  in  his  wild  speculations  on  what  he  might 

1  Works,  p.  326. 


54  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

have  done  for  himself  and  his  country  but  for  the 
weight  of  worldly  incumbrances.  "  Even  so,"  he 
says,  "  may  it  be  said  of  myself,  that  when  I  was 
most  seriously  imbusied  about  the  raising  of  my 
own  and  countrie's  reputation  to  the  supremest 
reach  of  my  endeavours,  then  did  my  father's 
creditors,  like  so  many  millstones  hanging  at  my 
heels,  pull  down  the  vigour  of  my  fancie,  and 
violently  hold  that  under,  what  [which]  other  wayes 
would  have  ascended  above  the  sublimest  regions  of 
vulgar  conception."1 

So  convinced  was  he  that  the  schemes  and  in 
ventions  with  which  his  thoughts  were  occupied 
were  of  immense  value,  that  he  declared  that  he 
ought  to  have  the  benefit  of  that  Act  of  James  m. 
(36th  statute  of  his  fifth  Parliament)  which  pro 
vides  that  the  debtor's  movable  goods  be  first 
"  valued  and  discussed  before  his  lands  be  apprised." 
He  claimed  this  as  a  right  from  the  State ;  "  and 
if,"  he  says,  "  conform  to  the  aforesaid  Act,  this  be 
granted,  I  doe  promise  shortly  to  display  before  the 
world,  ware  of  greater  value  then  [than]  ever  from 
the  East  Indias  was  brought  in  ships  to  Europe." 2 
But  unfortunately  the  Philistines  were  too  strong 
for  him. 

To  these  pecuniary  difficulties  were  added  annoy 
ances  and  wrongs,  which  the  meekest  of  mankind, 
among  whom  Sir  Thomas  is  not  to  be  reckoned, 
would  have  found  it  hard  to  bear. 

Mention  has  already  been  made  of  Kobert  Lesley 
of  Findrassie,  the  most  relentless  of  all  the  creditors, 

1  Works,  p.  328.  2  IMd.  p.  325. 


LESLEY  OF  FINDRASSIE  55 

who,  according  to  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  account 
of  matters,  made  life  bitter  for  him,  and  defeated  his 
many  schemes  for  the  benefit  of  the  human  race. 
The  injurious  proceedings  of  this  man  form  a  sub 
ject  which  our  author  can  never  leave  for  any 
length  of  time,  and  to  which  it  is  necessary  for  his 
biographer  to  revert  occasionally.  His  unfortunate 
debtor  found  a  certain  grim  satisfaction,  as  well  as 
an  opportunity  for  gratifying  his  taste  for  genea 
logical  research,  in  tracing  Robert's  descent  from  a 
celebrated  murderer — that  Norman  Lesley  whose 
hands  were  dipped  in  the  blood  of  Cardinal  Beaton. 
It  is  certain,  however,  that  there  was  no  real 
foundation  for  this  opinion.1 

Unless  Robert  Lesley  is  a  much-maligned  man, 
his  conduct  towards  the  son  of  his  patron  was  both 
rapacious  and  ungrateful.  On  one  occasion  at  least 
he  acted  in  a  very  high-handed  manner.  "  With 
all  the  horse  and  foot  he  was  able  to  command," 
says  Sir  Thomas,  "  he  came  in  a  hostile  manner  to 
take  possession  of  a  farm  of  mine  called  Ardoch ; 
unto  which  ...  he  had  no  more  just  title  then 
[than]  to  the  town  of  Jericho  mentioned  in  the 
Scriptures ;  and  at  the  offer  of  such  an  indignity  to 
our  house,  some  of  the  hot-spirited  gentlemen  of 
our  name  would  even  then  have  taken  him,  with  his 
three  sons,  bound  them  hand  and  foot,  and  thrown 

1  Norman  Lesley,  Master  of  Rothes,  eldest  son  of  George,  fifth 
Earl  of  Rothes,  died  without  issue  in  1554.  This  disposes  of  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart's  statement.  The  Lesleys  of  Findrassie  them 
selves  claimed  to  be  descended  from  Robert,  the  fourth  son  of  Earl 
George.  See  Scotch  Peerage  Law,  by  J.  Riddell,  p.  190. 


56  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

them  within  the  flood-mark,  into  a  place  called  the 
Yares  of  Udol,  there  to  expect  the  coming  of  the 
sea  in  a  full  tide,  to  carry  him  along  to  be  seized 
in  a  soil  of  a  greater  depth,  and  abler  to  restrain  the 
insatiableness  of  his  immense  desires,  then  [than] 
any  of  my  lands  within  the  shire  of  Cromartie." 
Sir  Thomas,  according  to  his  own  account,  hindered 
the  perpetration  of  this  violence,  and  gave  his 
enemy  and  those  who  accompanied  him  "  a  pass  and 
safe-conduct  to  their  own  houses."1 

Yet  so  far  was  the  caitiff  creditor  from  being 
touched  by  this  proof  of  magnanimity  on  the  part 
of  his  debtor,  that  he  applied  himself  with  renewed 
vigour  to  the  concoction  of  schemes  for  his  total 
destruction.  So  at  least  Sir  Thomas  would  have 
us  believe.  On  one  occasion  Lesley  tried  to  inveigle 
him  to  Inverness,  with  the  intention  of  having  him 
arrested  at  the  suit  of  an  accomplice — James 
Sutherland,  "  Tutor  of  Duffus  " — and  kept  in  dur 
ance  until  he  had  satisfied  all  his  enemy's  demands. 
On  another  occasion  Lesley  managed  to  get  a  troop 
of  horse  quartered  upon  the  tenants  of  Cromartie, 
till,  says  our  author, "  I  should  transact  for  a  sum, 
of  money  to  be  paid  to  his  son-in-law ;  which  verily 
was  the  greater  part  of  his  portion."  '*  In  addition 
to  this,  a  garrison  was  stationed  for  nearly  a  year 
in  the  castle  of  Cromartie,  where  they  conducted 
themselves  in  a  way  calculated  to  wound  and 
humiliate  the  proud  spirit  of  its  proprietor.  Among 
other  wrongs  and  losses  inflicted  upon  him  was 
the  sequestration  of  his  library,  which  he  had 
1  Works,  p.  379.  2  Ibid.  p.  380. 


LESLEY  DEFENDS  HIMSELF     57 

collected  with  such  pains.  Sir  Thomas  says  that 
he  sought  eagerly  to  be  allowed  to  purchase  back 
the  precious  volumes,  but  was  hindered  by  the 
spitefulness  and  indifference  of  those  to  whom  he 
made  application,  and  was  ultimately  able  to  secure 
only  a  few  of  them,  which  had  been  stolen  from 
the  collection  and  dispersed  through  the  country.1 

In  an  amusing  passage  in  the  Logopandecteision, 
our  author  gives  us  a  specimen  of  the  peculiarities 
of  speech  which  distinguished  his  arch-enemy, 
Lesley  of  Findrassie.  As  we  read  it  we  seem  to 
hear  the  very  tones  in  which  he  enunciated  or 
defended  his  "  felonious  little  plans."  "  Several 
gentlemen  of  good  account,"  he  says,  "  and  others  of 
his  familiar  acquaintance,  having  many  times  very 
seriously  expostulated  with  him  why  he  did  so  im 
placably  demean  himself  towards  me,  and  with  such 
irreconciliability  of  rancor,  that  nothing  could  seem 
to  please  him  that  was  consistent  with  my  weal, 
his  answers  most  readily  were  these :  '  I  have  (see 
ye  ?)  many  daughters  (see  ye  ?)  to  provide  portions 
for,  (see  ye  ?),  and  that  (see  ye  now  ?)  cannot  be  done, 
(see  ye  ?)  without  money ;  the  interest  (see  ye  ?)  of 
what  I  lent,  (see  ye  ?),  had  it  been  termely  [regu 
larly]  payed,  (see  ye  ?),  would  have  afforded  me  (see 
ye  now  ?)  several  stocks  for  new  interests ;  I  have 

1  One  of  these  volumes  containing  the  signature  of  our  author  is 
still  in  existence.  It  is  a  copy  of  Arthur  Johnston's  Latin  poems, 
printed  at  Aberdeen  by  Raban,  1632,  and  is  in  the  possession  of 
the  Rev.  J.  B.  Craven,  Kirkwall.  It  is  a  very  fragile  volume. 
The  signature  in  this  volume,  and  two  othere,  attached  to  legal 
documents,  are  all  that  are  known  to  be  extant.  We  give  a 
fac-simile  of  one  of  the  latter  on  p.  iv. 


58  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

(see  ye  ?)  apprized l  lands  (see  ye  ?)  for  these  summes 
(see  ye  ?)  borrowed  from  me,  (see  ye  now  ?),  and 
(see  ye  ?)  the  legal  [time]  being  expired,  (see  ye 
now  ?),  is  it  not  just  (see  ye  ?)  and  equitable  (see 
ye  ?)  that  I  have  possession  (see  ye  ?)  of  these  my 
lands,  (see  ye  ?),  according  to  my  undoubted  right, 
(see  ye  now  ?)  ? '  With  these  over-words  of  '  see  ye ' 

1  "Apprizing"  is  a  legal  process  to  which  Sir  Thomas  several 
times  refers  with  great  horror,  and  it  may  be  as  well  to  explain  to 
our  readers  what  it  was,  for  fortunately  it  is  now  a  thing  of  the  past. 
It  was  for  long  the  only  method  of  attaching  a  debtor's  heritable 
property.  By  the  Act,  1469,  c.  36,  when  payment  of  a  debt  could 
not  be  obtained  out  of  the  debtor's  movables  (including  rent), 
"the  King's  letters  might  be  obtained,  under  which  a  debtor's  land 
might  be  sold  by  the  Sheriff  to  the  amount  of  his  debts,  and  the 
creditor  paid  out  of  the  proceeds.  If  within  six  months  no  pur 
chaser  could  be  found,  a  portion  of  the  land  equal  to  the  debt  was 
to  be  apprised  by  thirteen  men  chosen  by  the  Sheriff,  and  the 
portion  apprised  by  them  was  to  be  made  over  to  the  creditor." 
The  debtor  could  redeem  within  seven  years.  This  procedure  at 
first  took  place  in  the  head  burgh  of  the  shire,  where  the  jury 
probably  knew  enough  to  make  a  fair  valuation  of  the  land.  But 
after  a  time  the  proceedings  often  took  place  in  Edinburgh,  where  the 
jury  had  no  special  knowledge,  and  might  be  packed  by  the  creditor. 
So  that  large  estates  were  sometimes  carried  off  in  payment  of 
trifling  debts.  The  appriser  at  once  entered  into  possession,  and 
was  not  obliged  to  account  for  the  rents  (until  1621,  c.  6).  It  was 
thus  a  powerful  engine  of  oppression.  If  A.  wished  B.'s  land,  and 
B.  owned  land  and  nothing  else,  it  was  possible  for  A. ,  if  he  could 
only  get  B.  as  his  debtor  even  in  a  small  sum,  so  to  work  matters 
that  for  the  debt  he  might  apprise  all  B.'s  land.  Being  then  in 
right  of  B.'s  rents,  he  had  B.  completely  in  his  power,  and  B.  had 
no  resources  for  gathering  together  the  amount  of  the  debt  which 
he  must  pay  in  order  to  redeem  his  lands  within  the  seven  years 
allowed.  The  law  was  much  relaxed  by  the  Act,  1621,  c.  6,  but  the 
above  will  enable  us  to  understand  how  an  unscrupulous  creditor 
might  get  an  easy-going,  thriftless  man  into  his  clutches,  and  im 
poverish  him  and  his  family. 


AN  ACCUMULATION  OF  EVILS          59 

and  'see  ye  now/  as  if  they  had  been  no  less 
material  then  [than]  the  Psalmist's  Selak,  and 
Ifif/f/aion  Selah,  did  he  usually  nauseate  the  ears  of 
his  hearers  when  his  tongue  was  in  the  career  of 
uttering  anything  concerning  me ;  who  alwayes 
thought  that  he  had  very  good  reason  to  make  use 
of  such  like  expressions,  '  do  you  see '  and  '  do  you 
see  now/  because  there  being  but  little  candour  in 
his  meaning,  whatever  he  did  or  spoke  was  under 
some  colour."  l 

It  must  have  been  very  hard  for  the  proud- 
hearted  chieftain  to  see  his  farms  devastated,  his 
tenants  maltreated,  his  library  thrown  to  the  winds, 
a  garrison  placed  in  his  house,  and  troops  of  horse 
quartered  upon  his  lands  without  any  allowance, 
in  addition  to  all  the  misery  and  impoverishment 
which  his  father's  wastefulness  and  neglect  had 
brought  down  upon  his  head. 

In    1647    an    event    occurred    which    seriously 

1  Works,  p.  382.  The  evident  meaning  of  the  last  sentence  is 
that  Lesley's  ways  were  so  dark  that  it  was  highly  necessary  for 
him  often  to  ask,  "See  ye?"  Yet  one  cannot  help  feeling  that 
this  relentless  creditor  may  not  have  been  solely  animated  by 
malignant  hatred  of  his  debtor.  Even  in  the  above  speech  there 
seem  to  be  claims  which  cannot  be  lightly  brushed  aside.  One  is 
again  reminded  of  Mr  Micawber,  and  of  the  sudden  and  unex 
pected  glimpse  of  a  better  nature  in  his  most  truculent  creditor, 
which  was  vouchsafed  him  when  he  got  his  discharge  in  bank 
ruptcy.  "Even  the  revengeful  bootmaker,"  we  are  told,  "de 
clared  in  open  court  that  he  bore  him  [Mr  M.]  no  malice,  but  that 
when  money  was  owing  to  him  he  liked  to  be  paid.  He  said  he 
thought  it  was  human  nature"  (David  Copjterjield,  chap.  xii.). 
An  eminent  American  philosopher  has  said  that  there  is  a  great 
deal  of  human  nature  in  man.  There  seems  at  any  rate  to  have 
been  a  great  deal  in  Mr  Lesley  of  Fiudrassie. 


60  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

affected  the  interests  of  our  author,  and  placed  him 
in  a  still  more  humiliating  position.  Sir  Eobert 
Farquhar  *  of  Mounie  had  "  apprised "  the  estate 
and  sheriffship  of  Cromartie,  and  was  now  confirmed 
in  the  possession  of  them.  He  proceeded  to  sell 
his  rights  to  (Sir)  John  Urquhart  of  Craigfintray, 
the  great  -  grandson  of  the  Tutor  of  Cromartie. 
Immediately  upon  this  (Sir)  John  purchased  a  com 
mission  from  Charles  I.  to  become  hereditary  Sheriff 
of  Cromartie.  In  this  way  the  ancestral  domains 
and  jurisdiction  of  which  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  was 
so  proud  virtually  passed  out  of  his  hands.  It  was 
not,  however,  till  after  the  Eestoration  apparently 
that  the  new  proprietor  entered  into  possession. 
He  evidently  allowed  his  claims  to  lie  dormant  until 
the  death  of  his  cousin,  Sir  Thomas,  and  then  put 
them  in  force.  Even  if  our  author  had  no  other 
troubles  to  contend  with,  the  knowledge  that  this 
Damoclean  sword  was  suspended  above  his  head 
would  have  been  enough  to  destroy  his  peace. 

No  doubt  Sir  Thomas  sometimes  thought  that  he 
was  the  most  unlucky  chieftain  the  Urquhart  race 
had  yet  known, — that  such  a  multitude  of  mis 
fortunes  had  never  come  upon  one  who  bore  his 
name  since  that  day  when,  on  a  sunny  plain  in 
Achaia,  wild  armed  men  first  raised  Esormon  "  aloft 
on  the  buckler-throne,  and  with  clanging  armour 
and  hearts "  hailed  him  as  "  fortunate  and  well- 

1  In  one  of  his  queer  Epigrams,  after  comparing  the  insatiable 
demands  of  his  creditors  to  those  of  the  grave  and  of  the  sea,  he 
closes  with  the  following  alliterative  litany  : 

"Free  me  from  Farcher,  Fraser,  Fendrasie." 


A  ROYALIST'S  LOSSES  61 

beloved." ]  Sir  Theodore  Martin,  indeed,  says  that 
Urquhart's  statements  with  regard  to  his  misfortunes 
should  not  be  construed  to  the  letter,  any  more  than 
should  the  announcements  of  his  wonderful  inven 
tions  and  designs.  They  were  both,  he  considers,  in  a 
great  degree  pet  objects  on  which  he  had  permitted 
his  imagination  to  rest,  till  they  had  been  transfigured 
into  a  magnitude  to  which  the  reality  probably  bore 
but  a  faint  resemblance.2  There  is,  however,  ample 
evidence  in  what  we  have  already  quoted,  to  show  that 
certain  of  the  grievances  he  complained  of  were  by 
no  means  imaginary.  It  is  beyond  dispute  that  he 
suffered  heavily  in  his  property  in  consequence  of 
his  adherence  to  the  Koyalist  cause.  In  1663  his 
brother,  Sir  Alexander,  presented  a  petition  asking 
compensation  for  the  losses  suffered  in  the  time  of 
his  father  and  brother.  The  Commissioners  ap 
pointed  to  examine  into  these  claims  reported  that, 
before  1650,  the  damage  inflicted  upon  the  Urquhart 
property  amounted  to  £20,303  Scots,  and  during 
1651-52  to  £39,203  Scots — in  all  £59,506  Scots, 
which  is  almost  £5000  Sterling.3 

The  relations  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  with  the 
ministers  of  the  churches  of  which  he  was  patron 
were  unfortunately  of  a  painful  character.  The 
grounds  of  misunderstanding  and  dispute  were 
numerous.  In  addition  to  political  and  ecclesi- 

1  "His  subjects  and  familiars  surnamed  him  [Esormon]  ovpo- 
xdpros,  that  is  [to]  say,  '  fortunate  and  well -beloved ' "  ( Works, 
p.  156). 

2  Rabelais,  p.  xv. 

*  Acts  of  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,  vol.  vii.  479,  a,  b. 


62  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

astical  differences  of  opinion  between  the  ministers 
of  the  three  parishes 1  (of  which  Sir  Thomas  was  the 
sole  heritor)  and  himself,  there  were  disputes  about 
augmentation  of  stipends,2  which  they  thought  in 
adequate  but  with  which  he  had  no  fault  to  find, 
the  abolition  of  his  heritable  right  to  the  patronage 
of  these  churches,  the  legal  proceedings  taken  by  the 
incumbents  to  compel  him  to  agree  to  arrangements 
decided  upon  by  the  Presbytery  with  regard  to 
stipends  and  the  upkeep  of  buildings,  and  there  were 
also  personal  quarrels  with  the  ministers  themselves. 
In  the  following  passage  he  tells  his  side  of  the  story, 
and  gives  us  a  vivid,  though  not  an  edifying  glimpse 
of  the  parochial  politics  of  that  far-off  time  and 
remote  corner  of  Scotland.  It  is  to  be  noticed 

1  The  parish  of  Cromartie  consists  of  the  north-east  portion  of 
the  peninsula  called  the  Black  Isle,  terminating  eastward  in  the 
precipice  called  the  Southern  Sutor,  and  stretches  for  about  four 
miles  along  the  shore  of  the  Moray  Firth  on  the  east,  and  about 
six  along  that  of  the  Firth  of  Cromartie  on  the  north  and  west. 
To  the  west  of  the  parish  of  Cromartie  were  situated  the  joint 
parishes  of  Kirkmichael  and  Cullicudden,  on  the  southern  shore  of 
the  Cromartie  Firth.     In  Sir  Thomas  Urqnhart's  time  these  were 
separate  parishes,  but  they  were  united  in  1662,  and  a  new  church 
was  built  at  Resolis,  in  Kirkmichael,  near  the  border  of  Cullicudden. 
Thenewly-constituted  parish  bore  and  still  bears  the  name  of  Resolis. 

2  In  his  Logopandecteision  he    speaks  of  the   ' '  stipauctionarie 
tide"  which  began  to  overflow  the  land.      He  thought  "with 
sufficient  bulwarks  of  good  argument  to  have  stayed  the  inundation 
thereof  from  two  of  his  churches  "  ;  but,  he  says,  "  I  was  violently 
driven  like  a  feather  before  a  whirlewind,  notwithstanding  all  my 
defences,  to  the  sanctuary  of  an  inforced  patience  "  (  Works,  p.  352). 
He  does  not,  however,  appear  to  have  stayed  long  in  this  sanctuary, 
or  else    the  shelter  it  afforded  was  but  imperfect.      His  "stip 
auctionarie"  (i.e.  stipend-increasing)  reminds  us  of  Mr  Micawber's 
calling  his  salary  his  "stipendiary  emoluments." 


ELOQUENCE  OF  GILBERT  ANDERSON      63 

that  Sir  Thomas  writes  of  himself  in  the  third 
person.  "  I  think,"  says  the  supposed  anonymous 
writer  of  him,  "  there  be  hardly  any  in  Scotland 
that  proportionally  hath  suffered  more  prejudice  by 
the  Kirk  then  [than]  himself;  his  own  ministers 
(to  wit,  those  that  preach  in  the  churches  whereof 
himself  is  patron,  Master  Gilbert  Anderson,  Master 
Kobert  Williamson,  and  Master  Charles  Pape  by 
name,  serving  the  cures  of  Cromartie,  Kirkmichel, 
and  Cullicudden),  having  done  what  lay  in  them 
for  the  furtherance  of  their  owne  covetous  ends,  to 
his  utter  undoing ;  for  the  first  of  those  three,  for 
no  other  cause  but  that  the  said  Sir  Thomas  would 
not  authorize  the  standing  of  a  certain  pew  (in  that 
country  called  a  desk),  in  the  church  of  Cromarty, 
put  in  without  his  consent  by  a  professed  enemy  to 
his  House,  who  had  plotted  the  ruine  thereof,  and 
one  that  had  no  land  in  the  parish,  did  so  rail 
against  him  and  his  family  in  the  pulpit  at  several 
times,  both  before  his  face  and  in  his  absence,  and 
with  such  opprobrious  terines,  more  like  a  scolding 
tripe-seller's  wife  then  [than]  good  minister,  squirt 
ing  the  poyson  of  detraction  and  abominable  fals- 
hood  (unfit  for  the  chaire  of  verity)  in  the  eares 
of  his  tenandry,  who  were  the  onely  auditors,  did 
most  ingrately  and  despightfully  so  calumniate 
and  revile  their  master,  his  own  patron  and  bene 
factor,  that  the  scandalous  and  reproachful  words 
striving  which  of  them  should  first  discharge  against 
him  its  steel-pointed  dart,  did  oftentimes,  like 
clusters  of  hemlock  or  wormewood  dipt  in  vinegar, 
stick  in  his  throat ;  he  being  almost  ready  to  choak 


64  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

with  the  aconital  bitterness  and  venom  thereof,  till 
the  razor  of  extream  passion,  by  cutting  them  into 
articulate  sounds,  and  very  rage  it  self,  in  the  highest 
degree,  by  procuring  a  vornit,  had  made  him  spue 
them  out  of  his  mouth  into  rude,  indigested  lumps, 
like  so  many  toads  and  vipers  that  had  burst  their 
gall.1 

"  As  for  the  other  two,  notwithstanding  that  they 
had  been  borne,  and  their  fathers  before  them, 
vassals  to  his  house,  and  the  predecessor  of  one  of 
them  had  shelter  in  that  land,  by  reason  of  slaughter 
committed  by  him,  when  there  was  no  refuge  for 
him  anywhere  else  in  Scotland ;  and  that  the  other 
had  never  been  admitted  to  any  church  had  it  not 
been  for  the  favour  of  his  foresaid  patron,  who, 
contrary  to  the  will  of  his  owne  friends  and  great 
reluctancy  of  the  ministry  it  self,  was  both  the 
nominater  and  chuser  of  him  to  that  function ;  and 
that  before  his  admission  he  did  faithfully  protest 
he  should  all  the  days  of  his  life  remain  contented 
with  that  competency  of  portion  the  late  incumbent 
in  that  charge  did  enjoy  before  him  ;  they  neverthe 
less  behaved  themselves  so  peevishly  and  unthank- 
fully  towards  their  forenamed  patron  and  master, 
that,  by  vertue  of  an  unjust  decree,  both  procured 
and  purchased  from  a  promiscuous  knot  of  men  like 
themselves,2  they  used  all  their  utmost  endeavours, 
in  absence  of  their  above  recited  patron,  to  whom  and 

1  The  attention  of  the  reader  is  specially  directed  to  the  marvel 
lous  felicity  and  vigour  of  the  above  description.      Sir  Thomas 
himself  has  never  written  anything  better  in  its  way. 

2  We  fear  that  this  is  meant  as  a  description  of  a  presbytery. 


UNEDIFYING  SERMONS  65 

unto  whose  house  they  had  been  so  much  behold 
ing,  to  outlaw  him,1  and  declare  him  rebel,  by  open 
proclamation  at  the  market-cross  of  the  head  town  of 
his  owne  shire,  in  case  he  did  not  condescend  [con 
sent]  to  the  grant  of  that  augmentation  of  stipend 
which  they  demanded,  conforme  to  the  tenour  of 
the  above-mentioned  decree ;  the  injustice  whereof 
will  appeare  when  examined  by  any  rational  judge. 

"  Now  the  best  is,  when  by  some  moderate  gentle 
men  it  was  expostulated,  why  against  their  master, 
patron,  and  benefactor,  they  should  have  dealt  with 
such  severity  and  rigour,  contrary  to  all  reason  and 
equity ;  their  answer  was,  They  were  inforced  and 
necessitated  so  to  do  by  the  synodal  and  presbyterial 
conventions  of  the  Kirk,  under  paine  of  deprivation, 
and  expulsion  from  their  benefices :  I  will  not  say, 
KCIKOV  Kopaicos  KCLtcov  &6v  [an  evil  egg  of  an  evil 
crow],  but  may  safely  think  that  a  well-sanctified 
mother  will  not  have  a  so  ill-instructed  brat,  and 
that  injuria  humana  cannot  be  the  lawfull  daughter 
of  a  jure  divino  parent."  2 

Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  is  not  to  be  taken  as 
infallible  in  the  opinions  which  he  formed  and 
expressed  concerning  the  quality  of  the  sermons 
which  were  delivered  from  the  Presbyterian  pulpits 
of  his  time.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
he  hits  upon  one  great  fault  by  which  many  of 
them  were  marred — that  of  being  rather  political 
harangues  than  exhortations  to  godliness  after  the 
Pauline  fashion.  Indeed,  he  goes  so  far  as  to  say 

1  The  reference  is  to  the  process  of  "  homing"  described  on  p.  16. 
-  Works,  p.  280-282. 


66  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

that,  as  a  rule,  the  preachers  of  his  time  seldom 
gave  such  exhortations,  as  they  were  "  enjoyned  by 
their  ecclesiastical  authority  [authorities  ?]  to  preach 
to  the  times,1  that  is,  to  rail  against  malignants  and 
sectaries,  or  those  whom  they  suppose  to  be  their 
enemies." 2  Preaching  "  to  the  times  "  Sir  Thomas 
found  meant  in  his  neighbourhood  preaching  against 
him;  and  one  may  be  allowed,  it  is  to  be  hoped, 
without  unduly  wounding  the  feelings  of  those  who 
admire  the  Covenanters,  to  think  sympathetically 
of  his  sufferings.  Sydney  Smith  once  spoke  of  a 
form  of  capital  punishment  in  which  the  victim 
was  to  be  "  preached  to  death  by  wild  curates."  If 
the  above  description  of  Mr  Gilbert  Anderson's 
sermons  be  true,  he  certainly  was  eminently  qualified 
to  officiate  as  one  of  the  executioners  in  carrying 
out  such  a  death  sentence.3 

1  That  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  is  not  exaggerating  matters  in 
speaking  of  such  injunctions  being  given  by  ecclesiastical  author 
ities,  is  proved  by  the  following  well-known  passage  in  the  memoir 
prefixed  to  the    Works  of  Archbishop    Leighton  : — "It  was  a 
Question  asked  at  [of]  the  Brethren,  both  in  the  classical  and  pro 
vincial  Meetings  of  Ministers,  twice  in  the  Year,  If  they  preached 
the  Duties  of  the  Times?     And  when  it  was  found  that  Mr 
Leighton  did  not,  he  was  quarrelled  [sic]  for  this  Omission,  but 
said,  If  all  the  Brethren  have  preached  to  the  TIMES,  may  not  one 
poor  Brother  be  suffered  to  preach  on  ETERNITY  ? " 

2  Works,  p.  280. 

3  The  notice  given  us  by  Sir  Thomas  of  Mr  Anderson's  preaching 
makes  us  desirous  of  knowing  more  about  him  ;  but,  unfortunately, 
only  a  very  few  facts  concerning  him  are  known.     He  was  born  in 
1597  ;  he  graduated  at  Aberdeen  in  1618  ;  was  settled  at  Cawdor, 
near  Nairn,  some  time  before  30th  October,  1627  ;  was  transferred 
to  Cromartie  between  5th  October,  1641,  and  llth  January,  1642  ; 
died  in  November,  1655,  and  was  succeeded  in  the  benefice  by  his 
son  Hugh  (Scott's  Fasti). 


LATITUDINARIAN  OPINIONS  67 

But  though  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  was  a  Royalist 
in  politics,  and  an  Episcopalian  in  religion,  he  was 
certainly  no  bigot  in  his  devotion  to  the  King  or 
the  Church.     In  a  passage  in  The  Jewel,  he  plainly 
declares  his  belief  "  that  there  is  no  government, 
whether  ecclesiastical  or  civil,  upon  earth  that  is 
jure  divino,  if  that  divine  right  be  taken  in  a  sense 
secluding  all  other  forms  of  government,   save  it 
alone,  from  the  privilege  of  that  title."1     Indeed, 
he  treats  such  an  idea  as  merely  a  pious  fraud, 
by  which  despotism  is  established  and  maintained 
at  a  very  cheap  rate  over  tender  consciences  by 
threatening  them  with  the  vengeance  of  Heaven  in 
case  of  disobedience.     Such  a  man  was  not  likely  to 
be  a  blind  partisan  of  any  cause.     Differences  in 
religious    beliefs    and    practices    he    attributed    to 
differences  of  temperament  among  individuals,  and 
to   climatic  and  national  peculiarities  ;  and  in  no 
obscure  terms  he  hints  that  he  was  of  the  opinion 
of  Tamerlane,  "  who  believed  that  God  was  best 
pleased  with  diversity  of  religions,  variety  of  wor 
ship,  dissentaneousness  of  faith,  and   multiformity 
of  devotion."  5      However  powerfully  such  opinions 
may  appeal  to  a  certain  class  of  minds,  it  is  hard  to 
conceive  of  their  being  associated  with  deep  religious 
feeling ;  and  accordingly  we  can  scarcely  be  wrong 
in   concluding   that   one    of    the   reasons   why  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  held  aloof  from  the  Covenanting 
movement   was  that  he   was  at  the  antipodes   to 
the  majority  of  his  fellow-countrymen  in  the  matter 
of  religious  belief.     A  certain  measure  of  aversion, 
1  Works,  p.  276.  a  Ibid.  p.  261. 


68  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

suspicion,  and  horror  is  still  manifested  by  many 
towards  those  whose  creed  is  supposed  to  be  of  too 
limited  and  negative  a  character ;  and  we  can  easily 
believe  that  in  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth 
century  this  attitude  was  taken  up  even  more 
openly  and  emphatically.  On  a  later  occasion, 
when,  as  we  shall  relate,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart 
applied  to  the  Commission  of  the  General  Assembly 
to  pardon  his  having  taken  part  in  the  capture  of 
Inverness,  his  case  was  referred  to  the  minister  of 
that  town,  Mr  John  Annand,  "  that  he  might  confer 
with  him  [Sir  Thomas]  concerning  some  dangerous 
opinions,  which,  as  is  informed,  he  hes  sometimes 
vented. " 1  In  the  view  of  the  Commission  of 
Assembly  the  guilt  of  cherishing  "  dangerous 
opinions "  was  as  great  as  that  of  rekindling  the 
flames  of  civil  war,  if,  indeed,  it  did  not  surpass  it. 

1  See  p.  83. 


CHAPTER    III 

Unsuccessful  Rising  in  the  North — Sir  Thomas  makes  his  Peace 
with  the  Church — Return  of  Charles  n.  to  Scotland — 
Invasion  of  England — Battle  of  Worcester — Sir  Thomas 
a  Prisoner  in  the  Tower — Makes  Friends — Is  liberated  on 
Parole — Great  Literary  Activity— Revisits  Scotland  — 
Dies — Later  History  of  the  Urquharts  of  Cromartie — 
Characteristics  of  our  Author — Glover's  Portraits  of  him. 

HOETLY  after  the  news  of  the  execution 
of  Charles  I.  reached  Scotland,  a  rising 
on  the  part  of  some  of  the  leading 
Cavaliers  in  the  north  took  place,  with 
the  view  of  restoring  the  Koyal  Family. 
The  most  prominent  person  in  this  attempt  was 
Thomas  Mackenzie  of  Pluscardiue,  a  younger  brother 
of  George,  the  second  Earl  of  Seaforth,  who  for  nearly 
ten  years  past  had  managed  the  affairs  of  the  family, 
and  was  looked  up  to,  both  on  account  of  his  ability 
and  also  on  account  of  the  great  territorial  influence 
he  represented.  He  had  seen  a  good  deal  of  service 
abroad,  and  was  at  one  time  governor  of  Stralsund.1 
Along  with  him,  and  only  second  to  him,  was  our 
Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  to  whom  even  civil  war  was 
scarcely  more  fraught  with  anxiety  and  danger 
than  was  the  life  he  had  been  forced  to  lead  for 

1  Antiquarian  Notts,  by  C.  Eraser-Mackintosh,  p.  156. 


70  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

some  time  past.  Together  with  them  were  as 
sociated  eight  other  Koyalists  of  good  standing, — 
among  whom  Colonel  Hugh  Eraser  of  Belladrum 
and  John  Munro  of  Lemlair  had  a  certain  pre 
eminence, —  and  these  ten  formed  a  kind  of 
revolutionary  committee  for  the  control  of  the 
movement  they  had  set  on  foot,  and  the  govern 
ment  of  the  district  that  might  become  subject  to 
them. 

Montrose  had  determined,  on  hearing  of  the 
execution  of  the  King,  to  renew  the  war  in  Scot 
land,  but  Pluscardine  and  his  associates  did  not 
wait  for  his  arrival.  Charles  was  beheaded  on 
Tuesday,  the  30th  of  January,  1649,  and,  by  the 
22nd  of  the  next  month,  the  Scottish  gentlemen  in 
the  north  had  already  taken  the  field,  and  cap 
tured  Inverness.  Four  days  after,  on  Monday, 
26th  February,  a  meeting  of  the  Committee  of  War 
was  held  in  that  town,  the  minutes  of  which  are 
still  in  existence,1  and  contain  the  name  of  our 
author  next  in  order  to  that  of  Pluscardine  him 
self. 

The  Committee  passed  certain  enactments,  by 
which  they  took  into  their  own  hands  the  customs 
and  excise  of  the  six  northern  counties — Inverness, 
Sutherland,  Cromartie,  Caithness,  Nairn,  and  Elgin. 
An  inventory  of  all  the  ammunition  of  the  garrison 
was  ordered  to  be  taken.  It  was  also  decided  that 
Sir  Thomas's  house  at  Cromartie  should  be  put  in 
a  state  of  defence,  and  that  the  work  should  be 

1  Antiquarian  Notes,  pp.  155-158  ;  History  of  the  Clan  Mac 
kenzie,  by  Alex.  Mackenzie. 


PROCLAIMED  A  TRAITOR  71 

carried  out  by  the  tenants  of  Sir  James  Fraser,  a 
bitter  Parliamentarian,  and  opponent  of  the  Stuarts 
in  the  north,  and  by  those  of  our  knight's  old 
enemy,  Lesley  of  Findrassie.1  It  is  easy  for  un- 
regenerate  human  nature  to  understand  the  pleasure 
with  which  the  members  of  the  Committee  of  War 
would  give  this  last  order.  By  another  enactment,  the 
Committee  declare  that  they  consider  it  expedient 
for  their  safety  that  the  works  and  forts  of  Inver 
ness  be  demolished  and  levelled  with  the  ground, 
and  they  ordain  that  each  person  appointed  to  this 
work  should  complete  his  proportion  of  it  before 
eight  days  have  passed,  "  under  pain  of  being 
quartered  upon  and  until  the  said  task  be  per 
formed." 

On  the  2nd  of  March,  Mackenzie  of  Plus- 
cardine,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  and  their  associates, 
were  proclaimed  as  rebels  and  traitors  by  the 
Estates  of  Parliament,2 — as  "  wicked  and  malignant 
persouns  intending  so  far  as  in  thame  lyes,  for 

1  The  enactment  in  question  runs  as  follows:— "It  being 
thought  expedient  by  the  said  Committee  that  the  house  of 
Cromartie  be  put  in  a  posture  of  defence,  and  that  for  the  doing 
thereof  it  is  requisite  some  faill  [turf]  be  cast  and  led,  the  said 
Committee  ordains  all  Sir  James  Fraser's  tenants  within  the 
parochins  [parishes]  of  Cromartie  and  Cullicudden,  together  with 
those  of  the  Laird  of  Findrassie,  within  the  parochin  of  Rosemarkie, 
to  afford  from  six  hours  in  the  morning  to  six  hours  at  night,  one 
horse  out  of  every  oxeugait  [=  about  13  Scotch  acres]  daily 
for  the  space  of  four  days  to  lead  the  same  faill  to  the  house  of 
Cromartie."  Of  this  enemy,  Sir  James  Fraser,  our  author  re 
marked  at  a  later  time  with  regrettable  bitterness,  that  he  knew 
only  one  good  thing  about  him,  and  that  was  that  he  was  dead. 

a  Acts  of  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,  vi.  392. 


72  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

their  own  base  ends  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a  new 
bloodie  and  unnaturall  warre  within  the  bowells  of 
this  their  native  country,"  etc.  etc. 

On  the  1st  of  March  the  Commissioners  of  the 
General  Assembly  had  written  to  Pluscardine  and 
his  associates  expressing  their  wonder  and  grief  at 
such  a  rising  in  the  interests  of  "  the  Popish, 
Prelaticall  and  Malignant  party,"  and  threatening 
the  penalty  of  excommunication  within  ten  days  if 
they  would  not  "  desist  from  and  repent  of  that 
horrid  insurrection." 1  The  reply  to  this  letter 
came  in  due  time,  and  was  signed  by  the  principal 
leader  in  the  insurrection,  and  by  some  other 
members  of  the  Clan  Mackenzie,  and  is,  it  must 
be  confessed,  a  distinctly  prevaricating  and  hypo 
critical  document.  For  one  sentence  at  least  in  it 
our  author  was  responsible,  though  he  neither 
signs  the  letter  nor  is  named  in  it.  His  pedantic 
phraseology  reveals  his  hand  in  the  construction  of 
the  reply  to  the  Commissioners'  remonstrances  and 
threats. 

The  letter  is  addressed  "  to  the  Honourable  and 
Eight  Eeverend,"  and  begins  as  follows : — "  Wee 
have  lately  received  yours  of  the  first  of  Merch, 
1649,  for  the  which  and  your  wisdomes  Christian 
care  of  ws,  and  your  fatherly  admonition  to 
ws,  we  humbly  and  heartily  rander  yow  all 
possible  thanks."  This  lamb-like  tone  is  maintained 
with  admirable  gravity  all  through  the  epistle,  and 
is  combined  with  a  canting  phraseology  which  was 
meant  to  be  impressive,  but  which  must  have 

1  General  Assembly  Commission  Records,  1648-49,  p.  220. 


A  DISINGENUOUS  REPLY  73 

entertained  any  members  of  the  Commission  of  the 
General  Assembly  who  originally  possessed  and 
still  retained  a  sense  of  humour.  "  And  quheras 
[whereas],"  so  it  goes  on,  "  your  wisdomes  taks  it 
a  matter  of  no  lesse  wonder  then  [than]  greife  that 
we,  being  vnder  the  oath  of  God  and  tye  of  our 
Nationall  Covenant,  would  make  insurrection  and 
take  armes  against  the  Lords  people,  certainly,  if  it 
were  so,  we  acknowledge  your  wisdomes  had  reason 
to  wonder  and  to  be  grieved.  And  it  is  no  lesse 
winder  and  grief e  to  ws,  being  wnder  the  said 
oath  and  tye  of  Covenant,  furthering  the  same  with 
all  our  power  and  meanes,  and  at  all  occasions 
desireing  nothing  els  then  [than]  the  enjoying  of 
the  liberty  of  the  subject,  and  proprietie  of  our 
goods,  intended  and  promised  in  and  by  our  Cove 
nant."  No  one  who  has  read  any  of  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart's  original  works  can  doubt  that  the  next 
sentence  was  either  composed  or  revised  by  him. 
The  two  phrases  which  we  have  taken  the  liberty 
of  putting  into  italics  could  scarcely  have  occurred 
to  any  other  member  of  the  Committee  of  War. 
"  Yet  we  find,  that  evill  willers  and  envyous  vnder- 
miners,  in  a  singular  and  prcetextuous  way  aiming 
at  our  ruine,  doe  spend  the  quintessence  of  their  units 
to  find  out  means  whereby,  under  specious  pretences 
of  the  publick  [good  ?]  to  extermine  ws  with 
povertie,  and  by  inventing  fresh  occasions  to  make 
ws  odious,  and  bring  ws  vpon  fresh  stages  [sic] 
vnder  the  base  name  of  Malignancy."  It  is  un 
necessary  to  quote  the  whole  of  the  letter,  but  a 
couple  of  sentences,  which  describe  what  the  in- 


74  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

surgents  had  done  at  Inverness,  deserve  notice. 
"  But  the  whole  countrey  of  all  degrees,  being 
sensible  of  the  oppression  and  insolency  of  the 
vnnecessary  and  vnprofitable  garison  of  Innernes  to 
Church  or  State,  did  heartily  and  vnanimously  con 
tribute  to  the  demolishing  thereof,  which  being 
done,  all  disbanded  peaceablie,  and  the  people 
retired  peaceablie  to  their  owne  homes,  without 
offence  to  any  nighbour  of  any  degree  or  condition. 
.  .  .  And  now,  when  the  said  garison  is  dis 
mantled,  we  shall  be  found  not  only  disposed  to 
live  peaceablie,  bot  also  ready  to  obey  all  publick 
or  dour  s  for  the  good  of  the  Kingdome."  The 
writers  ask  that  "  the  taxes  and  impositions,"  which 
pressed  with  special  severity  on  the  class  to  which 
they  belonged,  should  be  remitted,  and  liberty  given 
them  to  lead  that  religious,  peaceful  life,  to  which 
both  by  nature  and  by  deliberate  choice,  they  seem 
to  say,  they  were  strongly  inclined.  The  sting  of 
the  letter  is  in  its  closing  words.  If  these  "  evill 
willers "  succeed  in  persuading  the  Commissioners 
of  Assembly  to  go  on  with  the  sentence  of  ex 
communication,  as  fully  deserved,  they  (the  writers) 
formally  appeal  against  such  a  decision  from  the 
Commission  to  the  next  General  Assembly.1 

The  ecclesiastical  court  to  which  the  above  letter 
was  sent  may  have  contained  a  goodly  sprinkling  of 
fanatics,  but  it  is  certain  that  in  it  there  were  but 
few,  if  any,  imbeciles  ;  so  that  the  communication 
from  the  Committee  of  War  did  not  succeed  in 
imposing  upon  those  to  whom  its  contents  were 

1  General  Assembly  Commission  Records,  1648-49,  pp.  249,  250. 


ECCLESIASTICAL  STATE-PAPERS        75 

read.  They  did  not  condescend  to  answer  it,  but 
at  once  issued  a  pamphlet,  entitled  A  Declaration 
and  Warning  to  all  Members  of  this  Kirk,  "  to 
recover,  if  possible,  the  disturbers  of  the  peace  of 
God's  people  out  of  the  snare  of  Sathan,  and  to 
prevent  others  from  falling  therein."  The  docu 
ment  displays  very  genuine  indignation  and  dismay 
at  the  possibility  of  the  negotiations  which  were 
being  carried  on  for  restoring  Charles  II.  as  a 
"  covenanted  king  "  to  the  throne  of  his  ancestors, 
being  defeated,  and  of  his  coming  back  as  an 
arbitrary  ruler  and  oppressor  of  the  Church.  Those 
who  have  any  doubt  about  the  deterioration  of  both 
religion  and  politics  when  they  are  fused  together, 
should  read  this  and  other  State  Papers  of  the 
period,  and  their  eyes  would  be  opened.  The 
calm  assumption  by  the  writers  that  political  op 
ponents  are  the  enemies  of  God,  the  claim  to 
knowledge  of  the  Divine  purposes  and  counsels,  the 
free  use  of  the  most  sacred  words  of  Scripture,  the 
dark  fanaticism  which  inspires  so  many  of  the 
utterances,  and  the  intense  passion  which  makes  so 
many  of  them  sound  like  mere  raving — all  combine 
to  make  these  documents  very  painful  reading.  A 
circular  letter  of  warning  and  exhortation  was  sent 
to  Presbyteries,  attempts  were  made  to  persuade 
individuals  to  disconnect  themselves  from  the 
insurrectionary  movement,  and  a  message  of  en 
couragement  was  sent  to  Lieutenant-General  David 
Lesley  to  strengthen  his  hands  in  the  work  of 
putting  it  down  by  fire  and  sword.1 

1  General  Assembly  Commission  Pecords,  1648-49,  pp.  252-262. 


76  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

The  insurgents,  after  demolishing  the  fortifica 
tions  of  Inverness,  retired  before  the  troops  sent 
to  suppress  them,  and  took  refuge  among  the 
mountains  of  Eoss-shire.  Lesley  advanced  to  Fort- 
rose  and  garrisoned  the  castle  there,  and  then 
proceeded  to  endeavour  to  make  terms  with  the 
leaders  of  the  insurrection.  The  only  one  who 
would  listen  to  no  accommodation  was  Mackenzie 
of  Pluscardine.  Immediately  on  Lesley's  return 
south,  he  descended  from  the  mountains,  and  at 
tacked  and  took  the  castle  of  Chanonry.  Our  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  was  now  safely  out  of  the  con 
flict;  but  our  readers  may  wish  to  know  what 
became  of  the  insurrectionary  movement  which  he 
had  such  a  large  share  in  setting  on  foot,  and  from 
which  he  found  it  prudent  to  retire  at  an  early  stage. 

Mackenzie's  force  was  brought  up  to  eight  or 
nine  hundred  men  by  the  accession  of  his  nephew, 
Lord  Reay,  with  three  hundred  followers.  Soon 
afterwards  he  was  joined  by  General  Middle  ton  and 
Lord  Ogilvie,  and  advanced  into  Badenoch,  with  the 
view  of  raising  the  people  in  that  and  the  neigh 
bouring  districts.  In  what  is  called  the  Wardlaw 
MS.  a  very  vivid  picture  is  given  of  the  behaviour 
of  the  Highlanders  from  the  Eeay  country,  when 
they  poured  into  Inverness  on  the  morning  of 
Sunday,  the  2nd  of  May,  1649.  "They  crossed 
the  bridge  of  Ness,"  says  the  Royalist  minister  of 
Kirkhill,  "  on  the  Lord's  Day  in  time  of  divine 
service,  and  alarmed  the  people  of  Inverness,  im 
peding  God's  worship  in  the  town.  For  instead  of 
bells  to  ring  in  to  service  I  saw  and  heard  no  other 


ENGAGEMENT  AT  BALVENIE  77 

than  the  noise  of  pipes,  drums,  pots,  pans,  kettles, 
and  spits  in  the  streets  to  provide  them  victuals  in 
every  house.  And  in  their  quarters  the  rude  rascal 
ity  would  eat  no  meat  at  their  tables  until  the  land 
lord  laid  down  a  shilling  Scots  upon  each  trencher,1 
calling  this  'airgiod  cagainn'  (chewing-money),  which 
every  soldier  got,  so  insolent  were  they." 

The  campaign  was  a  very  brief  one.  The 
Koyalists,  joined  by  the  Marquis  of  Huntly,  at 
tacked  and  took  the  castle  of  Kuthven,  but,  soon 
after,  being  hardly  pressed  by  Lesley,  they  turned 
southwards  and  took  up  their  quarters  in  Balvenie 
Castle.  General  Middleton  and  Mackenzie  were 
despatched  to  treat  with  Lesley,  but  before  they 
reached  their  destination,  the  troops  from  Fortrose, 
after  a  rapid  inarch,  surprised  the  Royalist  forces 
at  Balvenie.  A  fierce  engagement  took  place,  in 
which  both  sides  suffered  severely.2  Eighty  of  the 

1  Strangely  enough,  in  Hope's  Anaatasius,  a  Tatar  messenger 
travelling  through  Asia  Minor  to  Constantinople  is  described  as 
acting  in  the  same  insolent  manner.     "He  would  not,"  says 
Anastasius,  "even  after  the  daintiest  meal  in  the  world,  forego  the 
douceur  he  expected  for  what  he  used  to  call  the  wear  and  tear  of 
his  teeth  "  (ii.  320). 

2  An  account  of  the  battle  is  given  in  a  letter  addressed  by  the 
victorious  generals,  Ker,  Halket,  and  Strachan,  to  the  Moderator  of 
the  Commission  of  Assembly,  dated  9th  May,  1649.     In  it  they 
say:  "We   were  in  Innernes  vpon  Sunday  at  night,  when  we 
received  intelligence  that  the  enemie  were  come  from  Torespay  to 
Balvine,  presently  to  discusse  ws  (sic).     We  could  not  hear  from 
the  Livetennent-Generall  [Lesley],  and   the  enemy  was  making 
himselfe  strong  in  many  severall  quarters  in  [the]  countrie.     We 
conceived  it  better  to  suppresse  nor  [than]  to  be  suppressed.     We 
in  our  weak  maner  beged  the  Lords  direction,  that  His  blissiug 
might  wait  His  owne  and  our  labours,  and,  with  great  freedome 


78  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

insurgents  fell  in  defence  of  the  castle.  The  High 
landers  were  dismissed  to  their  homes  on  swearing 
never  again  to  take  up  arms  against  the  Parliament; 
while  their  leaders  were  sent  as  prisoners  to  Edin 
burgh,  where  most  of  them  were  set  free  soon 
after,  on  payment  of  fines,  and  on  giving  security 
that  they  would  keep  the  peace.  By  sharp  and 
vigorous  action  the  remaining  sparks  of  insurrection 
in  the  north  were  stamped  out,  and  fresh  bodies  of 
troops  were  stationed  in  the  principal  strongholds 
of  that  part  of  the  country.  Thus  ended  a  rising 
which  would  probably  have  had  a  very  different 
result,  if  it  had  been  postponed  until  the  arrival  of 
Montrose. 

The  same  writer1  who  gave  an  account  of  the 
riotous  and  insolent  demeanour  of  the  Highland 
soldiers  in  Inverness,  furnishes  us  with  a  companion- 
concluded  to  march  with  all  expedition  to  Torispay,  intelligence 
having  come  certain  e  that  they  were  lyeing  in  Balveine  at  a  wood, 
where  we  engaged  with  them  ;  and  there  the  Lord  delivered  them 
vnto  our  hands.  We  were  not  abone  six  score  fighting  horsemen 
and  tuelfe  muskiteires.  We  had  some  more,  but  they  were 
wearied.  We  have  at  this  tyme  about  800  prisoners,  betuixt 
3  or  4  scoir  killed,  and  tuo  or  thrie  hundred  fled.  My  Lord 
Rae  and  all  the  officers  are,  according  to  the  capitulatioun, 
prisoners ;  the  rest  are  to  be  conveyed  to  their  countrey,  after  we 
receive  order  from  the  publick  ;  and  therefore  we  shall  expect  such 
further  directions  from  you  as  you  shall  thinke  fit,  for  securing 
and  obliging,  by  oath,  such  as  shall  returne  to  their  countrey" 
(General  Assembly  Commission  Records,  1648-49,  p.  263).  There  is  a 
genuine  Cromwellian  ring  about  the  phrases  "beged  the  Lord's 
direction,"  and  "  the  Lord  delivered  them  vnto  our  hands,"  which 
we  cannot  help  admiring  ;  and  there  is  a  beauty  of  its  own  in  the 
phrase  ' '  with  great  freedome "  in  the  connection  in  which  it 
stands. 

1  Wardlaw  MS. 


DAY  OF  THANKSGIVING  79 

picture — that  of  them  on  their  way  back  to  their 
homes  after  their  defeat  at  Balvenie.  It  is  as 
follows : — "  Next  twenty  horse,  and  three  companies 
of  foot,  were  ordered  to  convey  the  captives  back 
over  the  Spey,  and  through  Moray  to  Inverness, 
where  I  saw  them  pass  through ;  and  those  men 
who,  in  their  former  march,  would  hardly  eat  their 
meat  without  money,  are  now  begging  food,  and,  like 
dogs,  lap  the  water  which  was  brought  them  in  tubs 
and  other  vessels  in  the  open  streets.  Thence  they 
were  conducted  over  the  bridge  of  Ness,  and  dismissed 
everyone  armless  and  harmless  to  his  own  house. 
This  is  a  matter  of  fact  which  I  saw  and  heard." 

The  profound  feelings  of  anxiety  which  this 
abortive  attempt  at  insurrection  had  excited  in  the 
minds  of  the  ecclesiastical  rulers  of  Scotland  are 
very  clearly  indicated  by  the  exuberance  of  joy  with 
which  the  tidings  of  the  victory  at  Balvenie  were 
received  by  the  Commission  of  Assembly.1  They 
instantly  decided  to  appoint  a  solemn  Day  of 
Thanksgiving,  on  the  25th  of  May,  for  "the  Lord's 
mercifull  defeat  of  the  enemies  of  the  peace  of  this 
land."2  They  tacked  on  a  postscript  to  the  above- 

1  The  Commission  of  the  General  Assembly  is  each  year 
nominated  by  that  body,  and  is  responsible  to  it,  and  is  empowered 
to  dispose  of  all  items  of  business  remitted  to  it,  and  to  act  in  the 
interests  of  the  Church  during  the  months  between  the  meeting  of 
the  Assembly  which  nominated  them,  and  that  to  which  they 
report  their  proceedings.  They  are  authorised  to  meet  on  certain 
specific  days,  and  oftener,  when  and  where  they  think  fit.  The 
next  General  Assembly  may  reverse  their  sentences,  if  they  have 
exceeded  their  powers,  or  have  acted  in  any  way  which  is  con 
sidered  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  the  Church. 

3  General  Assembly  Records,  1648-49,  p.  264. 


8o  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

mentioned  Declaration  and  Warning,  containing  a 
statement  of  the  causes  of  the  Thanksgiving,  and 
ordered  both  to  be  read  from  all  the  pulpits  in 
Scotland.  Letters  of  congratulation  were  despatched 
to  the  victorious  officers,  and  to  others  who  had 
been  faithful  in  the  recent  crisis,  and  full  particulars 
of  what  had  taken  place  were  sent  to  the  Commis 
sioners  of  Scotland  at  the  Hague,  who  were  engaged 
in  the  negotiations  with  "  the  young  man,  Charles 
Stuart."  In  the  last-mentioned  document  there  is 
a  nicker  of  grim  humour,  as  the  writers  send 
intelligence  of  the  destruction  of  the  hopes  which 
news  of  the  rebellion  might  have  excited  in  the 
minds  of  Charles  and  his  friends.  The  last  sentence 
in  the  letter  can  scarcely  have  been  written  or 
read  without  a  smile.  "  We  have  appointed/'  they 
say,  "  the  twenty-fift  day  of  Maij  for  a  solemn 
thanksgiving  for  this  and  other  late  mercies,  where 
with  we  thought  good  to  acquaint  yow,  that  yow 
manage  this  to  the  best  advantage  of  the  work  in 
your  hands,  according  as  yow  shall  thinke  fitt."  l 
It  was  once  said  of  a  good  man  that  he  would  have 
been  better  if  he  had  had  a  little  more  of  the  devil 
in  him  ;  and  one  is  inclined  to  think  more  highly  of 
these  good  men  for  the  touch  of  malice,  which  relieves 
the  sombre  character  of  their  communication.2 

1  General  Assembly  Records,  1648-49,  p.  270.     The  instructions 
given  to  the  Commissioners  suggest  the  process  known  to  us  in 
modern  times  as  "  rubbing  it  in  "  (the  phrase  is  a  technical  one). 

2  In  March  of  the  following  year,  1650,  occurred  the  descent  of 
Montrose  on  the  north  of  Scotland,  which  ended  so  disastrously 
for  him.     After  spending  a  few  weeks  in  the  Orkneys,  where  he 
collected  a  few  recruits,  he  landed  in  Caithness,  and  proceeded 


COMMISSION  OF  ASSEMBLY  81 

The  threatened  bolt  of  excommunication  was  not 
launched,  but  our  author  found  it  necessary  to  apply 
to  the  Commission  of  General  Assembly  in  order 
to  make  his  peace  with  the  ecclesiastical  power. 
Accordingly,  on  the  22nd  of  June,  1650,  he 
appeared  in  Edinburgh  before  this  body,  and  pre 
sented  his  "  supplicatioun  "  for  pardon  for  the  guilt 
of  taking  part  in  the  Northern  insurrection,  and  of 
assaulting  and  razing  the  walls  of  Inverness. 

The  Commission  met,  doubtless,  in  that  "  little 
roome  of  [off]  the  East  Church"  of  St  Giles, 
which  Baillie  describes  as  having  been  "  verie 
handsomelie  dressed  for  our  Assemblies  in  all  time 
coming,"1  and  from  which,  three  years  later,  the 
English  officers,  under  Cromwell's  order,  ejected  the 
members  of  the  General  Assembly.  The  Commis 
sion  on  that  day,  when  our  author  appeared  before 
them,  consisted  of  twenty-four  members — the  most 
distinguished  divines  and  politicians  in  Scotland  of 
the  Covenanting  party.  The  moderator,  or  chair 
man,  was  Robert  Douglas,2  "  a  great  State  preacher," 

into  Sutherland,  where  he  suffered  a  crushing  defeat  at  the  hands 
of  Strachan  and  Halket,  the  generals  who  had  successfully 
suppressed  the  insurrection  in  the  north  in  the  previous  year. 
Montrose  was  taken  prisoner,  and  was  executed  in  Edinburgh,  on 
Tuesday,  21st  May,  1650. 

1  Baillie's  Letters  (Edinburgh,  1841),  ii.  84. 

2  Robert  Douglas  (1594-1674)  had  been  chaplain  to  a  brigade  of 
Scottish  auxiliaries,  sent  with  the  connivance  of  Charles  I.  to  the 
aid  of  Ctustavus  Adolphus,  in  the  Thirty  Years'  War.     He  was 
minister  of  the  second  charge  of  the  High  Church,  Edinburgh, 
and  then  of  the  Tolbooth  Church,  and  was  five  times  Moderator 
of  the  General  Assembly  (1642,    1645,  1647,  1649,  and  1651). 
Wodrow  says,  "  He  was  a  great  man  for  both  great  wit,  and  grace, 

6 


82  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

who  had  been  chaplain  to  the  Scots  troops  in  the 
service  of  Gustavus  Adolphus,  and  had  won  the 
esteem  of  that  monarch,  and  who  in  little  more 
than  six  months'  time  would  officiate  at  the  corona 
tion  of  Charles  IL,  for  whom  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart 
had  prematurely  drawn  the  sword.  Beside  him 
was  Samuel  Eutherford,  the  Principal  of  St 
Andrews,  whose  fervid  piety  has  found  no  lack  of 
admirers  in  every  generation  since  his  time. 
Eobert  Baillie,  the  writer  of  the  Letters  which 
contain  so  many  vivid  pictures  of  events  in  that 
stirring  period;  David  Dickson,  Professor  of  Divinity 
in  Glasgow,  whose  name  we  have  heard  as  one  of 
the  deputation  to  persuade  the  people  of  Aberdeen 
to  take  the  Covenant ;  and  James  Guthrie,  who  died 
as  a  martyr,  the  year  after  the  [Restoration,  were 
present  there  that  day.  The  contrast  between 
these  grave,  dignified,  saintly  Covenanting  leaders, 
and  the  brilliant  Cavalier,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  is 
one  which,  by  its  picturesqueness,  strongly  impresses 
the  imagination. 

The  Commission,  after  hearing  the  petitioner's 
statements,  did  not,  apparently;  treat  the  matter  as 
of  very  serious  moment.  The  dangerous  crisis  was 
over,  and  they  could  afford  to  be  merciful.  They 
seem  to  have  condoned  the  political  offence,  but 
referred  Sir  Thomas  to  Mr  John  Annand,  minister 
of  Inverness,  one  of  their  number,  "  that  he  might 

and  more  than  ordinary  boldness  and  authority  and  awful 
majesty  appearing  in  his  very  carriage  and  countenance."  Burnet 
affirms  that  he  had  ' '  much  wisdom  and  though  tfulness,  but  was 
very  silent  and  of  vast  pride  "  (Dictionary  of  Nat.  Biog.  xv.  347). 


RETURN  OF  CHARLES  II  83 

confer  with  him  concerning  some  dangerous  opinions 
which,  as  was  informed,  he  had  sometimes  vented." 
If  these  could  be  explained  away,  and  no  further 
complicity  in  disloyal  schemes  were  brought  home 
to  him,  Mr  Annand  was  empowered,  acting  at 
all  times  under  the  advice  of  the  Presbytery  of 
Inverness,  to  receive  his  public  "  satisfaction "  in 
the  church  of  that  city.  How  the  matter  ended 
we  do  not  know.  But  there  is  very  little  doubt 
that  Sir  Thomas's  nebulous  heterodoxy  proved  no 
bar  to  his  being  freed  from  ecclesiastical  censure, 
and  that,  in  due  course,  according  to  the  custom  of 
that  time,  he  stood,  as  a  penitent,  before  the 
congregation  of  the  Parish  Church,  in  that  city  the 
walls  of  which  he  had  assisted  to  assault  and  over 
throw. 

A  fortnight  after  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's 
appearance  before  the  Commission  of  the  General 
Assembly,  Charles  n.  landed  in  Scotland,  and  was 
accepted,  though  at  first  not  without  deep  mis 
givings,  as  "  covenanted  King."  The  party  to  which 
our  author  belonged  was  for  a  time  excluded  from 
all  share  in  public  life ;  and  even  the  army,  which 
was  to  defend  the  sovereign  against  the  English 
sectaries,  was  carefully  sifted,  to  remove  those  whose 
presence  might  bring  a  curse  upon  it.  So  that, 
though  the  land  resounded  with  war  and  the  rumour 
of  war,  Sir  Thomas  remained  in  an  enforced  quietude 
in  his  castle  at  Cromartic.  The  effect  of  the  battle  of 
Dunbar  (3rd  September)  was  to  depress  the  faction 
which  had  excluded  the  Royalist  partisans  from  the 
army,  and  kept  the  King  himself  in  something  very 


84  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

like  bondage.  Charles  IL,  indeed,  is  said  to  have 
given  thanks  to  God  for  the  victory  of  Cromwell 
over  the  Covenanting  forces  at  this  battle,  and  the 
only  difficulty  in  the  way  of  believing  this  statement 
lies  in  the  fact  that  he  so  seldom  gave  thanks  for 
anything. 

The  Eoyalist  party  now  began  to  rally  about 
their  sovereign.  Charles  n.  was  crowned  at  Scone 
on  the  1st  January,  1651,  and  in  due  time  an 
army,  which  included  many  of  the  so-called 
Malignant s,  was  ready  for  trying  conclusions  once 
again  with  the  terrible  English  General.  And  now 
for  the  third  time  our  author  took  up  arms  on 
behalf  of  the  Stuarts.  After  some  months  of 
endless  marchings  and  counter-marchings,  in  which 
Cromwell  evidently  endeavoured  to  provoke  his 
enemies  into  a  repetition  of  the  blunder  by  which 
they  had  lost  the  battle  of  Dunbar,  the  Scottish 
forces  found  an  opportunity  of  marching  into 
England. 

The  latter,  under  David  Lesley,  had  taken  up  a 
strong  position  on  the  height  of  the  Tor  Wood, 
between  Stirling  and  Falkirk,  from  which  they 
refused  to  be  drawn  out  to  battle  ;  and  Cromwell 
resolved  to  take  up  his  post  on  the  other  side  of 
the  Eoyalist  army.  Accordingly,  he  crossed  the 
Forth  at  Queensferry,  and,  after  defeating  an 
attempt  to  intercept  him  at  Inverkeithing,  reached 
and  occupied  Perth.  The  way  to  England  was 
now  open,  and  the  Scottish  army  swiftly  and 
silently  entered  upon  it,  resolved  to  stake  every 
thing  upon  a  great  battle. 


INVASION  OF  ENGLAND  85 

Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  left  his  castle  of  Croinartie, 
and  took  part  in  this  expedition,  though  apparently 
he  held  no  position  of  command  in  the  army,  and 
was  very  much  out  of  sympathy  with  many  of 
those  who  journeyed  with  Mm.  Indeed,  his  un 
fortunate  prejudices  against  the  Presbyterian  and 
Covenanting  party  come  out  in  the  statement  he 
makes,  that  many  of  those  who  started  out  to  smite 
"  the  Midianites  and  Philistines,"  when  it  came  to 
the  push,  managed  to  make  their  way  home,  "  being 
loth  to  hazard  their  precious  persons,  lest  they 
should  seem  to  trust  to  the  arm  of  flesh."1  The 
mass  of  those,  however,  who  formed  the  Scottish 
army  were  of  very  different  mettle,  and  the  battle 
in  which  they  staked  and  lost  everything  was 
one  of  the  fiercest  in  the  whole  of  the  great  Civil 
War. 

The  course  of  their  journey  southward  was 
through  Biggar  and  Carlisle,  and  then  through 
Lancashire.  To  their  disappointment,  they  re 
ceived  no  great  accession  of  Royalists,  nor  of  any 
others  who  were  inclined  to  join  them  in  the 
attempt  to  overthrow  the  Commonwealth.  "  They 
marched,"  says  the  historian,  "  under  rigorous 
discipline,  weary  and  uncheered,  south  through 
Lancashire ;  had  to  dispute  .  .  .  the  Bridge  of 
Warrington  with  Lambert  and  Harrison,  who 
attended  them  with  horse  -  troops  on  the  left ; 
Cromwell  with  the  main  army  steadily  advancing 
behind.  They  carried  the  Bridge  at  Warrington ; 
they  summoned  various  Towns,  but  none  yielded  ; 

p.  279. 


86  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

proclaimed  their  King,  with  all  force  of  lungs  and 
heraldry,  but  none  cried,  God  bless  him.  Summon 
ing  Shrewsbury,  with  the  usual  negative  response, 
they  quitted  the  London  road ;  bent  southward 
towards  Worcester,  a  City  of  slight  Garrison  and 
loyal  Mayor ;  there  to  entrench  themselves,  and 
repose  a  little."1  Yet  but  slight  opportunity  for 
this  was  given  them.  The  course  taken  by  Crom 
well  was  through  York,  Nottingham,  Coventry,  and 
Stratford-on-Avon,  and  when  he  arrived  at  Wor 
cester  with  his  army  from  Scotland,  and  with  the 
county  militias,  who  had  risen  at  his  summons,  his 
forces  numbered  over  thirty  thousand  men  as  against 
the  enemy's  sixteen  thousand. 

Meantime  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  had  taken  up 
his  quarters  in  Worcester,  in  the  house  of  a  Mr 
Spilsbury,  "  a  very  honest  sort  of  man,  who  had  an 
exceeding  good  woman  to  his  wife."  His  luggage, 
which  was  stored  in  an  attic,  consisted,  besides 
"  scarlet  cloaks,  buff  suits,  and  arms  of  all  sorts," 
of  seven  large  "  portmantles,"  three  of  which  were 
filled  with  unpublished  works  in  manuscript,  and 
other  valuable  documents — the  amount  of  which 
he  gives  us  in  quires  and  quinternions,  but  which 
need  not  be  repeated  here.  "Peace  hath  her 
victories  no  less  renowned  than  war,"  sang  Milton 
in  his  sonnet  to  the  Lord  General  Cromwell ; 
and  perhaps  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  hoped,  after 
achieving  victory  in  war,  to  win  a  second  set  of 
laurels  by  means  of  the  contents  of  the  three 
"  portmantles." 

1  Carlyle's  Oliver  Cromwell,  iii.  148. 


BATTLE  OF  WORCESTER  87 

On  the  evening  of  the  3rd  September,  the  anni 
versary  of  the  battle  of  Dunbar,  and  afterwards  to 
be  the  date  of  Cromwell's  own  death,  the  battle 
of  Worcester  was  fought,  and  the  Koyalist  cause 
utterly  shattered.  "  The  fighting  of  the  Scots," 
says  Carlyle, "  was  fierce  and  desperate.  '  My  Lord 
General  did  exceedingly  hazard  himself,  riding  up 
and  down  in  the  midst  of  the  fire ;  riding,  himself 
in  person,  to  the  Enemy's  foot  to  offer  them  quarter, 
whereto  they  returned  no  answer  but  shot/  The 
small  Scotch  Army,  begirdled  with  overpowering 
force,  and  cut  off  from  help  or  reasonable  hope, 
storms  forth  in  fiery  pulses,  horse  and  foot ;  charges 
now  on  this  side  of  the  River,  now  on  that ; — can  on 
no  side  prevail.  Cromwell  recoils  a  little,  but  only 
to  rally  and  return  irresistible.  The  small  Scotch 
Army  is,  on  every  side,  driven  in  again.  Its  fiery 
pulsings  are  but  the  struggles  of  death :  agonies  as 
of  a  lion  coiled  in  the  folds  of  a  boa.  '  As  stiff  a 
contest/  says  Cromwell,  '  for  four  or  five  hours  as 
ever  I  have  seen.' " l 

The  conquered  lost  six  thousand  men,  and  all 
their  baggage  and  artillery ;  and  Charles  only  with 
difficulty,  and  after  many  romantic  adventures,  suc 
ceeded  in  escaping  to  the  Continent  when  the  fight 
was  over.  Ten  thousand  prisoners,  including  eleven 
of  the  Scottish  nobility,  were  taken.  The  sufferings 
of  many  of  these  brave  men  were  severe  in  the 
extreme.  Some  perished  from  want  of  food  and 
from  gaol  diseases,  and  large  numbers  of  the  survivors 
were  shipped  for  the  plantations,  and  sold  as  slaves. 
1  Carlyle's  Oliver  Cromuxll,  iii.  154, 


88  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  and,  apparently,  more  than 
one  of  his  brothers,  were  among  the  prisoners,  but 
appeared  to  have  fared  better  than  many  of  their 
companions  in  arms.  The  greatest  of  the  misfor 
tunes  that  fell  upon  him  was,  in  his  estimation,  the 
sad  fate  that  overtook  his  precious  manuscripts. 
The  whole  story,  related  in  his  own  inimitable 
style,  may  be  read  in  Chapter  vi.  It  is  enough  to 
say  here  that  a  party  of  marauders  broke  into  his 
quarters  in  search  of  valuables,  that  they  forced 
open  the  "  portmantles  "  and  turned  their  contents 
out  upon  the  floor,  and  afterwards  carried  off  the 
papers  to  use  them  for  wrapping  up  articles  of 
plunder,  and  for  lighting  their  pipes.  Fortunately 
some  bundles  of  these  papers  were  afterwards  picked 
up  in  the  streets  and  brought  back  to  him,  and  in 
due  time  found  their  way  to  the  printer's. 

After  the  battle  of  Worcester,  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  and  some  of  the  other  Scottish  gentlemen 
who  had  been  taken  prisoners  there  were  confined 
in  the  Tower  of  London.  He  seems  to  have 
speedily  gained  the  favour  of  his  captors,  and  to 
have  been  treated  with  remarkable  leniency.  Indeed, 
he  speaks  in  terms  of  affectionate  respect  of  various 
officers  of  the  Parliamentary  army  from  whom  he 
had  received  kindness,  and  acknowledges  courtesies 
extended  towards  him  by  the  Lord  General  himself. 
Thus  he  places  on  record  his  indebtedness  to  a 
"  most  generous  gentleman,  Captain  Gladmon,"  for 
speaking  in  his  favour  to  the  Protector.  And  of 
another,  whom  he  calls  the  Marshal-General,  in 
whose  charge  he  had  been  placed,  he  has  set  down 


ALLEVIATIONS  OF  CAPTIVITY          89 

the  praise  in  the  following  elaborate  sentence : — 
"  The  kindly  usage  of  the  Marshal  -  General, 
Captain  Alsop,  whilst  I  was  in  his  custody,]  I  am 
bound  in  duty  so  to  acknowledge,  that  I  may 
without  dissimulation  avouch,  for  courtesies  con 
ferred  on  such  as  were  within  the  verge  of  his 
authority,  and  fidelity  to  those  by  whom  he  was 
intrusted  with  their  tuition  [oversight  of  them]  in 
that  restraint,  that  never  any  could  by  his  faithful 
ness  to  the  one  and  loving  carriage  to  the  other 
bespeak  himself  more  a  gentleman,  nor  in  the 
discharge  of  that  military  place  acquit  himself 
with  a  more  universally-deserved  applause  and 
commendation." l 

The  severity  of  his  imprisonment  was  soon  abated  ; 
and  he  was  removed  from  the  Tower  to  Windsor 
Castle,2  and  not  long  after,  by  the  orders  of  Crom 
well,  was  paroled  de  die  in  diem?  The  comparative 
liberty  he  now  enjoyed  enabled  him  to  repair  the 
loss  of  his  manuscripts  after  the  battle  of  Worcester, 
and  he  set  himself  to  make  the  best  of  the  frag 
ments  he  had  recovered,  and  to  prepare  them  for 
publication,  as  well  as  to  compose  new  material 
A  paragraph  in  the  Epilogue  of  one  of  his  works, 
in  which  he  describes  his  warm  appreciation  of 
the  measure  of  freedom  he  now  enjoyed,  is  worth 
quoting.  "That  I,  whilst  a  prisoner,"  he  says, 
"  was  able  to  digest  and  write  this  Treatise,  is  an 
effect  meerly  proceeding  from  the  courtesie  of  my 
Lord  General  Cromwel,  by  whose  recommendation 
to  the  Councel  of  State  my  parole  being  taken  for 

1  Works,  p.  408.  a  Col.  State  Papers,  Dom.  3  Ibid. 


90  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

my  true  imprisonment,  I  was  by  their  favour 
enlarged  to  the  extent  of  the  lines  of  London's 
communication ;  for  had  I  continued  as  before, 
coopt  up  within  walls,  or  yet  been  attended  still 
by  a  guard,  as  for  a  while  I  was,  should  the  house 
of  my  confinement  have  never  been  so  pleasant,  or 
my  keepers  a  very  paragon  of  discretion,  and  that 
the  conversation  of  the  best  wits  in  the  world, 
with  affluence  of  all  manner  of  books,  should  have 
been  allowed  me  for  the  diversion  of  my  minde,  yet 
such  an  antipathie  I  have  to  any  kinde  of  restraint 
wherein  myself  is  not  entrusted,  that  notwithstand 
ing  these  advantages,  which  to  some  spirits  would 
make  a  jayl  seem  more  delicious  then  [than] 
freedom  without  them,  it  could  not  in  that  eclipse 
of  liberty  lie  in  my  power  to  frame  myself  to  the 
couching  of  one  sillable,  or  contriving  of  a  fancie 
worthy  the  labour  of  putting  pen  to  paper,  no  more 
then  [than]  a  nightingale  can  warble  it  in  a  cage, 
or  linet  in  a  dungeon." 1 

Another  friend  whom  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart 
found  in  the  time  of  need  was  the  celebrated 
Eoger  Williams,  the  apostle  of  civil  and  religious 
liberty,  and  the  founder  of  the  settlement  of  Pro 
vidence,  Ehode  Island,  and  missionary  to  the 
Indians.  In  the  Epilogue  to  the  Logopandecteision 
he  thus  acknowledges  his  obligations  to  him  :  "  [I 
cannot]  forget  my  thankfulness  to  that  reverend 
preacher  Mr  Eoger  Williams  of  Providence,  in 
New  England,  for  the  manifold  favours  wherein  I 
stood  obliged  to  him  above  a  whole  month  before 

1  Works,  p.  408. 


ROGER  WILLIAMS  91 

either  of  us  had  so  much  as  seen  other,  and  that 
by  his  frequent  and  earnest  solicitation  in  my 
behalf  of  the  most  especial  members  both  of  the 
Parliament  and  Councel  of  State ;  in  doing  whereof 
he  appeared  so  truely  generous,  that  when  it  was 
told  him  how  I,  having  got  notice  of  his  so  un 
deserved  respect  towards  me,  was  desirous  to 
embrace  some  sudden  opportunity  whereby  to 
testitie  the  affection  I  did  owe  him,  he  purposely 
delayed  the  occasion  of  meeting  with  me  till  he 
had,  as  he  said,  performed  some  acceptable  office 
worthy  of  my  acquaintance ;  in  all  which,  both 
before  and  after  we  had  conversed  with  one  another, 
and  by  those  many  worthy  books  set  forth  by  him, 
to  the  advancement  of  piety  and  good  order,  with 
some  whereof  he  was  pleased  to  present  me,  he  did 
prove  himself  a  man  of  such  discretion  and  inimit 
ably-sanctified  parts,  that  an  Archangel  from  heaven 
could  not  have  shown  more  goodness  with  less 
ostentation."  l 

1  Works,  p.  419.  Roger  Williams  (c.  1600-c.  1684)  was  himself 
a  remarkable  man.  He  was  a  native  of  Wales,  was  educated  at 
Oxford,  and  entered  into  holy  orders  ;  but  his  aversion  to  the 
government  and  discipline  of  the  Church  of  England  led  him  to 
seek  for  greater  freedom  in  America.  He  was  a  strenuous  asserter 
of  religious  toleration  at  a  time  when  it  was  little  understood  and 
less  practised  anywhere.  His  liberty  of  thinking  and  speaking  led 
to  his  being  banished  from  Massachusetts  ;  and,  thereupon,  ho  pur 
chased  a  tract  of  land  from  the  Indians,  and  founded  a  settlement, 
which  he  named  Providence.  At  the  time  when  he  generously 
interceded  in  favour  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  he  was  residing  in 
London  as  the  agent  of  the  new  settlement,  of  which  he  was  after 
wards  chosen  president.  He  was  on  intimate  terms  with  Cromwell, 
Milton,  and  other  leading  Puritans,  and  consequently  would  be  in 
a  position  to  render  great  service  to  his  friend  Urquhart. 


92  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

The  years  1652  and  1653  form  a  period  of 
astonishing  literary  activity  on  the  part  of  our 
author,  for  no  fewer  than  five  separate  works  were 
then  published  by  him,  two  of  which  were  of  very 
considerable  bulk.  The  motive  that  had  led  him  to 
bring  out  his  two  former  works — the  Epigrams  and 
The  Trissotetras — had  been  a  desire  to  benefit  man 
kind  and  to  advance  the  glory  of  his  native  land. 
But  now  he  had  to  consider  his  own  interests,  and 
to  exert  himself  to  promote  them.  Accordingly,  his 
present  aim  was  to  convince  his  captors  of  his  extra 
ordinary  merits  and  gifts,  and  of  the  incomparable 
glory  of  that  family  which  he  had  the  honour  of 
representing. 

In  1652  he  issued  his  IIANTOXPONO- 
XANON ;  or,  a  Peculiar  Promptuary  of  Time,  of 
which  a  detailed  description  is  given  in  Chapter  v. 
The  object  of  this  treatise  is  to  show  the  Protector 
and  the  English  Parliament  that  the  family  of  the 
Urquharts  could  be  traced  back,  link  by  link,  to 
the  red  earth  out  of  which  Adam  was  made,  and  to 
suggest  how  lamentable  it  would  be,  if  the  ruling 
power  extinguished  a  race  which  had  successfully 
resisted  the  scythe  of  Time,  and  was  capable  of 
rendering  great  services  to  the  State. 

This  small  treatise  was  closely  followed  by  a 
more  important  production,  upon  which  Sir  Thomas's 
fame  as  an  author  largely  rests — his  EKSKTBA- 
A  AT  PON ;  or,  The  Discovery  of  a  most  Exquisite 
Jewel.  The  title  of  this  work  is  intended  to  be  an 
abbreviation  of  a  Greek  phrase — "  Gold  from  a 
dunghill" — and  contains  an  allusion  to  the  fact  that 


RETURN  TO  SCOTLAND  93 

the  first  half  of  it  was,  in  its  manuscript  form,  one 
of  the  bundles  of  paper  which  the  soldiers  treated 
with  such  disrespect  after  the  battle  of  Worcester, 
and  which,  indeed,  was  found  next  day  in  a  kennel 
of  one  of  the  streets  of  that  city.  This  book,  a 
fuller  account  of  which  we  give  later  on,  consists 
of  an  introduction  to  a  work  on  a  Universal 
Language,  to  which  is  added  a  rhapsodical  pane 
gyric  on  the  Scottish  nation,  and  an  account  of 
his  fellow-countrymen  who  had  been  famous  as 
scholars  or  soldiers  during  the  previous  fifty 
years. 

In  the  course  of  the  early  part  of  1652 
Urquhart  had  in  some  way  excited  the  suspicions 
of  the  Government,  and  in  the  month  of  May  his 
papers  were  seized  by  the  authorities.  Nothing 
treasonable,  however,  was  found  among  them,  and 
probably  the  harmless  character  of  his  pursuits, 
which  was  thus  brought  to  light,  made  a  favourable 
impression  upon  the  Council  of  State.  For,  a  few 
weeks  later,  he  was  allowed,  in  answer  to  a  petition 
which  he  presented  to  the  Council,  and  which  was 
referred  to  Cromwell,  to  return  to  Scotland  to 
arrange  his  private  affairs,  and  to  be  absent  for 
five  months.1  The  only  condition  imposed  upon 
him  was  that  during  this  time  he  should  do 
nothing  to  the  prejudice  of  the  Commonwealth. 

Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  creditors  had  been  told 

1  The  leave  granted  was  for  five  months  from  the  14th  of  July, 
1652.  Before  the  expiration  of  this  time,  Sir  Thomas  asked  for 
liberty  to  stay  for  six  weeks  longer  in  Scotland,  and  this  was 
granted  (Acts  of  Parliament,  vol.  vi.  pt.  2,  p.  7486). 


94  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

that  he  had  been  killed  at  the  battle  of  Worcester, 
and,  as  he  says  in  his  own  characteristic  way, 
"  for  gladness  of  the  tidings  [they]  had  madified 
[moistened]  their  noils  to  some  purpose  with  the 
liquor  of  the  grape/'1  and  had  possessed  themselves 
of  all  his  property.  When  they  were  assured  by 
letters  from  himself  that  he  was  still  alive,  they 
claimed  payment  for  debts  which  had  been  long 
discharged,  under  the  impression  that  the  receipts 
had  perished  along  with  other  papers  after  the 
battle.  They  even  plotted,  we  are  assured,  to 
arrest  our  author  in  London,  after  he  had  been 
liberated  upon  parole.  By  the  thoughtful  dis 
cretion  of  a  Captain  Goodwin,  of  Colonel  Pride's 
regiment,  the  receipts  in  question  had  been  saved 
out  of  the  spoil  of  Worcester,  and  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  was  able  to  display  them  to  the  unjust 
creditors.  "  And  when,"  he  says,  "  they  saw  that 
those  their  acquittances  .  .  .  were  produced  before 
them,  they  then,  looking  as  if  their  noses  had  been 
ableeding,  could  not  any  longer  for  shame  retard 
my  cancelling  of  the  aforesaid  bonds."  2 

In  the  midst  of  so  many  complaints  of  the 
iniquity  of  creditors,  it  is  gratifying  to  find  Sir 
Thomas  acknowledging  that  there  was  one  of  that 
class  who  treated  him  with  forbearance  and  even 
with  kindness.  His  thankfulness  at  discovering 
this  green  oasis  in  the  arid  desert  in  which  so  much 
of  his  life  had  been  passed,  is  expressed  in  his  own 
characteristic  way.  "  But  may,"  he  says,  "  William 
Robertson  of  Kindeasse,  or  rather  Kindnessc  (for  so 

1  Works,  p.  377.  ~  Ibid,  p.  378. 


ROBERTSON  OF  KINDEASSE  95 

they  call  this  worthy  man),  for  his  going  contrary 
to  that  stream  of  wickedness  which  carryeth  head 
long  his  fellow-creditors  to  the  black  sea  of  un- 
christian-like  dealing,  enjoy  a  long  life  in  this 
world,  attended  with  health,  wealth,  a  hopeful 
posterity,  and  all  the  happiness  conducible  to 
eternal  salvation ;  and  may  his  children  after  him, 
as  heires  both  of  his  vertues  and  means,  derive 
[transmit]  his  lands  and  riches  to  their  sons,  to 
continue  successively  in  that  line  from  generation 
to  generation,  so  long  as  there  is  a  hill  in  Scotland, 
or  that  the  sea  doth  ebbe  and  flow.  This  hearty 
wish  of  mine,  as  chief  of  my  kinred  [kindred],  I 
bequeath  to  all  that  do  and  are  to  carry  the  name 
of  Urquhart,  and  adjure  them,  by  the  respect  they 
owe  to  the  stock  whence  they  are  descended,  for 
my  father's  love  and  mine  to  this  man,  to  do  all 
manner  of  good  offices  to  each  one  that  bears  the 
name  of  Kobertson."1 

His  old  enemy,  Lesley  of  Findrassie,  endeavoured 
in  vain  to  persuade  the  officers  of  the  English 
garrison,  then  stationed  in  Urquhart's  house  at 
Cromartie,  to  arrest  him  as  a  prisoner  of  war,  and 
keep  him  in  confinement  "  till  he  [Lesley]  were 
contented  in  all  his  demands." 2  An  attempt 
was  also  made  to  apprehend  him  at  Elgin;  but 
he  escaped  all  these  machinations,  and,  after 
travelling  in  safety  through  many  of  the  principal 
towns  of  Scotland,  returned  to  London  within  the 
specified  time,  and  gave  himself  up  to  the  Council 
of  State. 

1  Works,  p.  384.  *  Ibid.  p.  380. 


96  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

In  the  course  of  the  year  1653  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  published  the  last  of  his  original  works 
— his  Logopandecteision,  and  the  translation  of  the 
first  two  books  of  Rabelais,  in  connection  with 
which  his  name  is  best  known.  The  object  of  the 
former  of  these  was  to  suggest  a  wonderful  scheme 
for  a  universal  language,  with  the  idea  of  being 
restored  by  the  Government  to  the  full  possession 
of  his  liberty,  and  of  being  reinstated  in  the  position 
of  power  and  wealth,  which  he  maintained  was  his 
by  hereditary  right,  in  order  to  carry  out  the 
scheme.  His  hopes  and  anticipations  of  success  in 
this  appeal  to  the  English  Government  were  not 
daunted  by  the  fact  that  to  do  what  he  required 
would  need  several  legislative  changes,  a  reversal  of 
proceedings  in  Scottish  courts  of  law,  and  a  sub 
stantial  grant  from  the  Treasury.  This,  after  all, 
he  considered,  was  a  very  small  price  to  pay  for  the 
benefits  he  would  thereby  confer  upon  the  world. 
That  the  appeal  was  not  successful  needs  scarcely 
be  told.  Probably  in  no  country  in  the  world, 
and  at  no  period  in  history,  could  any  be  found 
more  likely  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  such  requests, 
than  such  men  as  Cromwell,  Fleetwood,  and 
Overton.  Men  like  these  were  too  practical,  and 
of  too  hard  a  nature,  to  be  impressed  by  any  such 
visionary  schemes  as  those  which  their  prisoner 
delighted  in  constructing. 

A  veil  of  obscurity  hangs  over  the  closing  years 
of  our  author's  life.  His  last  appearance  before 
the  public  was  in  the  issuing  of  the  books  above 
mentioned.  The  only  further  record  of  him  is  in  the 


OUR  AUTHOR'S  DEATH  97 

continuation  of  the  Pedigree  of  the  Urquharts,  which 
is  contained  in  the  Edinburgh  edition  of  his  Tracts. 
In  this  we  read  that  "he  was  confined  for  several 
years  in  the  Tower  of  London ;  from  whence  he  made 
his  escape,  and  went  beyond  seas,  where  he  died 
suddenly  in  a  fit  of  excessive  laughter,  on  being 
informed  by  his  servant  that  the  King  was  restored."1 
If  this  account  of  matters  be  true,  it  would  seem 
that  Sir  Thomas  had  forfeited  some  of  those  privi 
leges  which  he  had  won  so  soon  after  he  had 
become  a  State  prisoner.  It  is  quite  possible  that 
this  was  in  consequence  of  having  joined  in  some 
Royalist  plot  against  the  Commonwealth  and  for 
the  restoration  of  Charles  n. 

In  the  preface  to  the  second  book  of  Rabelais, 
Sir  Thomas  promises  very  speedily  to  translate 
the  three  remaining  books  of  that  author,  so  that 
the  whole  "  Pentateuch  of  Rabelais,"  as  he  calls  it, 
might  be  in  the  hands  of  English  readers.  But 
this  design  was  never  completed.  The  translation 
of  the  third  book  was  found  among  his  papers, 
and  was  published  in  1693  by  Pierre  Antoine 
Motteux,  but  it  is  probable  that  the  editor  himself 
had  some  share  in  the  work  as  issued  to  the  public. 

Sir  Theodore  Martin  considers  that  there  is  a 
strong  presumption  against  the  truth  of  the  above 
account  of  Sir  Thomas's  death,  in  his  entire  silence 
during  the  long  period  which  elapsed  between 
the  publication  of  his  last  work  and  1660,  the  date 
of  the  Restoration  of  Charles  IT.  "  Men,"  he  says, 
"  so  deeply  smitten  with  the  cacoethts  scribendi  as 
Urquhart  was,  do  not  thus  readily  cast  the  pen 
1  P.  37. 


98  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

aside;  nor  was  the  lack  of  a  publisher  likely  to 
have  stood  in  the  way  of  his  literary  career.  His 
writings,  if  for  no  other  cause  but  the  number  of 
his  friends,  must  always  have  been  a  safe  specu 
lation  for  a  printer,  at  a  time  when  printing  was 
cheap  and  readers  numerous.  But  the  imperfect 
state  of  his  translation  of  Eabelais  is  perhaps  the 
best  evidence  of  the  inaccuracy  of  the  current  belief. 
.  .  .  Motteux  says  that  Urquhart's  version  '  was 
too  kindly  received  not  to  encourage  him  to  English 
the  three  remaining  books,  or  at  least  the  third,  the 
fourth  and  fifth  being  in  a  manner  distinct,  as 
being  Pantagruel's  voyage.  Accordingly  he  trans 
lated  the  third  book,  and  would  have  finished  the 
whole,  had  not  death  prevented  him/  This  bears 
hard  against  the  supposition  of  that  event  having 
occurred  upwards  of  six  years  after  the  two  first 
books  had  been  given  to  the  world.  It  is  probable 
that  he  died  much  sooner,  a  victim  in  all  likelihood 
to  that  fiery  restlessness  of  spirit, 

'Which  o'er-informs  its  tenement  of  clay, 
And  frets  the  pigmy  body  to  decay.'"1 

This  conjecture  is,  however,  improbable.  A 
petition  from  our  author's  brother,  Sir  Alexander 
Urquhart,  is  still  in  existence,  in  which  he  asks  for 
a  new  commission  of  hereditary  Sheriffship  of 
Cromartie  to  be  made  out  for  him,  on  the  ground 
of  his  being  the  eldest  surviving  son  of  the  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  who  died  in  1642.2  Though 
this  document  is  undated,  it  is  assigned  by  the 
editor  of  the  volume  of  State  Papers  in  which  it  is 

1  Rabelais,  p.  xiv.        2  Gal.  State  Papers,  Domestic,  16.60-61,  p.  237 . 


TRADITION  PROBABLY  CORRECT       99 

to  be  found,  to  August  of  1060.  If  this  date 
be  trustworthy,  we  may  be  almost  sure  that  the 
traditional  statement  as  to  the  year  of  our  author's 
death  is  correct. 

The  cause  of  his  giving  up  his  literary  labours,  and 
of  omitting  to  carry  through  the  work  of  translation 
on  which  he  had  entered,  is,  of  course,  unknown  to 
us.  His  health,  physical  or  mental,  may  have  be 
come  seriously  impaired,  or  his  spirits  may  have 
been  too  much  depressed  by  the  misfortunes  that 
crowded  upon  him,  to  allow  him  to  engage  in 
literary  work.  Indeed,  the  alleged  cause  of  death 
from  violent  agitation  of  feeling  caused  by  hearing 
of  the  Kestoration  of  Charles  II.,  argues  in  itself  a 
previous  condition  of  great  physical  weakness. 

There  seems  at  first  a  certain  grotesqueness  in 
such  a  fatal  exuberance  of  joy  in  connexion  with 
such  an  event  as  Charles  II.  regaining  the  crown 
which  his  father  had  lost,  and  of  which  in  another 
generation  all  of  his  blood  were  to  be  deprived. 
But  we  have  to  keep  in  mind  that  Sir  Thomas  was 
not  alone  in  his  folly,  if  folly  it  were ;  for  a  great 
wave  of  exultation  swept  over  the  three  kingdoms 
at  that  time.  Our  author  had,  like  many  of  his 
fellow-Koyalists,  staked  and  lost  everything  he 
possessed  in  the  defence  of  the  House  of  Stuart,  and 
one  can  have  little  difficulty  in  understanding  how 
the  announcement  of  the  triumph  of  the  cause, 
which  was  so  dear  to  him,  should  have  agitated 
him  profoundly.1 

1  In  the  preface  to  a  new  translation  of  Rabelais  by  \V.  F.  Smith, 
Esq. ,  Fellow  of  St  John's  College,  Cambridge,  some  doubt  is  cast 
uj>on  the  above  narrative  of  Sir  Thomas's  death.  Mr  Smith 


ioo  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

Sir  Alexander  Urquhart  failed  to  recover  posses 
sion  of  either  the  barony  or  the  Sheriffship  of 
Cromartie,  and  a  year  after  the  supposed  date  of 

remarks,  "This  looks  something  like  an  imitation  of  Rabelais  in 
his  account  of  the  death  of  Philemon."  The  reference  is  to  the 
following  passages  in  Rabelais,  who  alludes  to  the  story  no  fewer 
than  three  times.  In  Book  i.  10,  we  read:  "Just  so  the  heart 
with  excessive  joy  is  inwardly  dilated,  and  suffereth  a  manifest 
resolution  of  the  vital  spirits,  which  may  go  so  farre  on,  that  it 
may  thereby  be  deprived  of  its  nourishment,  and  by  consequence 
of  life  itself,  by  this  Pericharie  or  extremity  of  gladnesse,  as  Galen 
saith  .  .  .  and  as  it  hath  come  to  passe  in  former  times  ...  to 
Philemon  and  others,  who  died  with  joy."  In  chap.  xx.  some 
more  particulars  are  given  of  the  case:  "As  Philemon,  who,  for 
seeing  an  asse  eate  those  figs,  which  were  provided  for  his  own 
dinner,  died  with  force  of  laughing."  But  in  Book  iv.  17,  we  are 
told  the  whole  story:  "[Neither  ought  you  to  wonder  at]  the 
death  of  Philomenes,  wrhose  servant,  having  got  him  some  new 
figs  for  the  first  course  of  his  dinner,  whilst  he  went  to  fetch  wine, 
a  straggling  .  .  .  ass  got  into  the  house,  and,  seeing  the  figs  on 
the  table,  without  further  invitation,  soberly  fell  to.  Philomenes 
coming  into  the  room,  and  nicely  observing  with  what  gravity  the 
ass  eat  its  dinner,  said  to  his  man,  who  was  come  back,  '  Since 
thou  hast  set  figs  here  for  this  reverend  guest  of  ours  to  eat, 
methinks  it  is  but  reason  thou  also  give  him  some  of  this  wine  to 
drink.'  He  had  no  sooner  said  this,  but  he  was  so  excessively 
pleased,  and  fell  into  so  exorbitant  a  fit  of  laughter,  that  the  use 
of  his  spleen  took  that  of  his  breath  utterly  away,  and  he  immedi 
ately  died."  The  story  is  taken  from  Lucian  (paKpopioi,  c.  25) 
or  from  Valerius  Maximus  (ix.  12),  in  which  in  the  Paris  folio 
edition  (1517)  the  name  is  given  as  Philomenes.  There  is  un 
doubtedly  a  resemblance  between  the  account  of  Philemon's  death 
and  that  of  our  author,  but  we  think  it  can  only  be  accidental. 
The  editor  of  the  Edinburgh  edition  of  the  Tracts  is,  as  I  have 
said,  our  only  authority  for  the  story  of  Urquhart's  death  ;  but 
there  is  no  adequate  reason  for  doubting  it.  He  seems  to  have 
been  well  versed  in  the  history  of  the  Urquhart  family,  which  he 
brings  up  to  date,  and  must  have  derived  his  information  from 
some  members  of  it.  It  would  be  strange  if  in  little  more  than  a 
century  after  our  author's  death,  an  utterly  mythical  account  of  it 
should  have  sprung  up  and  found  a  place  among  the  details  of 


ESTATE  PASSES  TO  COUSIN  101 

his  petition,  he  is  said  to  have  ratified  his  cousin's 
rights,1  and  in  1663  he  formally  "  disponed "  the 
estate  (i.e.  his  title  to  it)  to  Sir  John.2  The  new 

family  history.  According  to  Lowndes's  Billiograplier's  Manual, 
the  editor  of  the  volume  was  David  Herd,  the  well-known 
antiquary.  If  this  statement  be  correct,  we  have  all  the  more 
reason  to  rely  upon  the  supplementary  information  the  volume 
contains,  as  Herd's  acquaintance  with  Scottish  history  and  bio 
graphy  was  very  extensive  and  accurate.  In  one  of  the  Nodes 
Ambrosianas  (Blackwood'a  Magazine,  September,  1832),  a  highly 
extravagant  version  is  given  of  Urquhart's  death.  It  is  intended 
to  be  humorous,  but  is  merely  flat  and  silly.  Only  those  can 
smile  at  it  who  have  been  trained  up  to  believe  that  the  Noctes 
contain  exquisite  humour,  and  who  have,  therefore,  been  accus 
tomed  to  welcome  passages  from  it  as  mirth-inspiring.  The  state 
ment  made  in  this  mention  of  Urquhart,  that  his  death  was  caused 
by  excessive  alcoholic  celebration  of  the  happy  event  of  the 
Restoration,  is  utterly  baseless  and  offensive ;  and  it  is  a  pity  that  in 
Allibone's  Dictionary  and  in  the  Dictionary  of  National  Biography 
this  article  in  Blackwood's  Magazine  should  be  referred  to  as  one  of 
the  sources  of  information  concerning  Urquhart.  The  author  of 
it  had  not  access  to  any  other  account  of  Sir  Thomas's  death  than 
that  given  in  the  above-mentioned  edition  of  the  Tracts. 

1  Acts  of  Parliament,  vii.  70. 

8  Inverness  Sasines.  The  date  when  Sir  Alexander  Urquhart 
received  knighthood  seems  to  be  approximately  fixed  by  the  fact 
that  in  a  grant  under  the  Privy  Seal  of  5th  March,  1661,  he  is  called 
Alexander,  and  in  a  notice  of  him  of  the  29th  of  the  same  month 
and  year  he  appears  as  Sir  Alexander  (Acts  of  Parliament,  vii.  93). 
From  the  fact  that  in  this  year  the  succession  to  the  estates  and 
hereditary  Sheriftship  of  Cromartie  were  entered  upon  by  his  cousin 
Sir  John  Urquhart  of  Craigfintray,  it  was  taken  for  granted  by  the 
editor  of  the  Tracts  (Edinburgh,  1774)  that  Sir  Alexander  had  died. 
This  error  is  repeated  by  Hugh  Miller,  and  by  most  of  those  who 
have  made  any  reference  to  him.  He  was  still  alive  in  1667,  for 
during  that  year  he  sold  his  salmon  fishings  in  Over-rak  and  the 
King's  Water  to  John  Gordon  (see  also  Acts  of  Parliament,  vii.  537). 
He  is  spoken  of  as  quondam  in  a  charter  of  certain  lands  which  had 
belonged  to  him,  19th  June,  1668.  His  cousin,  Sir  John  Urquhart, 
received  knighthood  about  the  same  time  ;  at  least  he  appears  in 
Parliament  as  Sir  John,  1st  January,  1661  (Acts  of  Parliament,^.  4). 


102  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

possessors  were,  however,  as  unfortunate  as  their 
immediate  predecessors,  for  in  no  very  long  time 
they  were  overwhelmed  by  distresses  like  those 
which  had  burdened  and  embittered  the  lives  of 
our  author  and  his  father.  In  1682  the  celebrated 
Sir  George  Mackenzie,  whose  name,  like  that  of 
Queen  Mary  of  England,  is  usually  associated  with 
an  unenviable  epithet,  as  that  of  a  cruel  persecutor,1 
"apprized"  the  estate  from  Sir  John's2  son,  Jonathan.3 

1  "There  was  the  Bluidy  Advocate  Mackenyie,  who,    for  his 
worldly  wit  and  wisdom,  had  been  to  the  rest  as  a  god  "  ("  Wander 
ing  Willie's  Tale"  Redyauntlet,  chap.  xi.). 

2  There  is  said  to  have  been  some  tragedy  in  connection  with 
the  death  of  this  Sir  John  Urquhart.     According  to  Wodrow,  as 
quoted  by  Hugh  Miller,  after  having  posed  as  an  ultra-Presbyterian, 
he  became  the  friend  and  counsellor  of  the  Earl  of  Middleton, 
Charles  ii.'s  Commissioner   for   Scotland,  under  whom  Presby- 
terianism  was  overturned  and  Episcopacy  set  up  in  its  place  (1661). 
Tradition  says  that  "about  eleven  years  after  the  passing  of  the 
Act,  he  fell  into  a  deep  melancholy,  and  destroyed  himself  with 
his  own  sword  in  one  of  the  apartments  of  the  old  castle.     The 
sword,  it  is  said,  was  flung  into  a  neighbouring  draw-well  by  one 
of  the  domestics,  and  the  stain  left  by  his  blood  on  the  walls  and 
floor   of  the  apartment  was  distinctly  visible  at  the  time   the 
building  was  pulled  down"  (Scenes  and  Legends  of  the  North  of 
Scotland,  p.  111).     Tradition  is  wrong,  however,  in  saying  eleven 
years  after  1661;  for  on  August  7th,  1677,  Sir  John,  along  with 
others,  received  a  commission  "  for  putting  the  laws  against  con 
venticles  and  other  disorders  into  execution  "  (  Wodrow,  ii.  p.  366). 

3  On  the  death  of  Jonathan's  son,  Colonel  James  Urquhart,  in 
1741,  the  shadowy  honour  of  the  headship  of  the  family  passed  to 
the  Urquharts  of  Meldrum,  who  were  descended  from  the  Tutor  of 
Cromartie  by  a  third  marriage  with  Elizabeth  Seton,  only  daughter 
of  Alexander  Seton  of  Meldrum,  and  ultimately  heiress  of  that 
estate.      The  last  male  representative   of   this  line   was   Major 
Beauchamp  Colclough  Urquhart,  who  closed  a  promising  career  by 
a  heroic  death  at  the  battle  of  Atbara,  in  the  Sudan,  on  8th  April, 
1898.     His  sister,  Isabel  Annie,  is  wife  of  Garden  Alexander  Duff, 
Esq. ,  Hatton  Castle,  Turriff. 


LATER  HISTORY  OF  ESTATE  103 

No  one  who  knows  what  this  means 1  will  be  sur 
prised  to  hear  that  it  soon  afterwards  passed  into 
his  possession.  On  his  elevation  to  the  peerage 
(1685)  as  Viscount  Tarbat,  first  Earl  of  Cromartie, 
he  put  his  third- born  son,  Sir  Kenneth,  into  posses 
sion  of  the  estate,  with  the  view  of  establishing  a 
branch  of  his  family  to  be  known  as  the  Mackenzies 
of  Cron&rtie.  This  plan  was  doomed  to  be  defeated, 
for  Sir  Kenneth's  son  George  had  no  family,  and 
sold  the  estate  to  Captain  William  Urquhart  of 
Meldrum  in  174 1.2  The  lands  were  again  sold  to 
Patrick,  Lord  Elibank,3  in  1763,  and  by  him  to 
George  Eoss  of  Pitkerrie,  nine  years  afterwards. 
Mr  Ross  had  amassed  a  large  fortune  in  England 
as  an  army  agent,4  and  part  of  this  he  expended  in 
the  purchase  of  the  estate,  and  in  the  extensive 
improvements  which  he  effected  in  it.  One  wishes 
he  had  not  thought  it  desirable  to  pull  down  the 
picturesque  old  castle,  which  had  stood  on  the  mote- 
hill  of  Cromartie  for  three  hundred  years,  and 
which  had  sheltered  so  many  generations  of  the 

1  See  p.  58. 

a  Pococke,  in  his  Tour  through  Scotland  (1761),  8ays  of  the  castle 
of  Cromartie  :  "It  has  fallen  into  the  hands  of  one  Mr  Urquhart, 
who  had  commanded  a  Spanish  Gaily,  and  died  a  Convert  to 
Popery ;  which  slip  his  son,  now  eighteen  years  old,  has  in  some 
degree  recovered,  by  conforming  to  the  Church  of  England" 
(p.  176  ;  Scottish  History  Society). 

8  In  the  old  Statistical  Account  of  Cromartie,  and  in  the  preface 
to  the  Maitland  Club  edition  of  Urqukart's  Works,  the  estate  is 
said  to  have  passed  into  the  hands  of  Sir  William  Pulteney. 

4  Mr  Ross  is  mentioned  in  the  Letters  of  Junius  (see  those  of 
29th  November  and  12th  December,  1769).  He  was  succeeded  by 
his  nephew,  from  whom  the  present  proprietor  of  Cromartie, 
Mn.jor  Walter  Charteris  Ross,  is  descended. 


104  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

Urquhart  family.     Let  us  now,  however,  return  to 
our  author. 

In  telling  the  story  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's 
life,  some  of  his  most  striking  peculiarities  have 
been  displayed  and  illustrated,  so  that  no  one  who 
has  read  the  foregoing  pages  is  altogether  dependent 
upon  what  may  now  be  said  for  forming  an  estimate 
of  his  character.  His  vanity  is  perhaps  the  most 
striking  trait  in  it ;  but  only  a  very  hard-hearted 
moralist  would  call  it  a  vice  in  his  case,  for  it  is  as 
artless  as  it  is  boundless,  and  is  combined  with  so 
much  kindness  of  heart  and  generosity  of  feeling, 
that  we  are  more  entertained  by  it  than  indignant 
at  it.  No  one  who  looks  into  his  works  can  doubt 
the  intensity  of  his  patriotism.  Indeed,  his  pas 
sionate  longing  after  personal  fame  is  in  all  cases 
combined  with  the  wish  to  confer  additional  glory 
upon  the  land  of  his  birth.  His  devotion  to  the 
Eoyalist  cause 1  is  of  the  purest  and  most  heroic 
type,  and  the  general  tone  of  his  character,  as 
revealed  to  us  in  his  books,  is  elevated  and  noble. 
At  the  same  time  there  is  an  element  of  the 
grotesque  in  it,  so  that  in  his  disinterested  and 
chivalrous  disposition  he  reminds  us  of  Don  Quixote,2 

1  Our  Sir  Thomas's  memory  should  be  cherished  by  defenders  of 
the  name  and  fame  of  Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  for  he  goes  so  far  as 
to  say  that  "ignorance,  together  with  hypocrisie,  usury,  oppression, 
and  iniquity,  took  root  in  these  parts  [Scotland],  when  upright 
ness,   plain-dealing,   and  charity,  with  Astrcea,  took  their  flight 
with  Queen  Mary  of  Scotland  into  England. "     Probably  few  of  her 
admirers  would  be  so  daring  as  to  assert  this,  though  many  of 
them  doubtless  would  be  glad  to  hear  the  assertion  made. 

2  We  take  the  liberty  of  extracting  these  few  sentences  from  the 
letter  of  a  friend,  who  has  taken  great  interest  in  the  execution  of 
this  work  : — "  Sir  Thomas  would  have  been  an  original  character  in 


ABSENCE  OF  HUMOUR 


105 


while  in  his  frequent  allusions  to  struggles  with 
pecuniary  difficulties,  as  well  as  in  his  use  of 
magniloquent  language,  he  distinctly  recalls  Wilkins 
Micawher.  A  lively  fancy,  a  strain  of  genuine 
erudition  beneath  his  pedantry,  and  some  sparks  of 
insanity,  are  other  elements  in  his  fantastical  char 
acter.  Only  a  mind  like  his  own  could  trace  the 
maze  of  its  windings  and  turnings,  and  fathom 
the  depths  of  its  eccentricity.  In  his  thoughts 
"  truth  is  constantly  becoming  interfused  with 
fiction,  possibility  with  certainty,  and  the  hyper 
bolical  extravagance  of  his  style  only  keeps  even 
pace  with  the  prolific  shootings  of  his  imagination." * 
It  is  perhaps  expected  that  one  should,  in  a 
measure,  apologize  for  the  eccentricities  of  Urquhart's 
character  and  literary  style,  by  explaining  that  he  was 
a  humourist.  But,  unfortunately,  humour  is  a  quality 
in  which  Urquhart  was  lacking,  unless  we  understand 
by  the  word  mere  fantastical  quaintness  of  thought 
and  speech.  In  one  passage  of  his  works  he  speaks 
with  contempt  of  "  shallow-brained  humourists," 2 
and  we  should  wrong  his  ghost  by  putting  him 
among  those  whom  he  abhorred.  Not  a  single  trace 
of  that  subtle,  graceful  play  of  fancy  and  of  feeling 
which  enters  into  our  conception  of  humour  is  to  be 
found  in  his  works.3  His  readers  may  smile  as  they 

almost  any  surroundings — a  kind  of  literary  Quixote,  with  what 
may  be  called  a  'parenthetical'  genius,  branching  o(F  at  every 
comma  into  the  fresh  images  furnished  by  a  teeming  imagination. 
He  was  more  than  a  translator  of  Rabelais — he  seems  to  have  been 
a  kind  of  Rabelais  himself." 

1  Sir  Theodore  Martin,  Rabelais,  p.  xix.  2  See  p.  28. 

8  A  different  opinion  is  expressed  in  the  preface  to  W.  Harrison 
Ainsworth's  capital  novel  of  Crkhton.  "Sir  Thomas,"  he  says, 


ro6  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

turn  over  his  pages,  but  he  is  always  in  deadly  earnest. 
The  quality  of  wit  he  occasionally  manifests  in  the 
form  of  keen  sarcasm,  when  he  gives  full  vent  to 
his  feelings  of  scorn  and  contempt ;  as  when,  for 
example,  he  describes  those  who  went  out  to  fight, 
"  but  did  not  hazard  their  precious  persons,  lest 
they  should  seem  to  trust  to  the  arm  of  flesh."  1 

He  can  never  give  a  simple  statement  of  matters 
of  fact.  Thus  in  his  account  of  the  Admirable 
Crichton,  instead  of  saying  that  the  rector  of  the 
university  addressed  a  few  complimentary  sentences 
to  Crichton,  and  that  the  latter  replied  in  the  same 
vein,  he  says :  "  In  complements  after  this  manner, 
ultro  citroque  Jidbitis,  tossed  to  and  again,  retorted, 
contrerisposted,  backreverted,  and  now  and  then 
graced  with  a  quip  or  a  clinch  for  the  better  relish 
of  the  ear,  being  unwilling  in  this  kind  of  straining 
curtesie  to  yeeld  to  other,  they  spent  a  full  half- 
hour  and  more." 2  Everything  must  be  dressed  up 
"  with  divers  quaint  and  pertinent  similes  "  before  it 
is  fit  to  be  introduced  to  the  reader's  notice.  To 
quote  again  from  the  most  accomplished  literary  critic 
who  has  written  upon  him :  "  History,  philosophy, 
science,  literature  are  ransacked  for  illustrations  of 
the  commonest  subject.  His  fancy  is  ever  on  the 
alert,  and  you  are  constantly  surprised  by  some 
incongruous  image,  begotten  in  its  wanton  dalliance 

"  is  a  joyous  spirit — a  right  Pantagruelist ;  and  if  he  occasionally 
'Projicit  ampullas  et  sesquipedalia  verba,' 

he  has  an  exuberance  of  wit  and  playfulness  of  fancy  that  amply 
redeem  his  tendency  to  fanfaronade."     Our  readers  have  abundance 
of  material  before  them  for  coming  to  a  decision  upon  this  question. 
1  See  p.  85.  2  Works,  p.  226. 


PORTRAITS  OF  OUR  AUTHOR          107 

with  knowledge  the  most  heterogeneous.  lie 
has  always  an  eye  to  effect.  His  own  learning 
must  be  brought  into  play,  rhetorical  tropes  must 
flourish  through  his  periods,  '  suggesting  to  our 
minds  two  several  things  at  once/  and,  of  course,  as 
diverse  as  possible,  that  '  the  spirits  of  such  as  are 
studious  in  learning  may  be  filled  with  a  most 
wonderful  delight.' " l  His  style  reacts  upon  and 
controls  his  thoughts,  and  often  carries  him,  as 
Ariosto's  Hippogriff  carried  Astolfo,  up  into  the 
skies,  whither  those  are  unable  to  follow  him  who 
are  mounted  on  humbler  animals,  or  have  no  other 
means  than  those  with  which  they  were  born  for 
plodding  along  the  dusty  roads  of  earth. 

If  we  can  trust  the  two  engraved  portraits  of 
Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  which  have  come  down  to  us, 
he  was  a  man  of  handsome  presence,  and  accustomed 
to  deck  himself  in  all  the  splendour  of  costume  to 
which  so  many  of  his  brother  -  cavaliers  were 
addicted.  George  Glover,  the  famous  engraver, 
drew  both  the  portraits  of  him  which  are  extant. 
One  of  these  appears  as  a  frontispiece  to  the 
Epigrams  and  to  the  Trissotetras.  It  is  a  small 
whole-length,  and  represents  Sir  Thomas  in  rich 
dress,2  holding  out  his  hand  to  receive  from  some 

1  Sir  Theodore  Martin,  Rabelais,  p.  xx. 

2  In  Granger's  Biographical  Dictionary  (1779),  this  portrait  is 
described  erroneously,  as  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  is  said  in  it  to  be 
dressed  in  armour.  Probably  the  description  was  given  from  memory. 
In  the  second  volume  of  Bohn's  edition  of  Rabelais,  the  frontis 
piece  is  a  half-length  portrait  of  the  translator,  evidently  repro 
duced  from  the  above.     The  effect,  however,  is  highly  disagreeable, 
and  the  likeness  must  have  produced  an  unfavourable  opinion  of 
our  author  in   the  minds  of  most  of   those  who  have   looked 
upon  it. 


io8  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

allegorical  personage  a  laurel  wreath  "for  Armes 
and  Artes." 1  On  a  table  beside  him  are  his  hat 
and  embroidered  cloak.  In  the  vacant  spaces  on 
each  side  of  the  upper  part  of  the  figure  are  his 
name  and  titles :  "  Sr  Thomas  "Orchard,  Knight,  of 
Bray  and  Udol,  etc.,  Baron  of  Ficherie  and  Clohorby, 
etc.,  Laird  Baron  of  Cromartie  and  Heritable  Sheriff 
thereof,  etc."  The  portrait  is  described  as  taken 
from  the  life,  and  engraved  in  1641  ;2  and  beneath 
it  is  a  couplet  by  W.  S.,  as  follows : 

"Of  him  whose  shape  tins  Picture  hath  design'd, 
Vertue  and  learning  represent  the  Mind." 

Who  W.  S.  was  we  do  not  know.  The  date  forbids 
our  identifying  him  with  the  Bard  of  Avon.  He 
was  probably  one  of  those  mysterious  personages, 
who  were  always  at  hand  to  write  epistles  of  com 
mendation  to  works  by  Sir  Thomas,  and  to  testify 
on  their  "  book-oath  "  to  his  gifts  and  graces. 

The  second  engraved  portrait  is  of  great  rarity, 
and  only  one  impression  of  it  is  known  to  be  in 

1  In  this  engraving,  which  is  our  frontispiece,  the  Greek  inscrip 
tion  runs  thus  :    rots  ffe  irt^avLV  KO.\  irpoffT^affiv  evxapicrTu,  and 
means,  ' '  2  thank  those  who  sent  you  and  gave  the  order. "    These 
words  are,  of  course,  addressed  to  the  messenger  who  has  been 
commissioned  by  the  Muses  to  convey  the  wreath  to  Sir  Thomas. 
Above  the  wreath  itself  is  an  obscure  phrase — Movcrapuf/i]  o-r6\os — 
which  is  evidently  a  mixture  of  Latin  and  Greek,  musarum  crr6Xos 
(  =  d7r6<rroXos  ?),   "messenger  of  the  muses."     It  may,  however,  be 
that  ffrtiXos  is  to  be  taken  as  "equipment"  or  "decoration,"  as 
referring  to  the  wreath.    The  courage  with  which  Greek  and  Latin 
forms  are  mixed  up,  and  an  old  word  despatched  on  its  way  with  a 
new  meaning,  of  which  this  brief  phrase  gives  evidence,  is  highly 
characteristic  of  Cromartian   Greek.      For  further  illustration  of 
the  peculiarities  of  this  local  variety  of  Hellenic  speech,  see  p.  149. 

2  Sir  Thomas,  therefore,  claims  by  anticipation  the  titles  of  Baron 
and  Sheriff,  which  were  afterwards  to  be  his. 


The  Poet  surrounded  by  the  Muses. 


SEATED  ON  PARNASSUS  109 

existence.  It  was  probably  meant  to  be  a  frontis 
piece  to  the  unpublished  volume  of  Epigrams 
described  on  p.  116,  the  title  of  which  was  to  have 
been  Apollo  and  the  Muses,  but  which  never  found 
its  way  into  print.  In  this  engraving  Sir  Thomas 
is  depicted  as  seated  with  great  complacency  upon 
Mount  Parnassus,  in  the  midst  of  the  Muses,  seven 
of  whom  are  pressing  upon  his  attention  wreaths  of 
laurel  of  which  he  is  worthy,  "  for  Judgment,  Learn 
ing,  witt,  Invention,  sweetness,  stile."  At  his  feet 
is  the  sacred  fountain  of  Castalia  or  Hippocrene, 
into  the  waters  of  which  the  other  two  Muses  are 
sportively  dipping  "  sprinklers  "  or  asperges.  One 
of  them  seems  inclined  to  give  Sir  Thomas  a 
sprinkling,  but  refrains,  either  because  it  was 
unnecessary  or  for  fear  of  spoiling  his  nice  clothes. 
In  the  background,  the  winged  horse  Pegasus  is 
flying  sufficiently  low  down  to  allow  a  woman  to 
pluck  a  couple  of  feathers  from  his  wings.1  These 

1  This  use  of  the  quills  is  referred  to  in  the  following  passage  in 
Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  Epigrams  (MS.) : — 

"The  Invocation  to  Clio. 

Book  2. 

Wench  wholly  martial,  to  whose  inspiration 
The  Colophonian  Poet  ow'd  his  skill : 
Let  my  verse  merit  no  Lesse  estimation, 
Then  [than]  if  the  point  of  a  Pegasid  quill, 
Dip'd  in  the  sacred  fontain  Caballine, 
Character'd  the  Impression  of  each  Line." 

The  "Colophonian  Poet "  is — "not  to  put  too  fine  a  point  upon  it " 
— Homer,  who,  according  to  some,  was  born  at  Colophos,  in  Asia 
Minor.  The  phrase  "  Pegasid  quill "  in  this  passage  strengthens 
our  opinion  that  this  second  portrait  of  Sir  Thomas,  which  we  give 
here,  was  intended  to  be  a  frontispiece  to  a  second  volume  of 
poems.  The  similarity  of  diction  between  this  "Invocation"  and 
the  speeches  of  Ancient  Pistol  is  very  great. 


no  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

are  no  doubt  intended  to  provide  pens  for  Sir 
Thomas's  next  literary  undertaking.  In  the  further 
distance  are  several  feathered  creatures,  which  are 
probably  meant  for  poetical  swans,  but  which  bear 
a  painful  likeness  to  prosaic  geese.  At  the  foot  of 
the  picture  in  one  corner  we  have  Apollo,  playing  on 
his  lyre ;  and  on  the  ground  in  front  are  a  half- 
starved  dragon  and  a  snake,  writhing  in  impotent 
rage,  as  they  witness  the  triumph  of  Sir  Thomas. 
We  can  hardly  be  mistaken  in  concluding  that 
these  last  are  symbolical  representations  of  envious 
and  carping  critics. 


CHAPTER   IV 

EPIGRAMS  :  DIVINE  AND  MORAL,  AND  THE 
TRISSOTETRAS 

N  1641,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  published 
his  first  work — a  volume  of  poems,  en 
titled  "EPIGRAMS:  DIVINE  AND  MORAL,"1 
and  dedicated  to  the  Marquis  of  Hamil 
ton.  The  poems  are  divided  into  three 
books,  two  of  which  contain  forty-five 
epigrams,  while  the  third  contains  forty-four.  Most 
of  them  are  in  iambic  pentameters,  and  are  for  the 
greater  part  sextets  in  form ;  but  though  the  versi 
fication  is  occasionally  smooth,  these  compositions 
do  little  credit  to  the  Muse  who  inspired  them. 
They  are,  without  an  exception,  pointless ;  and  an 
epigram  without  a  point  is  about  as  useless 
and  exasperating  as  a  needle  without  one.2  It  is 

1  "EPIGRAMS  :  DIVINE  AND  MORAL.  By  Sir  Thomas  Urchard, 
Knight.  London  :  Printed  by  Barnard  Alsop  and  Thomas  Fawcet, 
in  the  Yeare  1641." 

0  It  is  only  fair,  however,  to  Urquhart  to  remember  that  his 
idea  of  an  Epigram  was  probably  different  from  ours.  In  modern 
times  point  or  "bite"  is  regarded  as  essential  to  such  kind  of 
compositions.  The  original  idea  of  them  was  that  they  should 
contain  a  single  distinct  thought,  and  bo  brief  enough  to  serve  as 
inscriptions. 


ii2  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

somewhat  remarkable  that  in  his  prose  compositions 
the  imagination  of  Sir  Thomas  seems  quite  un 
fettered,  while  in  his  poems  it  is  under  some  such 
restraining  influence  as  a  strait-waistcoat  is  said 
to  exercise  upon  a  certain  class  of  patients. 

A  wild  legend,  the  origin  of  which  is  unknown, 
but  which  is  utterly  baseless,  asserts  that  Urquhart 
"  was  laureated  poet  at  Paris  before  he  was  three 
and  twenty  years  of  age."1  We  could  hardly 
conceive  of  any  responsible  authorities  being  so  far 
"  left  to  themselves  "  as  to  do  a  deed  like  this.  The 
story  may  be  either  the  misapplication  to  Urquhart 
of  some  vague  tradition  of  one  of  the  feats  of  his 
hero,  the  Admirable  Crichton,  or  of  what  he  himself 
has  actually  recorded  of  the  poet,  Arthur  Johnston.2 

A  modern  critic,  who  has  given  Urquhart  a  full 
measure  of  praise,  finds  himself  unable  to  say  a 
word  in  favour  of  his  poems.  "  This  slender 
volume,"  he  remarks,  "gives  not  the  slightest 
promise  of  talent.  Its  stanzas  are  indistinguished 
and  indistinguishable.  There  is  no  reason  why  any 
one  should  have  written  them,  but,  on  the  other 
hand,  there  is  no  reason  why  anyone  should  not. 
They  express  the  usual  commonplaces :  the  inevit- 
ableness  of  death,  and  the  worth  of  endeavour.  A 
mildly  Horatian  sentiment  is  dressed  up  in  the 
tattered  rags  of  Shakespearianism,  and  the  surprise 
is  that  the  author,  whose  prose  is  restrained  by  no 
consideration  of  sound  or  sense,  should  have  deemed 
it  worth  while  to  print  so  tame  a  collection  of 
exercises." 3 

1  Granger's  Biographical  History,  iii.  160. 

2  Works,  p.  263.          3  Charles  Whibley,  New  Review,  July  1897. 


THE  EPIGRAMS  113 

A  favourable  specimen  of  the  Epigrams  is  the 
following  from  the  first  book  : — 

"  How  DIFFICULT  A  THING  IT  is  TO  TREAD  IN  THE  PATHES 

OF  VERTUE. 

"The  way  to  vertue's  hard,  uneasie,  bends 
Aloft,  being  full  of  steep  and  rugged  alleys; 
For  never  one  to  a  higher  place  ascends, 
That  always  keeps  the  plaine,  and  pleasant  valleyes : 
And  reason  in  each  human  breast  ordaines 
That  precious  things  be  purchased  with  paines." 

Or  take  this  from  the  opposite  page  : — 

"WHEN  A  TRUE  FRIEND  MAY  BE  BEST  KNOWNE. 
"As  the  glow-worme  shines  brightest  in  the  darke 
And  frankincense  smells  sweetest  in  the  fire ; 
So  crosse  adventures  make  us  best  remarke 
A  sincere  friend  from  a  dissembled  Iyer ; 

For  some,  being  friends  to  our  prosperity, 
And  not  to  us,  when  it  failes,  they  decay." 

The  fault  of  obscurity,  of  which  the  poet 
Browning  has  been  accused,  could  not  be  laid  to 
the  charge  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart.  Nor  can  it 
be  said  of  him  that  he  neglects  truths  that  are 
obvious,  and  occupies  himself  in  discovering  and 
bringing  forward  those  that  are  recondite.  The 
sentiments  to  which  he  gives  utterance  seem  those 
which  spontaneously  occur  to  the  average  mind  ; 
on  reading  the  subject  of  the  poem,  as  given  in  the 
title,  and  then  the  poem  itself,  we  think 
"A  said  whot  a  owt  to  'a  said," 

and  we  come  away  without  any    feverish    mental 
agitation  or  accelerated  movement  of  pulso.1 

1  A  school-girl  once  wrote  in  a  copy  of  Moral  Tales,  which  she 
used  for  her  Italian  lessons,  that  they  were  "moral  to  the  last 

8 


U4  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

The  sentiments  which,  from  his  own  account, 
had,  on  more  occasions  than  one,  filled  his  mind, 
are  expressed  in  the  piece  entitled  "  THE  GENEROUS 
SPEECH  OF  A  NOBLE  CAVALLIER  AFTER  HE  HAD 
DISARMED  HIS  ADVERSARY  AT  THE  SINGLE  COMBAT." 
They  are  as  follows : — 

"Though  with  my  raper,  for  the  guerdon 

Your  fault  deserveth,  I  may  pierce  ye, 

Your  penitence  in  craving  pardon, 

Transpassions  my  revenge  in  mercy ; 

And  wills  me  both  to  end  this  present  strife, 
And  give  you  leave  in  peace  t'  enjoy  your  life." 

Another  Epigram,  which  one  critic  regards  as 
Urquhart's  chef  d'aeuvre  in  this  kind  of  composition, 
is  the  following : — 

"Take  man  from  woman,  all  that  she  can  show 
Of  her  own  proper,  is  nought  else  but  wo."1 

In  a  letter  of  commendation  prefixed  to  his  next 
work,  The  Trissotetras,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  says  of 
himself :  "  This  Mathematicall  tractate  doth  no  lesse 
bespeak  him  a  good  Poet  and  Orator,  then  [than] 
by  his  elaboured  poems  he  hath  showne  himselfe 
already  a  good  Philosopher  and  Mathematician." 
This  self-criticism  is  all  that  could  be  desired.  A 

degree."     The  same  may  be  said  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  Moral 
Epigrams. 

1  This  reminds  one  of  Alice's  subtraction  sum.  ' '  Take  a  bone 
from  a  dog.  What  remains  ?  .  .  .  The  dog's  temper  would 
remain"  (Through  the  Looking -Glass,  chap.  ix.).  A  somewhat 
different  and  more  sombre  turn  of  thought  than  the  above  was 
suggested  to  South ey's  Dr  Dove  by  the  resemblance  between  the 
words.  "Woman,"  he  says,  "evidently  meaning  either  man's  woe 
— or  abbreviated  from  woe  to  man,  because  by  woman  was  woe 
brought  into  the  world"  (The  Doctor  >  chap,  ccviii.). 


FLASHES  OF  WIT  115 

work  on  mathematics  that  proves  an  author's 
possession  of  poetical  and  rhetorical  gifts,  and  a 
volume  of  poetry  which  leads  one  to  think  that 
the  singer  is  an  accomplished  mathematician,  are 
gifts  with  which  the  world  is  but  seldom  favoured, 
and  as  it  is  likely  that  their  merits  will  not 
instantly  be  observed,  the  zeal  of  the  author  in 
calling  our  attention  to  them  is  by  no  means 
unnecessary.  But  when  he  goes  on  to  say,  still 
speaking  of  himself  in  the  third  person,  "  The  Muses 
never  yet  inspired  sublimer  conceptions  in  a  more 
refined  stile  then  [than]  is  to  be  found  in  the  accu 
rate  strain  of  his  most  ingenious  Epigrams/'  we  feel 
that  he  is  less  felicitous.  His  first  shot  has  hit  the 
blank,  but  the  second  is  wide  of  the  target  altogether. 

In  his  dedication  of  the  volume  to  "  the  Marquis 
of  Hamilton,  Earle  of  Arren  and  Cambridge,  etc.," 
he  describes  its  contents  as  "  but  flashes  of  wit."  A 
modern  reader  will  probably,  however,  be  inclined 
to  think  that  this  modest  opinion  of  them  is  far  too 
flattering.  At  times  there  is  a  faint  suggestion  of  a 
possible  gleam  of  brightness,  but  this  is  instantly 
followed  by  Egyptian  darkness,  and  one  is  reminded 
of  a  revolving  light  that  has  somehow  gone  wrong. 

The  volume  closes  with  the  somewhat  liturgical 
formula,  "  Here  end  the  first  three  Bookes  of  Sir 
Thomas  Vrchard's  Epigrams,"  and  with  a  doxology, 
the  latter  being  almost  the  only  trace  of  matter  in 
it  to  justify  the  use  of  "  Divine  "  in  the  title.  The 
author  was  evidently  prepared  to  go  on  with  more 
"  bookes  "  of  the  kind,  if  he  got  any  encouragement 
from  publishers  or  public,  but,  probably,  both 
thought  it  about  time  for  him  to  stop.  The  fact 


n6  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

that,  in  five  years  after  this  volume  of  poems  had 
appeared,  a  second  edition  should  apparently  have 
been  brought  out,  would  seem  at  first  to  indicate 
that  there  must  have  been  some  little  run  upon  the 
Epigrams.  But  the  truth  of  the  matter  is,  that  one 
"  William  Leake"  had  evidently  got  the  "remainder," 
and  issued  them  in  1646  with  a  new  title-page. 

In  the  Introductory  Notice  to  Sir  Theodore 
Martin's  edition  of  Kabelais,  some  information  is 
given  concerning  a  folio  volume  of  unpublished 
Epigrams  by  Urquhart,  which  is  still  in  existence.1 
It  consists  of  ten  books,  called  after  Apollo  and 
the  Muses,  each  containing  110  Epigrams,  except 
the  last,  which  has  113.  The  MS.  is  dedicated  to 
the  Marquis  of  Hamilton ;  but,  in  addition  to  this, 
each  book  has  a  separate  dedication  to  some  one  of 
the  author's  political  associates  or  friends.  The 
persons  thus  honoured  are  the  Marquis  of  Huntly, 
the  Earl  of  Arundel,  the  Earl  of  Northumberland, 
the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  the  Earl  of  Dorset,  the 
Earl  of  Holland,  the  Earl  of  Newcastle,  the  Earl  of 
Stafford,  Lord  Craven,  and  Lord  Gaurin  (Gowran). 
According  to  the  custom  of  that  time,  the  reader 
finds  his  progress  barred  by  several  prefaces, 
respectively  named,  in  this  instance,  as  the 
"  Isagoge,"  or  "  Introduction,"  the  "  Premonition," 
and  the  "  Prolog,"  and  cannot  get  away  without  a 

1  The  title  is  as  follows  : — "  Ten  Books  of  Epigrams :  the  Curio- 
sitie  whereof,  for  Conception,  stile,  instruction,  and  Other  mixtures 
of  show  and  substance,  being  no  lesse  fruitfull  then  [than]  pleasing 
to  the  diligent  Peruser,  are  entitled  APOLLO  and  the  MUSES.  Written 
by  the  Right  Worshipfull  SIR  THOMAS  UIICHARD,  Knight."  The 
volume  is  now  in  the  possession  of  Professor  Ferguson,  of  Glasgow 
University.  From  it  our  specimen  of  his  handwriting  is  taken. 


> 


OX 


ri 


F'ac-simile  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  handwriting  considerably  reduced. 


iHED  EPIGRAMS        117 

"  Corollarie,"  an  "  Animadversion,"  several  extra 
leaves  of  verses,  "  A  Table  for  the  more  easie  finding 
out  of  such  Epigrams  as  treat  of  one  subject," 
an  "  Index,"  and  a  "  List  of  proper  names." 
For  one  of  these  latter  he  has  reason  to  be  grateful 
to  Sir  Thomas,  for  the  "  Index "  is  a  glossary  of 
"  the  harshest  and  most  difficult  words  contained  in 
the  preceding  Epigrams." 

The  general  character  of  the  unpublished 
Epigrams  does  not  seem  to  be  higher  than  that  of 
those  which  have  seen  the  light  of  day,  and 
consequently  there  is  little  likelihood  of  any  anxiety 
being  expressed  by  the  general  public  for  a  sight 
of  them.  Some  of  them  also  are  of  a  sportive 
turn,  and  are  more  in  accordance  with  the  standard 
of  taste  and  manners  which  prevailed  in  the  middle 
of  the  seventeenth  century  than  with  that  of  our 
own  day.  From  the  "Animadversion"  it  seems 
.  that  Urquhart  "  contry ved,  blocked,  and  digested 
these  eleven  hundred  epigrams  in  a  thirteen  weeks 
tyme."  This  surely  breaks  the  record  in  the 
matter  of  speed  in  producing  epigrams.  Had  the 
results  been  better,  one  would  have  had  more  plea 
sure  in  supporting  Sir  Thomas  against  all-comers. 

The  second  literary  venture  made  by  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  was  the  publication  of  a  scientific  work, 
entitled  "  THE  TRISSOTETRAS  " l — a  treatise  which 

1  The  title-page,  according  to  the  custom  of  tho  time,  gives  a 
somewhat  elaborate  account  of  the  contents  of  tho  volume.  It  runs 
as  follows  :— "THE  TKISSOTETRAS  :  Or,  A  most  Exquisite  Table  for 
Resolving  all  manner  of  Triangles,  whether  plain  or  sphericall,  Rect 
angular  or  Obliquangular,  with  greater  facility,  then  [than]  ever 
hitherto  hath  been  practised  :  Most  necessary  for  nil  such  as  would 
attaine  to  the  exact  knowlc'lge  of  Fortification,  Dyaling, 


u8  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

professed  to  simplify  trigonometry.  Yet,  notwith 
standing  the  statement  on  the  title-page  that  the 
new  method  of  working  problems  in  that  depart 
ment  of  mathematical  science  would  be  found  in 
valuable  by  soldiers,  sailors,  architects,  astronomers, 
and  others,  the  volume  seems  to  have  dropped  at 
once  into  the  depths  of  oblivion,  without  even 
having  produced  a  ripple  upon  the  surface  of  the 
waters.  No  one  is  known  to  have  read  it  or  to 
have  been  able  to  read  it.  Lord  Bacon,  indeed, 
says  that  things  solid  and  weighty  are  drowned  in 
the  river  of  time,  while  things  that  are  light  and 
blown-up  are  carried  down  by  its  current.1  A  very 
comfortable  theory  would  this  be  for  those  of  us 
who  write  books  that  are  found  unreadable  and 
drop  at  once  out  of  notice,  if  only  some  trustworthy 
person  could  be  found  who  would  certify  to  the 
truth  of  Lord  Bacon's  assertion. 

The  editor  of  the  Maitland  Club  edition  of  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart's  Works  has  some  qualms  of 
conscience  about  reprinting  this  treatise.  With  a 
touch  of  humour,  which  only  true  Philistines  will 
fully  appreciate,  he  says  that  some  apology  may 

tion,  Surveying,  Architecture,  the  Art  of  Shadowing,  taking  of 
Heights  and  Distances,  the  use  of  both  the  Globes,  Perspective, 
the  skill  of  making  Maps,  the  Theory  of  the  Planets,  the  calculating 
of  their  motions,  and  all  other  Astronomicall  Computations  what 
soever.  Now  lately  invented,  and  perfected,  explained,  commented 
on,  and,  with  all  possible  brevity  and  perspicuity,  in  the  hiddest 
and  most  re-searched  mysteries,  from  the  very  first  grounds  of  the 
Science  it  selfe,  proved,  and  convincingly  demonstrated.  By  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  of  Cromartie,  Knight.  Published  for  the  benefit 
of  those  that  are  mathematically  affected.  London,  Printed  by 
James  Young.  16^5." 

1  Advancement  of  Learning. 


THE  TRISSOTETRAS 


119 


appear  necessary,  even  to  an  Antiquarian  Club,1  for 
reprinting  a  work  apparently  so  unintelligible  and 
useless ;  and  accordingly  he  shelters  himself  behind 
the  opinion  of  Mr  Wallace,  the  Professor  of  Mathe 
matics  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh  at  that  time 
(1834).  "I  have,"  says  Mr  Wallace,  who  had  been 
asked  to  examine  the  work,  "  looked  at  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart's  Trissotetras,  but  I  hardly  know  what  to 
think  of  it.  The  book  is  not  absolute  nonsense,  but 
is  written  in  a  most  unintelligible  way,2  and  so  as 
never  book  was  written  before  nor  since.  On  this 
account  it  is  truly  a  literary  curiosity.  There 
appears  to  have  been  a  perverted  ingenuity  exercised 
in  writing  it,  and  I  imagine  •  that,  with  some 
patience,  the  author's  plan  might  be  understood, 
but  I  doubt  if  any  man  would  take  the  trouble ;  for, 
after  he  had  overcome  the  difficulty,  there  is  nothing 
to  reward  his  labour.  I  presume  the  object  of  the 
author  was  to  fix  the  rules  of  Trigonometry  in  the 
memory,  but  no  writer  since  his  time  has  adopted 
his  invention.  Indeed,  I  do  not  observe  the  least 
mention  of  his  book  in  the  history  of  mathematical 
science.  Yet,  for  his  time,  he  seems  not  to  have 
been  a  bad  mathematician.  Urquhart  speaks  in 
terms  of  great  praise  of  Napier,  yet  not  greater 
than  he  deserved.  I  infer  from  this  that  he  was 
well  acquainted  with  the  subject  as  then  known. 
The  book  in  question  is  certainly  a  curious,  if  not  a 

1  The  italics  are  ours. 

2  Sir  Theodore  Martin  remarks  that  this  conclusion  nearly  re 
sembles  that  of  Socrates,  upon  being  asked  his  opinion  of  the  book 
of  Heraclitus  the  Obscure.     "Those  things,"  he  said,   "which  I 
understood  were  excellent;  I  imagine  so  were  those  I  understood 
not ;  but  they  require  a  diver  of  Delos"  (Rabelais,  p.  xviii.). 


120  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

valuable  relic  of  Scottish  genius  in  the  olden  time, 
and  it  is  a  good  specimen  of  the  pedantry  and 
fantastic  taste  of  the  Author.  If,  therefore,  by  re 
printing  his  works,  it  be  intended  to  give  a  true 
portraiture  of  him,  The  Trissotetras  should  on  that 
account,  and  I  see  no  better  reason,  again  pass 
through  the  press."  ] 

The  volume  is  dedicated  "  To  the  right  honour 
able  and  most  noble  lady,  my  dear  and  loving 
mother,  the  Lady  Dowager  of  Cromartie."  The 
"  Epistle  Dedicatory  "  is  couched  in  the  high-flown 
language  which  others  would  have  had  difficulty  in 
concocting,  but  which  seems  to  flow  with  ease  from 
the  lips  of  Sir  Thomas.  "  Thus,  Madam,"  he  says, 
"  unto  you  doe  I  totally  belong ;  but  so  as  that 
those  exteriour  parts  of  mine,  which  by  birth  are 
from  your  Ladiship  derived,  cannot  be  more  for 
tunate  in  this  their  subjection,  notwithstanding  the 
egregious  advantages  of  bloud  and  consanguinity 
thereby  to  them  accruing,  then  [than]  my  selfe  am 
happy,  as  from  my  heart  I  doe  acknowledge  it,  in 
the  just  right  your  Ladiship  hath  to  the  eternall 
possession  of  the  never-dying  powers  of  my  soule." 
The  following  passage  from  the  same  "Epistle" 
reminds  one  of  the  adulatory  terms  in  which  Sir 
Walter  Ealeigh  and  Spenser  addressed  Queen 
Elizabeth :  "  By  vertue  of  your  beloved  society, 
your  neighbouring  Countesses,  and  other  great 
dames  of  your  kindred  and  acquaintance,  become 
more  illustrious  in  your  imitation  [i.e.  in  imitation 
of  you]  ;  amidst  whom,  as  Cynthia  amongst  the 
obscurer  planets,  your  Ladiship  shines,  and  darteth 

1  JForks,  p.  xvi. 


THORNY  TERMINOLOGY  121 

the  angelick  rayes  of  your  matchlesse  example  on 
the  spirits  of  those  who  by  their  good  Genius  have 
been  brought  into  your  favourable  presence  to  be 
enlightened  by  them."  The  concluding  passage  in 
his  Dedication  is  still  more  remarkable:  "I  will  here," 
he  says,  "  in  all  submission,  most  humbly  take  my 
leave  of  your  Ladiship,  and  beseech  Almighty  God 
that  it  may  please  his  Divine  Majesty  so  to  blesse 
your  Ladiship  with  continuance  of  dayes,  that  the 
sonnes  of  those  whom  I  have  not  as  yet  begot,  may 
attaine  to  the  happinesse  of  presenting  unto  your 
Ladiship  a  braine-babe  of  more  sufficiencie  and  con 
sequence."  1 

The  ordinary  reader  who  looks  into  the  volume 
cannot  fail  to  be  appalled  by  the  new  and  mysterious 
terms  with  which  its  pages  are  crowded.  Words 
like  "  proturgetick,"  "  quadrobiquadrrcquation,"  "  sin- 
diforall,"  "cathetobasall,"  "  loxogonosphericall,"  and 
"  zetetick,"  are  freely  used,  and  many  others  equally 
hard  and  thorny.  Even  the  author  himself  finds 
it  necessary  to  append  to  the  work  a  glossary, 
containing  an  explanation  of  a  number  of  the 
words  of  which  he  had  made  use.  "  Being  certainly 
perswaded,"  he  says,  "  that  a  great  many  good  spirits 
[i.e.  worthy  souls]  ply  Trigonometry  that  are  not 
versed  in  the  learned  tongues,  I  thought  fit  for  their 
encouragement  to  subjoyne  here  the  explication  of 
the  most  important  of  those  Greek  and  Latin  termes, 
which  for  the  more  efficacy  of  expression  I  have 
made  use  of  in  this  Treatise."2 

In  some  cases,  however,  the  "  explication,"  instead 
of  dispelling  the  darkness,  only  renders  it  more 

1  Works,  pp.  55-57.  2  Ibid.  p.  131. 


122  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

visible,  as  when,  e.g.,  we  are  told  that  "  catlietobasall 
is  said  of  the  concordances  of  loxogonosphericall 
moods,  in  the  datas  of  the  perpendicular  and  the 
base,  for  finding  out  of  the  maine  quaesitum."  "  In- 
versionall"  we  are  told,  "  is  said  of  the  concordances 
of  those  moods  which  agree  in  the  manner  of  their 
inversion ;  that  is,  in  placing  the  second  and  fourth 
termes  of  the  analogy,  together  with  their  indow- 
ments,  in  the  roomes  of  the  first  and  third,  and 
contrariwise."  Probably  only  those  who  are  able  to 
follow  the  statement  that  "  oppoverticall  is  said  of 
those  moods  which  have  a  catheteuretick  concord 
ance  in  their  datas  of  the  same  cathetopposites 
and  verticall  angles,"  will  be  qualified  to  give  an 
intelligent  assent  to  the  statement  that  "  sindiforall 
is  said  of  those  moods  the  fourth  terme  of  whose 
analogic  is  onely  illatitious  to  the  maine  qusesitum."  x 
Besides  the  Epistle  of  Dedication  to  the  author's 
mother,  there  are  two  Epistles  and  some  Latin 
verses  addressed  to  the  reader.  The  former  of 
these  last  -  mentioned  Epistles  is  signed  by  Sir 
Thomas,  and  consists  of  a  glowing  tribute  of  re 
spect  to  Napier,  the  inventor  of  logarithms.  "  To 
write  of  Trigonometry,"  he  says,  "and  not  make 
mention  of  the  illustrious  Lord  Neper2  of  Marchiston, 

1  The  author  of  the  above  sentences  is  one  of  the  very  few  persons 
in  history  or  fiction  known  to  us  who  would  have  been  qualified  to 
join  in  the  conversation  of  the  pleasant  company  in  Illyria,  when 
they  began  "to  speak  of  Pigrogromitus,  and  of  the  Vapians  passing 
the  equinoctial  of  Queubus  "  (Twelfth  Night,  Act  n.  Sc.  iii.)— the 
allusion  to  which  has  caused  so  many  German  commentators  on 
Shakespeare  to  spend  sleepless  nights  in  their  libraries. 

2  John  Napier,  of  Merchiston  (1550-1617),  who  published  his 
invention  in  1614.     Our  author  calls  him  Lord  Napier,  but  we  are 
to  understand  the  title  as  simply  equivalent  to  "laird."     He  calls 


NAPIER'S  LOGARITHMS  123 

the  inventer  of  Logarithms,  were  to  be  unmindfull 
of  him  that  is  our  daily  benefactor  ;  these  artificiall 
numbers  by  him  first  excogitated  and  perfected, 
being  of  such  incomparable  use,1  that  by  them  we 
may  operate  more  in  one  day,  and  with  lesse  danger 
of  errour,  then  [than]  can  be  done  without  them  in 
the  space  of  a  whole  week  ;  a  secret  which  would  have 

himself  on  one  of  his  title-pages  Baro  Aferchistonii,  but  that  phrase 
is  merely  the  designation  of  the  superior  of  a  barony,  or  lord  of  a 
manor.  In  the  old  Scottish  Parliament  men  of  this  rank  sat  as 
"  lesser  barons." 

1  The  subject  of  logarithms  is  perhaps  one  of  those  things  which 
the  ordinary  reader  might  safely  be  presumed  to  know  something 
about.  In  these  days  of  higher  education  for  women,  it  wouLl  be 
an  act  of  impertinence  to  provide  information  on  this  point  for  that 
class  of  our  readers.  The  following  explanations  are,  therefore, 
intended  for  those  members  of  the  inferior  sex  whose  education  on 
the  mathematical  side  has  been  neglected.  The  idea  of  logarithms 
arose  in  the  mind  of  Napier  from  the  wish  to  simplify  the  processes 
of  multiplication  and  division,  by  making  addition  and  subtraction 
take  their  place.  To  effect  this,  connect  together  a  series  of 
numbers  increasing  by  arithmetical  progression  with  a  series 
increasing  by  multiplication  or  by  mathematical  progression. 
Thus:  ' 


0.   1. 

5.   32. 

10.   1024. 

1.   2. 

6.   64. 

11.   2048. 

2.   4. 

7.  128. 

12.   4096. 

3.   8. 

8.  256. 

13.   8192. 

4.  16. 

9.  512. 

14.  16384. 

To  multiply,  say,  64  by  256,  that  is,  to  find  the  products  of  the 
6th  and  8th  powers  of  2,  we  must  take  the  (6  +  8)th  or  14th  power, 
which  from  the  table  is  16384.  To  divide  8192  by  256,  or  the  13th 
power  of  2  by  the  8th,  we  must  take  the  (13-8)th  or  5th  power, 
which  from  the  table  is  32.  By  means  of  this  principle  calcula 
tions  can  be  made  by  persons  whose  business  it  is  to  do  so,  and 
stored  up  apart  for  use.  The  vast  saving  to  mental  labour  by  this 
simple  and  beautiful  adjustment  of  numbers  may  be  estimated  by 
a  glance  at  any  collection  of  tables  of  logarithms.  In  a  science 
like  astronomy,  progress  would  be  terribly  impeded  if  calculations 
hail  to  be  conducted  by  the  ordinary  methods. 


124  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

beene  so  precious  to  antiquity  that  Pythagoras,  all 
the  seven  wise  men  of  Greece,  Archimedes,  Socrates, 
Plato,  Euclid,  and  Aristotle,  had,  if  coaevals,  joyntly 
adored  him,  and  unanimously  concurred  to  the 
deifying  of  the  revealer  of  so  great  a  mystery."  He 
concludes  with  the  splendid  sentence  that  Napier's 
"  immortall  fame,  in  spite  of  time,  will  out-last  all 
ages,  and  look  eternity  in  the  face."  l 

The  second  Epistle  to  the  reader  is  of  a  very 
startling  kind.  It  professes  to  be  by  some  one 
whose  initials  are  J.  A.,  and  it  is  written  in  com 
mendation  of  the  book  and  its  author,  but  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is  the  production  of  Sir 
Thomas  himself.  He  could  no  more  disguise  his 
style  of  writing  than  Sir  Piercie  Shafton  could  lay 
aside  his  Euphuistic  English.  After  reading  the 
laudatory  sentences  bestowed  upon  the  inventor 
of  logarithms,  it  is  very  amusing  to  find  J.  A. 
remarking  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  that  "  the  praise 
he  hath  beene  pleased  to  confer  on  the  learned  and 
honourable  Neper,  doth,  without  any  diminution,  in 
every  jot  as  duly  belong  unto  himselfe." 5  As  all  our 
author's  eulogies  are  constructed  on  a  vast  scale,  it 
is  not  surprising  to  read  that  the  new  method  of 
measuring  triangles,  as  compared  with  the  old,  is 
like  the  sea-journey  between  the  Pillars  of  Hercules 
("  commonly  called  the  Straits  of  Gibraltar "),  as 
compared  with  the  land-journey  from  the  one  to 
the  other.  In  the  one  case,  we  have  a  short  voyage 
of  not  more  than  six  hours'  sail ;  in  the  other  case, 
a  walk  of  some  seven  thousand  long  miles.  The 
two  concluding  paragraphs  of  the  Epistle  are  so 
1  Works,  p.  59.  2 'Ibid.  p.  61. 


A  VALUABLE  SECRET  125 

extraordinary  arid  so  characteristic  of  our   author, 
that  we  must  be  allowed  to  quote  them  at  length. 

"  The  secret  unfolded  in  the  following  book,"  says 
J.  A.,  "  is  so  precious,  that  [the  author's]  countrey 
and  kindred  would  not  have  been  more  honoured 
by  him  had  he  purchased  [procured]  millions  of 
gold,  and  severall  rich  territories  of  a  great  and 
vast  extent,  then  [than]  for  this  subtile  and  divine 
invention,  which  will  out-last  the  continuance  of 
any  inheritance,  and  remaine  fresh  in  the  under 
standings  of  men  of  profound  literature,  when 
houses  and  possessions  will  change  their  owners, 
the  wealthy  become  poor,  and  the  children  of  the 
needy  enjoy  the  treasures  of  those  whose  heires  are 
impoverished.  Therefore,  seeing  for  the  many-fold 
uses  thereof  in  divers  arts  and  sciences,  in  specula 
tion  and  practice,  peace  and  war,  sport  and  earnest, 
with  the  admirable  furtherances  we  reape  by  it  in 
the  knowledge  of  sea  and  land,  and  heaven  and 
earth,  it  cannot  be  otherwise  then  [than]  per 
manent,  together  with  the  Author's  fame,  so  long  as 
any  of  those  endure ;  I  will,  God  willing,  in  the 
mines  of  all  these,  and  when  time  it  selfe  is  expired, 
in  testimony  of  my  thankfulnesse  in  particular  for 
so  great  a  benefit,  if  after  the  resurrection  there  be 
any  complenientall  [complimentary]  affability,  ex- 
presse  myselfe  then  as  I  doe  now,  The  Author's  most 
affectionate,  and  most  humbly  devoted  servant,  J.  A."1 
Why  our  author  should  have  resorted  to  this 
device  for  recommending  himself  and  his  book,  we 
cannot  tell.  Perhaps  he  felt  that  some  strong 
affirmations  were  needed  in  the  case.  Probably  he 

1  Urorks,  p.  63. 


126  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

agreed  with  the  old  saying  that,  if  you  wish  work 
to  be  thoroughly  done,  you  had  better  do  it  your 
self.  The  moral  aspect  of  the  matter  we  leave  in 
the  hands  of  our  readers  for  discussion. 

In  five  Latin  elegiac  couplets  of  a  very  neat  and 
polished  kind,  Alexander  Ross l  recommends  The 
Trissotetras  to  the  reader,  and  assures  the  author 
that  Scotia,  whom  by  his  writings  he  was  exalting 
to  the  stars,  looked  down  upon  him  with  a  benig 
nant  smile.  Ross  himself  is  now  only  known  to 
most  of  us  from  the  mention  made  of  him  in 
Hudibras,  in  the  well-known  passage — 

"There  was  an  ancient  sage  philosopher 
Who  had  read  Alexander  Eoss  over." 

It  is  to  be  feared  that  Alexander  Ross  had  not 
performed  the  same  feat  with  regard  to  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart's  treatise ;  for  his  verses 2  would  have 

1  Alexander  Ross  (1590-1654)  was  a  believer  in  centaurs  and 
griffins,   in  nations  of  giants  and  pygmies,  and  also,  of  course, 
in  witches.      In  short,    a  pretty  accurate  statement  of  his  in 
tellectual  creed  might  be  constructed  by  turning  into  the  articles 
of  a  confession  of  faith  the  list  of  "Vulgar  Errors"  controverted 
by  Sir  Thomas  Browne.     It  is  interesting  to  know  that  he  was 
probably  the  last   person  in   Scotland  who  heard  the  voice   of 
the  water-kelpie.      "One  day,"  he  says,    "travelling  before  day 
with  some  company  near  the  river  Don  in  Aberdeen,  we  heard  a 
great  noise  and  voices  calling  to  us.     I  was  going  to  answer,  but 
was  forbid  by  my  company,  who  told  me  they  were  spirits,  who 
never  are  heard  there  but  before  the  death  of  somebody ;  which 
fell   out  too  true,    for  the  next  day  a  gallant  gentleman  was 
drowned,    with  his  horse   offering    to   swim  over "    (Quoted    in 
Lives  of  Eminent  Men  of  Aberdeen,  by  J.  Bruce). 

2  They  begin— 

"  Si  cupis  setherios  tut6  peragrare  meatus, 
Et  sulcare  audes  si  vada  salsa  maris,"  etc. 

A  friend,  who  knows 


A  PRAYER  FOR  CRITICS  127 

been  equally  appropriate  if  the  subject  of  them  had 
been  a  flying-machine  or  a  water- tricycle  invented 
by  his  friend. 

At  the  end  of  the  glossary  in  which  the  hardest 
words  in  The  Trissotetras  are  explained,  the  author 
addresses  a  word  in  season  to  the  persons  into 
whose  hands  his  book  may  fall.  He  expects  that 
"  learned  and  judicious  mathematicians"  will  welcome 
it,  and  he  promises  them  more  of  the  same  kind. 
His  dignified  attitude  towards  carping  critics  is  very 
impressive.  "But  as  for  such,"  he  says,  "who, 
either  understanding  it  not,  or  vain-gloriously  being 
accustomed  to  criticise  on  the  works  of  others,  will 
presume  to  carp  therein  at  what  they  cannot 
amend,  I  pray  God  to  illuminate  their  judgments 
and  rectifie  their  wits,  that  they  may  know  more 
and  censure  lesse ;  for  so  by  forbearing  detraction, 
the  venom  whereof  must  needs  reflect  upon  them 
selves,  they  will  come  to  approve  better  of  the 
endeavours  of  those  that  wish  them  no  harme." l 

"  Himself  to  sing  and  build  the  lofty  rhyme," 
has  given  me  the  following  metrical  translation  of  Ross's  verses  : — 

"  Wouldst  thou  in  safety  trace  ethereal  ways, 
Or  plough  with  daring  keel  the  briny  deep  ; 
Shouldst  thou  earth's  wide  expanses  long  to  span, 
Come  hither,  make  this  learned  book  thine  own. 
By  it,  without  Daedalian  wings,  canst  fly, 
And  without  Neptune,  through  the  depths  canst  swim  ; 
By  it  thou  canst  subdue  the  Lybian  heat, 
And  bear  the  cruel  cold  of  Scythian  skies. 
On,  Thomas!  Scotia,  whom  unto  the  stars 
Thy  writings  raise,  will  yet  rejoice  in  thee." 

1  Works,  p.  146.     N.B. — The  attention  of  professional  critics  is 
respectfully  directed  to  the  above  passage. 


CHAPTER  V 

IIANTOXPONOXANON,  OR  THE  PEDIGREE 

NE  of  the  most  characteristic  of  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart's  works  is  his 
IIANTOXPONOXANON :  or, 
A  Peculiar  PEOMPTUAEY  of 
TIME.1  This  contains  a  com 
plete  pedigree  of  the  Urquhart 
family  from  the  creation  of  the  world  down  to  the 
year  A.D.  1652.  Prefixed  to  it  is  a  letter  to  the 
reader  by  "  a  well- wisher,"  whose  initials  are  G.  P., 
into  whose  hands  the  pedigree  had  fallen  by  mere 
chance,  and  who  had  thought  himself  bound  in 
duty  to  the  public  to  see  it  safely  through  the 
press.  According  to  the  statements  of  this  dis 
interested  philanthropist,  the  work  in  question  was 
but  one  of  a  large  number  of  papers  of  very  great 
importance,  forming  part  of  the  author's  baggage, 

'The  full  title  of  the  work  is  as  follows :— IIANTOXPONOXANON : 
or,  A  Peculiar  PROMPTUARY  of  TIME;  Wherein  (not  one 
instant  being  omitted  since  the  beginning  of  motion)  is  displayed 
A  most  exact  DIRECTORY  for  all  particular  Chronologies  in  what 
Family  soever  :  And  that  by  deducing  the  true  Pedigree  and 
Lineal  descent  of  the  most  ancient  and  honourable  name  of  the 
VRQVHARTS,  in  the  house  of  CROMARTIE,  since  the  Creation  of 
the  world,  until  this  present  yeer  of  God,  1652.  London,  Printed 
for  Richard  Baddeley,  and  are  to  be  sold  at  his  shop,  within  the 
Middle-Temple-Gate,  1652. 


A  NARROW  ESCAPE  129 

which  he  had  to  abandon  after  the  battle  of 
Worcester.  It  is  the  habit,  we  know,  of  im 
pecunious  and  importunate  wayfarers  to  carry  about 
with  them  documents  of  interest  to  which  they 
solicit  attention;  but  why  a  man  in  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart's  position  should  have  gone  on  a  cam 
paign,  encumbered  by  various  unpublished  works 
in  manuscript,  it  is  difficult  to  say.  Perhaps  the 
simplest  explanation  is  that  he  was  different  from 
other  people. 

The  soldiers  of  Cromwell,  we  were  told,  made 
but  light  of  this  portion  of  the  enemy's  baggage, 
after  "  the  fatal  blowe  given  to  the  Koyal  party  at 
Worcester " ;  indeed,  but  for  "  a  surpassing  honest 
and  civil  officer  of  Colonel  Pride's  regiment,"  the 
pedigree  of  the  Urquharts  would  have  been  used 
by  "  a  file  of  musquettiers  to  afford  smoak  to  their 
pipes  of  tobacco." l 

The  fame  of  Sir  Thomas  as  an  author  and  as 
a  soldier  moved  G.  P.,  as  he  tells  us,  to  commit  this 
treatise  to  the  press.  With  considerable  ingenuity 
he  remarks  that,  though  the  author  is  now  in  prison 
as  a  Royalist,  he  understands  that  his  position  is 
by  no  means  "  so  desperate  as  that  he  thereby  will 
be  much  endangered."  If  any  doubt  up  to  this 
point  existed  as  to  who  G.  P.  might  be,  it  is  set  at 
rest  by  the  terms  in  which  he  pleads  for  favourable 
conditions  being  granted  to  the  prisoner.  "  It  is 
humbly  desired,"  he  says,  "  and,  as  I  believe,  from 
the  hearts  of  all  that  are  acquainted  with  him,  that 
the  greatest  State  in  the  world  stain  not  their  glory 
by  being  the  Atropos  to  cut  the  thred  of  that 

1  Works,  p.  151. 
9 


130  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

which  Saturne's  sithe  hath  not  been  able  to  mow  in 
the  progress  of  all  former  ages,  especially  in  the 
person  of  him  whose  inward  abilities  are  like  to 
produce  effects  conducible  to  the  State  of  as  long 
continuance  for  the  future." 1  Only  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  himself  had  the  secret  of  what  we  may 
call  the  "  spacious  "  manner  of  self-eulogy,  which  by 
its  very  grandeur  seems  lifted  up  above  all  such 
petty  feelings  as  pride  or  vanity. 

The  concluding  passage  in  the  address  to  the 
reader  is  also  worth  quoting,  as  it  illustrates  the 
magnanimous  spirit  in  which  the  captive  deprecates 
severity  towards  himself  on  the  ground  of  the 
injury  which  would  thereby  redound  to  the  State. 
"  Considering,"  it  says,  "  how  formerly  he  hath  been 
a  Maecenas  to  the  scholar,  a  patron  to  the  souldier, 
a  favourer  of  the  marchant,  a  protector  of  the 
artificer,  and  upholder  of  the  yeoman,  it  were  a 
thousand  pities  that  by  the  austerity  of  a  State, 
which  dependeth  in  both  its  esse  and  bene  esse  upon 
the  flourishing  of  these  worthy  professions,  effects 
so  advantagious  thereto,  should,  by  not  conferring 
deserved  courtesies  on  him,  be  extinguished  in  the 
very  brood."  2 

In  the  True  Pedigree  and  Lineal  Descent  of 
the  Most  Ancient  and  Honourable  Family  of  the 
Urquharts  in  the  House  of  Cromartie,  we  have  a 
brief  but  surprisingly  complete  history  of  the  family 
from  the  time  of  Adam3  down  to  A.D.  1652.  The 

1  Works,  p.  152.  2  Ibid.  p.  152. 

3  Poor  Sir  Thomas  thought  that  he  was  going  back  to  the 
beginning  when  he  traced  his  descent  up  to  Adam,  or,  to  be  more 
exact,  to  the  red  earth  of  which  the  "protoplast"  was  made. 


REMARKABLE  GOOD  FORTUNE        131 

line  runs  through  the  Sethite  and  not  the  Cainite 
branch  of  the  human  race,  and,  among  the  sons  of 
Noah,  it  passes  through  Japhet.  The  story  is  told 
of  a  marginal  note  being  found  in  the  history  of 
some  ancient  Highland  family,  to  the  effect  that 
"  about  this  time  the  Flood  took  place."  Something 
like  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  document  before  us, 
for,  under  the  date  B.C.  289 3,  Sir  Thomas  adds  to  a 
mention  of  his  ancestor  Noah,  a  remark  to  the 
effect  that  "  the  Universal  Deluge  occurred  in  the 
six  hundreth  yeer  compleat  of  his  age." 

The  good  fortune  of  his  ancestors  in  their  in 
heritances,  marriages,  and  friendships  is  very 
remarkable.  To  one  of  them,  Japhet,  fell  the 
inheritance  of  "  all  the  regions  of  Europe  " ;  Japhet's 
grandson  Penuel  was  "a  most  intimate  friend  of 
Nimrod,  the  mighty  hunter  and  builder  of  Babel " ; 
while  his  great-grandson  Tycheros  was  chosen  by 
"-Orpah,  the  daughter  of  Sabatius  Saga,  Prince  of 
the  Armenians,  to  be  her  husband,  because  of  his 
gallantry  and  good  success  in  the  wars."  l 

The  name  Urquhart  came  into  use  at  the 
comparatively  late  period  of  B.C.  2139,  when  the 
family  had  been  in  existence  for  over  eighteen 
hundred  years.  It  was  first  borne  by  Esormon. 
"  He,"  we  are  told, "  was  soveraign  Prince  of  Achaia. 
For  his  fortune  in  the  wars,  and  affability  in  con 
versation,  his  subjects  and  familiars  surnamed  him 

The  late  Charles  Darwin  carried  back  the  pedigree  of  man  a 
prodigious  length,  though  he  lowered  its  quality.  There  can  be 
little  doubt  that  our  author  would  have  disdained  to  accept  what 
used  to  be  called  "the  lower  animals"  as,  in  any  sense,  ancestors 
of  mankind,  or,  at  any  rate,  of  the  dignified  family  of  Urquhart. 
p.  156. 


132  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

ovpoxdpros,  that  is  [to]  say,  fortunate  and  well- 
beloved.  After  which  time,  his  posterity  ever  since 
hath  acknowledged  him  the  father  of  all  that  carry 
the  name  of  Urquhart.1  He  had  for  his  arms,  three 
banners,  three  ships,  and  three  ladies,  in  a  field  d'or, 
with  a  picture  of  a  young  lady  above  the  waste, 
holding  in  her  right  hand  a  brandished  sword,  and 
a  branch  of  myrtle  in  the  left,  for  crest ;  and  for 
supporters,  two  Javanites,  after  the  souldier-habit  of 
Achaia,  with  this  motto  in  the  scroll  of  his  coat- 
armour,  ravra  ra  rpla  a%io6eaTa]  that  is,  These 
three  are  worthy  to  behold.  Upon  his  wife 
Narfesia,  who  was  soveraign  of  the  Amazons,  he 
begot  Cratynter."2 

The  habits  of  the  Urquharts  to  form  alliances 
and  friendships  with  persons  afterwards  famous  in 

1  In  one  respect,  at  any  rate,  we  have  legitimate  ground   of 
triumph   over  our   ancestors — we    spell    better    than    they  did. 
Charles  Lamb  once  lent  a  volume  of  the  old  dramatists  to  a  friend, 
and  asked  him  his  opinion  of  it.     The  reply  wras  that  it  contained 
a  considerable  amount  of  bad  spelling !     The  name  Urquhart,  as 
thus  written,   occurs  here  in  Sir  Thomas's   "Pedigree,"  and  is, 
doubtless,  the  correct  form  of  the  name.     In  the  Latinised  shape 
of  Urquhardus  it  occurs  on  the  register  of  the  University  of  Aber 
deen,  at  which  our  author  studied.     Yet  Urchard  seems  to  have 
been 

"  The  name  our  valiant  Knight 
To  all  his  challenges  did  write." 

The  unbridled  licence  in  the  matter  of  spelling  prevalent  at  that 
period  is  still  further  illustrated  by  the  historian  Gordon,  who 
wrote  the  History  of  Scots  Affairs,  and  who  gives  us  the  name  in 
the  form  of  Wrqhward  !  This,  one  would  think,  was  as  far  as  it 
was  possible  to  get  in  the  way  of  bad  spelling,  without  altogether 
taking  leave  of  the  sounds  to  be  expressed  by  alphabetical  signs. 
After  it  the  spelling  Wrwhart,  as  we  find  it  in  an  Act  of  Parlia 
ment  of  1663,  seems  rather  poor. 

2  Works,  p.  156. 


THE  THREE  LIONS'  HEADS  133 

sacred  and  secular  history  is  very  marked.  Thus, 
one  of  them,  Phrenedon  Urquhart,  "  was  in  the 
house  of  the  Patriarch  Abraham  at  the  time  of  the 
destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha."  At  a  later 
period,  another,  named  Hypsegoras  Urquhart,  married 
a  daughter  of  Herculus  Lybius ;  while  a  descendant 
of  theirs,  Pamprosodos  Urquhart,  married  Termuth, 
"  who  was  that  daughter  of  Pharaoh  Amenophis 
which  found  Moses  among  the  bulrushes,  and 
brought  him  up  as  if  he  had  been  her  own  childe." 

Another  ancestor,  Molin  Urquhart  (c.  B.C.  1534), 
married  Panthea,  "  the  daughter  of  Deucalion  and 
Pyrrha,  of  whom  Ovid  maketh  mention  in  the  first 
of  his  Metamorphoses."  The  genealogist  goes  on  to 
say  that  "  in  that  part  of  Africk  which,  after  his 
name,  is  till  this  hour  called  Molinea,  by  cunning 
and  valour  together  he  killed  in  one  morning  three 
lions;1  the  heads  whereof,  when  in  a  basket,  pre 
sented  to  his  lady  Panthea,  so  terrified  her,  that 
(being  quick  with  childe)  for  putting  her  right  hand 
to  her  left  side,  with  this  sudden  exclamation,  0 
Hercules,  what  is  this  ?  the  impression  of  three 
lions'  heads  was  found  upon  the  left  side  of  the 
childe  as  soon  as  he  was  born."  In  consequence  of 
this  incident,  the  three  banners,  three  ships,  and 
three  ladies  in  the  Urquhart  arms  were  exchanged 
for  three  lions'  heads. 

A  century  later,  we  find  that  Propetes  Urquhart 
married  Hypermnestra, "  the  choicest  of  Danaus'  fifty 
daughters."  This  must  have  been  some  time 
after  the  little  affair  happened  for  which  forty-nine 
of  her  sisters  were  condemned  to  draw  water  in 

1  Works,  p.  159. 


134  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

sieves ;  for,  as  every  schoolboy  knows,  the  fifty 
daughters  of  Danaus  were  married  to  their  cousins, 
the  fifty  sons  of  ^Egyptus,  and  all  of  them,  but  one, 
at  the  bidding  of  their  father,  murdered  their 
husbands  on  the  evening  of  the  marriage-day. 
Hypermnestra,  however,  had  pity  upon  her  cousin 
and  husband,  Lynceus,  and  spared  him.1  He  must 
have  died  shortly  after,  probably  from  natural 
causes,  as  it  is  recorded  in  the  work  before  us  that 
she  married  Propetes  Urquhart,  and  became  the 
mother  of  Euplocamos  Urquhart. 

1  Horace  gives  us  the  speech  in  which  she  told  Lyncens  of  his 
danger,  and  urged  him  to  make  his  escape — 

"'Wake!'  to  her  youthful  spouse  she  cried, 
'  Wake  !  or  you  yet  may  sleep  too  well : 
Fly — from  the  father  of  your  bride, 

Her  sisters  fell: 
They,  as  she-lions  bullocks  rend, 

Tear  each  her  victim :  I,  less  hard, 
Than  these,  will  slay  you  not,  poor  friend, 
Nor  hold  in  ward : 

Me  let  my  sire  in  fetters  lay 

For  mercy  to  my  husband  shown : 
Me  let  him  ship  from  hence  away, 

To  climes  unknown. 

Go ;  speed  your  flight  o'er  land  and  wave, 
While  Night  and  Venus  shield  you  ;  go 
Be  blest:  and  on  my  tomb  engrave 
This  tale  of  woe.'" 

Odes,  iii.  11  (Conington's  Translation). 

Her  sad  forebodings  concerning  her  own  fate,  it  is  satisfactory  to 
know,  were  not  fully  realised.  Perhaps  she  was  shipped  away  to 
Cromartie,  or  Ireland,  or  Portugal,  or  Africa,  or  wherever  it  was 
that  the  head  of  the  Urquhart  family  was  then  reigning.  Instead 
of  Lynceus  having  the  melancholy  satisfaction  of  putting  an 
inscription  on  her  tombstone,  it  is  probable  that  she  performed 
that  office  for  him. 


CAINOTOMOS  URQUHART  135 

The  thought  of  what  the  family  to  which 
Hypermnestra  belonged  were  capable  when  their 
blood  was  up,  must,  one  would  think,  have  cast  a 
slight  shadow  of  apprehension  upon  the  married  life 
of  Propetes  Urquhart.  A  more  cheerful  tone  must 
have  pervaded  that  of  his  descendant  Cainotomos 
Urquhart,  for  he,  we  are  told,  "  took  to  wife  Thy- 
melica,  the  daughter  of  Bacchus,  in  recompense  of 
his  having  accompanied  him  in  the  conquest  of  the 
Indies."  Further  interesting  particulars,  which  are 
not  elsewhere  recorded,  are  related  of  this  ancestor 
of  Sir  Thomas.  On  his  return  from  the  expedi 
tion  in  which  he  assisted  Bacchus  to  conquer  India, 
he  "  passed  through  the  territories  of  Israel,  where, 
being  acquainted  with  Debora  the  Judge  and  Pro 
phetess,  he  received  from  her  a  very  rich  jewel, 
which  afterwards  by  one  of  his  succession  was  pre 
sented  to  Pentasilea,  that  Queen  of  the  Amazons 
that  assisted  the  Trojans  against  Agamemnon." 

Their  son  Kodrigo  Urquhart  (c.  B.C.  1295)  was, 
we  are  told,  invited  over  by  his  kindred  the  Clan- 
molinespick,1  the  principal  clan  in  Ireland,  and 
"  bore  rule  there  with  much  applause  and  good 
success  " — the  one  solitary  instance  of  the  kind,  we 
suppose,  which  is  to  be  found  in  the  history  of  that 
"  most  distressful  country."  "  From  him,"  it  is  said, 

1  Clanmolinespick  is,  we  believe,  more  correctly  clann-maol-an- 
easbuig  (the  last  pronounced  cspick),  and  means  "the  clan"  or 
' '  family  of  the  servant  of  the  bishop. "  They  are  probably  the 
Irish  ancestors  of  the  Macmillans  of  Knapdale  in  Argyleshire. 
The  word  "  maol"  "a  tonsured  servant,"  occurs  in  Malise  (maol- 
Josa),  "a  servant  of  Jesus,"  a  family  name  of  the  old  Earls  of 
Strathearn  ;  and  easbuiy  in  Gillespie  or  Gillespic,  "a  servant"  or 
"  gillie  of  the  bishop." 


136  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

"  is  descended  the  Clanrurie,1  of  which  name  there 
were  twenty-six  rulers  and  kings  of  Ireland  before 
the  days  of  Ferguse  the  first,  King  of  Scots  in 
Scotland." 

A  slight  degree  of  uncertainty  hangs  about  the 
identity  of  the  wife  of  Mellessen  Urquhart  (c.  B.C. 
1049).  Her  name  was  Nicolia,  and  before  her 
marriage  she  "  travelled  from  the  remote  Eastern 
countries  to  have  experience  of  the  wisdom  of 
Solomon,  and  by  many 2  is  supposed  to  have  been 
the  Queen  of  Sheba."  Her  husband,  however,  must 
have  considered  that,  though  she  loved  wisdom,  she 
had  not  acquired  much  of  it,  or,  at  any  rate,  of  the 
kind  which  is  needed  for  bringing  up  a  young 
family;  for  the  historian  goes  on  to  say  that 
"  Mellessen  Urquhart  nevertheless  sent  some  of  his 
children  to  Ireland  and  Britain,  to  be  brought  up 
with  the  best  of  his  own  father  and  mother's  kindred." 

Amongst  other  celebrated  persons  who  had  the 
honour  of  being  enrolled  amongst  the  ancestors 
of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  are  Pothina,  a  niece  of 
Lycurgus ;  ^quanima,  the  sister  of  Marcus  Corio- 
lanus ;  Diosa,  the  daughter  of  Alcibiades ;  and 
Tortolina,  the  daughter  of  King  Arthur.  It  is 
observable  that  for  a  good  many  generations  im 
mediately  preceding  the  author's  time,  the  ladies 
who  figure  in  the  genealogy  are  of  comparatively 

1  Clanrurie  is  "the  clan"  or  "family  of  Roderick."     These  are 
the  Macrories  and  Fullartons,  their  eponym  having  been  Rory  or 
Roderick,  one  of  the  two  sons  of  Reginald,  whose  father  in  almost 
prehistoric  times  was  Somerled,  Lord  of  the  Isles.     They  settled 
in  Bute  and  Arran,  and  about  Ardnanmrchan  and  the  islands 
there. 

2  This  phrase — "by  many  " — is  very  delightful. 


THE  THREE  BEARS'  HEADS  137 

lowly  birth — seldom,  indeed,  do  they  reach  the 
rank  of  an  earl's  daughter.  Either  the  supply  of 
princesses  was  by  this  time  somewhat  exhausted,  or 
the  demands  of  the  Urquharts  were  less  exorbitant. 
The  high-spirited  character  of  the  most  remarkable 
scion  of  the  family  who  drew  up  the  genealogy 
forbids  us  to  think  that,  with  the  lapse  of  time,  they 
had  suffered  any  diminution  of  courage.  It  rather 
seems  as  though  the  world  had  entered  upon  a  less 
heroic  stage.  Perhaps,  like  Sir  Thomas  Browne  in 
a  later  age,  they  had  concluded  that  "  it  was  too 
late  to  be  ambitious,  for  the  great  mutations  of  the 
world  were  acted." 

In  the  time  of  Vocompos  (A.D.  775)  a  further 
change  took  place  in  the  arms  of  the  Urquharts, 
which  gave  them  their  final  form.  "Vocompos," 
we  learn,  "  was  the  first  in  the  world  that  had  the 
bears'  heads  to  his  arms,  being  induced  to  exchange, 
by  the  instigation  of  King  Solvatius,  his  arms  of 
three  lions'  heads,  for  the  three  bears'  heads,  razed, 
because  of  the  great  exploit,  in  presence  of  the 
King,  done  by  him  and  his  two  brothers,  in  killing, 
one  morning,  three  wild  bears,  in  the  Caledonian 
forrest :  the  supporters  were  also  changed  into  two 
greyhounds :  the  crest  and  impress  remaining  still 
the  same  as  it  was  since  the  days  of  Astioremon." 1 

1  Works,  p.  168.  A  curious  stone  lintel  now  at  Kinbeakie  gives 
a  representation  of  the  Urquhart  coat  of  arms,  such  as  it  was  in 
Sir  Thomas's  own  time.  It  was  no  doubt  executed  at  his  orders 
and  under  his  direction,  for  inscribed  on  it  are  the  names  of  some 
of  those  worthies  who  appear  in  the  above  genealogical  history. 
The  representation  which  we  give  of  this  stone  is  from  a  photograph 
specially  taken  for  the  illustration  of  this  work.  As  the  porch  in 
the  wall  of  which  the  slab  is  set  is  very  narrow,  it  was  impossible, 


138  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

An  alleged  ancestor  of  our  author,  William  de 

even  with  the  use  of  a  wide-angle  lens,  to  get  a  more  satis 
factory  photograph  than  that  which  is  here  reproduced.  Our 
readers  will  therefore  kindly  excuse  the  distortion  of  shape 
which  is  only  too  apparent,  and  accept  as  a  measure  of  com 
pensation  the  vividness  with  which  the  details  of  the  engraved 
stone  are  brought  out.  "This  singular  relic,"  says  Hugh 
Miller,  "which  has,  perhaps,  more  of  character  impressed  upon  it 
than  any  other  piece  of  sandstone  in  the  kingdom,  is  about  five 
feet  in  length  by  three  in  breadth,  and  bears  date  A.M.  5612, 
A.c.  1651.  On  the  lower  and  upper  edges  it  is  bordered  by  a  plain 
moulding,  and  at  the  ends  by  belts  of  rich  foliage,  terminating  in 
a  chalice  or  vase.  In  the  upper  corner  two  knights  in  complete 
armour  on  horseback,  and  with  their  lances  couched,  front  each 
other,  as  if  in  the  tilt-yard.  Two  Sirens  playing  on  harps  occupy  the 
lower.  In  the  centre  are  the  arms — the  charge  on  the  shield  three 
bears'  heads,  the  supporters  two  greyhounds  leashed  and  collared, 
the  crest  a  naked  woman  holding  a  dagger  and  palm,  the  helmet 
that  of  a  knight,  with  the  beaver  partially  raised,  and  so  profusely 
mantled  that  the  drapery  occupies  more  space  than  the  shield  and 
supporters,  and  the  motto  MEANE  WEIL,  SPEAK  WEIL,  AND  Do 
WEIL.  Sir  Thomas's  initials,  S.  T.  V.  C.,  are  placed  separately, 
one  letter  at  the  outer  side  of  each  supporter,  one  in  the  centre  of 
the  crest,  and  one  beneath  the  label ;  while  the  names  of  the  more 
celebrated  heroes  of  his  genealogy,  and  the  eras  in  which  they 
flourished,  occupy  in  the  following  inscription  the  space  between 
the  figures : — ANNO  ASTIOREMONIS,  2226  ;  ANNO  VOCOMPOTIS, 
3892  ;  ANNO  MOLINI,  3199  ;  ANNO  RODRICI,  2958  ;  ANNO  CHARI, 
2219 ;  ANNO  LTJTORCI,  2000 ;  ANNO  ESORMONIS,  3804.  It  is 
melancholy  enough  that  this  singular  exhibition  of  family  pride 
should  have  been  made  in  the  same  year  in  which  the  family  re 
ceived  its  deathblow — the  year  of  Worcester  battle"  (Scenes  and 
Legends  of  the  North  of  Scotland,  chap.  vii.).  The  arms  of  the 
Urquhart  family  in  their  later  form,  as  associated  with  those  of  the 
Meldrum  and  Seton  families,  are  given  in  the  1774  edition  of  the 
IIANTOXPOXOXANON,  and  are  as  follows  -.—"Arms,  Or,  three 
Bears-heads,  erazed,  gules,  langued  azure.  Crest,  a  demy  Otter 
issuing  from  the  wreath  sable,  crowned  with  an  antique  Crown,  or, 
holding  betwixt  his  paws  a  crescent  gules.  Motto  above,  Per  mare 
et  Terras,  and  below,  Mean,  speak,  and  do  well.  Supporters,  two 
grayhounds,  proper  collared  gules,  and  leashed."  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  Urquhart  arms  should  be  the  three  bears'  heads, 


SIEGE  OF  CROMARTIE  CASTLE         139 

Monte  Alto  (Mouat),1  took  part  in  the  patriotic 
resistance  of  Scotland  against  English  oppression 
which  is  associated  with  the  names  of  Bruce  and 
Wallace,  and  the  faint  local  traditions  of  that  time 
partly  corroborate  Urquhart's  statements.  "  This 
William,"  he  says,  "  caried  himself  so  lovingly 
towards  King  Kobert,  that  when  almost  all  Scotland 
was  possest  by  King  Edward's  faction,  and  his  lands 
at  Cromartie  altogether  overrun  by  them,  and  his 
house  garrisoned  and  victualed  with  three  yeers 
provision  of  all  necessaries  for  one  hundred  men,  he 
by  a  stratagem  gained  the  castle,  and  with  the 
matter  of  fourty  men,  keept  it  out  against  the  forces 
of  Edward  for  the  space  of  seven  yeers  and  a  half, 
during  which  time  all  his  lands  there  were  totally 
wasted,  and  his  woods  burnt ;  so  that,  having 
nothing  then  he  could  properly  call  his  own  but 
the  mote-hill  onely  of  Cromartie,  which  he  fiercely 
.maintained  against  the  enemies,  he  was  agnamed 
Gulielmus  de  Monte  Alto.  At  last  William  Wallace 

though  they  are  often  described  as  three  boars1  heads.  The  records 
of  1742  and  1760  in  the  Lyon  Register  make  this  quite  certain. 
Probably  the  close  resemblance  between  the  two  words  is  the  prin 
cipal  cause  of  the  confusion  with  regard  to  the  matter  which  exists. 
In  the  sculptured  coat  of  arms,  of  which  we  give  a  representation, 
the  heads  certainly  have  a  superficial  resemblance  at  least  to  those 
of  boars.  A  correspondent  who  takes  an  interest  in  this  question 
remarks,  however,  that  "though  the  heads  have  tusks  worthy  of 
any  boar,  they  (i.e.  the  heads)  are  set  at  right  angles  to  the  necks 
in  a  way  in  which  no  boar  could  be  represented."  On  the  other 
hand,  the  snouts  of  the  animals  have  that  distinctly  rclrousst 
shape  which  we  associate  with  pigs,  both  wild  and  domesticated. 
The  question  is,  therefore,  not  so  simple  as  at  first  sight  it  appears, 
and  can  scarcely  be  adequately  dealt  with  in  a  mere  footnote. 
Accordingly  we  leave  our  readers  to  discuss  and  settle  the  difficulty. 
1  See  p.  4,  supra. 


140  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

came  to  his  relief,  but,  as  I  conceive,  it  was  the 
brother's  son  of  the  renowned  William,  who  in  a 
little  den  [or  hollow]  within  two  miles  of  Cromartie, 
till  this  hour  called  Wallace  Den,  killed  six  hundred 
of  King  Edward's  unfortunate  forces.  Afterwards, 
raising  the  siege  from  about  the  mote- hill  of 
Cromartie  by  the  assistance  of  his  namesake  the 
other  William,  the  shire  of  Cromarty  was  totally 
purged  of  the  enemy.  " 1 

Tradition,  according  to  Hugh  Miller,  is  silent 
respecting  the  siege,  but  relates  many  details  of 
the  battle.  The  Scottish  forces  lay  in  ambuscade 
in  the  ravine  or  hollow  which  is  still,  or  was  until 
recently,  called  by  Wallace's  name,  and  attacked  a 
large  body  of  English  troops  on  their  way  to  join 
some  of  their  countrymen,  who  were  encamped  on 
the  peninsula  of  Easter  Eoss.  The  English  were 
surprised  and  panic-struck,  and  left  six  hundred 
dead  on  the  field  of  battle.  The  survivors  were 
unacquainted  with  the  country,  and  were  under  the 
impression  that  there  was  continuous  land  between 
them  and  their  countrymen  on  the  opposite  shore. 
"  They  were  only  undeceived,"  we  are  told,  "  when, 
on  climbing  the  southern  Sutor,  where  it  rises 
behind  the  town,  they  saw  an  arm  of  the  sea  more 
than  a  mile  in  width,  and  skirted  by  abrupt  and 
dizzy  precipices,  opening  before  them.  The  spot  is 
still  pointed  out  where  they  made  their  final  stand ; 
and  a  few  shapeless  hillocks,  that  may  still  be 
seen  among  the  trees,  are  said  to  have  been  raised 
above  the  bodies  of  those  who  fell ;  while  the 
fugitives,  for  they  were  soon  beaten  from  this 

1  Works,  p.  170. 


A  LARGE  FAMILY  141 

position,  were  either  driven  over  the  neighbouring 
precipices,  or  perished  amidst  the  waves  of  the 
Firth."1 

Sir  Thomas  does  not  let  us  off  easily.  After 
subjecting  our  credulity  to  a  severe  strain  by  one 
kind  of  statement,  he  unexpectedly  increases  the 
tension  by  another.  Thus  he  says  that  an  ancestor 
in  the  fifteenth  century,  Thomas  Urquhart,  had  by 
his  wife  Helen  Abernethie,  daughter  of  Lord  Salton, 
five-and-twenty  sons,  who  grew  up  to  manhood, 
and  eleven  daughters,  all  of  whom  found  husbands. 
It  would  only  have  been  kind  of  him  to  have 
reduced  these  numbers  a  little.  But  on  one  point 
he  has  spared  us :  we  are  not  asked  to  believe  that 
there  were  others  who  died  in  infancy. 

In  a  postscript  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  explains 
that  he  has  just  given  his  readers  a  sketch  of  the 
history  of  his  family,  but  hopes  to  furnish  them 
with  a  complete  narrative  as  soon  as  he  obtains  his 
release  from  his  parole,  and  is  at  liberty  to  attend 
to  this  and  to  other  matters  of  greater  importance. 
The  thought  of  the  delightful  book  in  store  for 
mankind  is  so  attractive  to  him  that  he  cannot 
help  dilating  upon  it.  "  In  the  great  chronicle  of 

1  Scenes  and  Legends  of  the  North  of  Scotland,  Hugh  Miller,  p.  48. 
This  battle  is  supposed  to  be  mentioned  by  Blind  Harry,  who  has 
celebrated  the  achievements  of  Wallace  in  the  following  uncouth 
lines  : — 

"Wallace  raid  throw  the  northlaud  into  playne. 
At  Crummade  feill  Inglismen  thai  slew. 
The  worth  i  Scottis  till  hym  thus  couth  perse w. 
Raturnd  agayne  and  come  till  Abirdeyn, 
With  his  blith  ost  apon  the  Lammess  ewyn  " 

(rii.  1084-88). 


142  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

the  House  of  Urquhart,"  he  continues,  "  the  afore 
said  Sir  Thomas  purposeth,  by  God's  assistance,  to 
make  mention  of  the  illustrious  families  from  thence 
descended,  which  as  yet  are  in  esteem  in  the 
countries  of  Germany,  Bohemia,  Italy,  France,  Spain, 
England,  Scotland,  Ireland,  and  several  other  nations 
of  a  warmer  climate,  adjacent  to  that  famous  terri 
tory  of  Greece,  the  lovely  mother  of  this  most 
ancient  and  honourable  stem." x  He  also  intends 
not  to  omit  the  name  of  any  family  with  which  at 
any  time  the  aforesaid  house  has  contracted  alliance. 
The  concluding  paragraph  is  very  amusing ;  for 
in  it  our  author  promises  to  give  proof  of  the  state 
ments  he  has  made,  by  quoting  from  the  works 
of  respectable  chroniclers  of  past  ages,  though  the 
degree  of  certainty  which  the  reader  may  thereby 
expect  to  reach  falls  short  of  that  given  by  Holy 
Writ  or  the  works  of  Euclid.  "And  finally,"  he 
says,  "  for  confirmation  of  the  truth  in  deriving  of 
his  extraction  from  the  Ionian  race  of  the  Prince  of 
Achaia,  and  in  the  deduction  of  all  the  considerable 
particulars  of  the  whole  story,  [the  author]  is  resolved 
to  produce  testimonies  of  Arabick,  Greek,  Latin,  and 
other  writers  of  such  authentick  approbation,  that 
we  may  boldly  from  thence  infer  consequences  of 
no  less  infallible  verity  then  [than]  any  that  is  not 
grounded  on  faith  by  means  of  a  Divine  illumina 
tion,  as  is  the  story  of  the  Bible,  or  on  reason,  by 
vertue  of  the  unavoidable  inference  of  a  necessary 
concluding  demonstration,  as  that  of  the  Elements 
of  Euclid ;  which  being  the  greatest  evidence  that 
in  any  narration  of  that  kinde  is  to  be  expected, 
1  Works,  p.  174. 


INFORMING  IF  NOT  EDIFYING        143 

the  judicious  reader  is  bid  farewel,  from  whom 
the  Author  for  the  time  most  humbly  takes  his 
leave." l 

It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  scheme  of  filling 
out  the  sketch  of  the  history  of  the  Urquhart 
family  was  never  carried  out,  if  ever  it  had  been 
seriously  entertained  by  Sir  Thomas ;  and  we  are 
left  in  ignorance  of  the  names  of  the  Arabic,  Greek, 
Latin,  and  other  authors  on  whose  testimony  our 
belief  in  the  authenticity  of  the  narrative  was  to 
have  been  firmly  based.  In  the  absence  of  this 
our  judgment  is  left  in  suspense,  unless,  indeed, 
we  conclude  that,  as  the  genealogy  begins  and  ends 
with  the  names  of  actual  persons,2  the  intermediate 
part  is  not  likely  to  have  been  a  mere  fabrication. 
If  the  links  are  sound  in  the  places  where  we  can 
test  them,  it  requires  no  very  great  exercise  of 
credulity  to  believe  that  they  are  the  same 
throughout. 

Matthew  Arnold  on  one  occasion  laid  down  the 
principle,  that  a  book  should  either  "  edify  the 
uninstructed,"  or  "inform  the  instructed."  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart's  "  IIANTOXPONOXANON  " 
certainly  justifies  its  existence  according  to  this 
standard  of  judging  literature ;  for  if  it  does  not 
serve  to  edify  the  uninstructed,  it  does  inform  the 

1  Works,  p.  175. 

2  The  editor  of  the  1774  edition  of  the  Tracts  of  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  says  that  he  had  compared  the  genealogy  with  the 
records  kept  by  the  Lord  Lyon  of  Scotland,  which  go  back  as  far 
as  the  reign  of  Alexander  n.  (A.D.  1214-1249),  and  had  found  it 
strictly  correct  from  that  period.     In  Appendix  I.,  which  contains 
the  lists  of  names  of  Sir  Thomas's  ancestors,  we  have  taken  the 
liberty  of  indicating  the  names  on  which  reliance  can  be  placed,  by 
printing  them  in  italics  (see  p.  211). 


144  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

instructed,  since  the  information  it  contains  is  not 
to  be  found  in  any  other  quarter.1 

One's  faith  in  the  credibility  of  his  narrative  is, 
however,  a  little  shaken  by  finding  that  in  the 
second  book  of  his  favourite  author,  Eabelais,  the 
genealogy  of  the  giant  Pantagruel  is  carried  up  to 
a  period  far  beyond  the  Flood.  It  may  be  a  mere 
coincidence,  but  it  is  one  of  those  coincidences  that 
make  us  very  thoughtful.2 

At  the  time  when  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  wrote, 
Scotland  was  supposed  to  have  had  a  dynasty  of 
kings  and  a  connected  political  history  dating  far 

1  Sir  Thomas  is  said  to  have  remarked  about  ' '  the  Pedigree,"  that 
by  the  first  generation  of  readers  it  would  be  received  with  scoffs, 
that  the  second  generation  would  have  their  doubts  about  it,  but  that 
the  third  generation  would  be  heavily  inclined  to  believe  it.     Time 
has  moved  somewhat  more  slowly,  however,  than  he  anticipated, 
and  probably  but  few  of  us  have  as  yet  got  past  the  second  stage. 

2  In  the  article  on  Crichton  in  the  Biographia  Britannica,  Dr 
Kippis  subjects  our  author  to  grave  censure  (see  p.  158).     With 
respect  to  Urquhart's  present  work  he  says:   "Of  his  total  dis 
regard  to  truth  there  is  incontestible  evidence  in  another  work 
of  his,  entitled  The  True  Pedigree,  etc.     In  this  work  it  is  almost 
incredible  what  a  number  of  falsities  he  has  invented,  both  with 
respect  to  names  and  facts.     Perhaps  a  more  flagrant  instance  of 
imposture  and  fiction  was  never  exhibited ;  and  the  absurdity  of 
the  whole  pedigree  is  beyond  the  power  of  words  to  express.     It 
can  only  be  felt  by  those  who  have  perused  the  Tract  itself."    It 
is  to  be  feared  that  Dr  Kippis  was  mentally  akin  to  the  Irish 
bishop  who  remarked  of  Gulliver's  Travels  when  it  appeared,  that 
"all  was  not  gospel  that  was  in  that  book." 

Some  one  has  said  that  the  names  of  Urquhart's  ancestors,  at  any 
rate  on  the  male  side,  are  very  likely  those  of  the  giants  and  heathen 
in  the  Amadis  of  Gaul ;  and  certainly  Famongomad an,  Cartadaque, 
Madanfabul,  Arcalaus,  and  Basagante  remind  one  of  chiefs  and 
heroes  of  the  Cromartie  line.  In  the  female  line  the  resemblance 
is  much  closer ;  for  Asymbleta,  Eromena,  and  Gonima  distinctly 
recall  the  Darioleta,  Brisena,  aud  Madasima  of  the  romance. 


MYTHICAL  HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND      145 

back  before  the  birth  of  Christ.  The  impudent 
fictions  of  Hector  Boece,  whose  history  of  Scotland 
was  published  in  1526,  had  been  accepted  by  the 
public,  and  were  regarded  as  genuine  facts  even  by 
such  literary  personages  as  Erasmus  and  Paulus 
Jovius.  Perhaps  Sir  Thomas  thought  that  a 
credulity  which  had  endured  the  considerable  strain 
which  Boece  had  put  upon  it  might  be  trusted  to 
bear  a  still  greater  weight.  Indeed,  he  interwove 
the  story  of  his  family  with  that  which  was  current 
as  the  genuine  history  of  his  native  land. 

According  to  the  mythical  history  of  Scotland, 
Gathelus,  a  Grecian  prince,  having  quarrelled  with 
his  father  Miol,  took  refuge  in  Egypt,  and  married 
Scota,  a  daughter  of  the  Pharaoh  who  perished  in 
the  Red  Sea.  The  young  people  came  west  and 
founded  Portugal  (i.e.  Port  of  Gathelus),  and  then 
journeyed  north  to  Scotland,  bringing  with  them,  as 
part  of  their  baggage,  the  coronation-stone  yet  to 
be  seen  in  Westminster  Abbey.  Their  descendant 
Fergus,  "  the  father  of  a  hundred  kings,"  was  the 
founder  of  the  Scottish  monarchy.  These  shadowy 
persons  appear  again,  "  with  the  moonlight  stream 
ing  through  them,"  and  play  their  parts  in  the 
genealogy  of  the  Urquharts. 

Some  have  thought  that  Sir  Thomas  believed 
devoutly  in  the  genealogy  himself,  and  was  the  dupe 
of  his  own  imagination.  One  would  be  sorry  to 
form  so  low  an  opinion  of  his  mental  endowments. 
If  the  book  in  question  were  not  an  elaborate  joke, 
it  can  only  have  been  intended  to  impose  upon  the 
English  people  by  convincing  them  of  the  extra 
ordinary  dignity  and  grandeur  of  their  captive. 

10 


146  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

If  this  were  indeed  the  case,  he  must  have  had  an 
humbler  opinion  of  the  intellectual  faculties  pos 
sessed  by  the  average  Englishman  than  even  the 
majority  of  his  fellow-countrymen  entertain. 

A  very  amusing  reference  to  this  book  of  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart's  is  to  be  found  in  the  Decisions 
of  the  Court  of  Session,  under  date  of  23rd  to  25th 
January,  1706.1  In  that  year  an  action  was 
brought  by  the  Earl  of  Sutherland  against  the  Earls 
of  Crawford,  Errol,  and  Marischal,  to  determine  the 
question  of  precedency  in  the  rolls  of  Parliament. 
The  pursuer  asserted  that  he  was  lineally  descended 
from  an  Earl  of  Sutherland  living  in  1275,  while 
his  opponents'  ancestors  were  not  Earls  till  about 
1399.  The  pursuer  laid  stress  upon  the  fact  that, 
in  1630,  a  formal  inquiry  into  this  matter  had 
been  held  at  Inverness,  and  that  the  decision  had 
been  in  his  favour.  The  persons  who  conducted 
the  inquiry  were,  he  said,  of  undoubted  credit,  and 
well  versed  in  the  particulars  investigated,  and 
"  might  have  had  good  information  from  old  men 
and  writs,  which  in  the  course  of  time  and  through 
accidents  had  long  disappeared."  The  advocate  for 
the  defenders  replied  that  the  "  Chancellor  of  the 
Inquest"  had  been  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  who 
might  have  traced  the  pursuer's  descent  from  Noah, 
as  he  had  deduced  his  own  genealogy  from  Adam, 
and  that  the  decision  arrived  at  was  of  no  more 
value  than  "  his  fanciful  derivation  of  his  own 
pedigree.  For  the  members  of  the  Inquest  seemed 
to  have  sworn  rashly  upon  matters  of  greater 

1  Fountainliall,  Decisions,  ii.  265  and  315  ;  Morrison,  Dictionary 
of  Decisions,  xxvii.  11304. 


THE  TWO  SIR  THOMASES  147 

antiquity  than  they  could  certainly  know."  "  It  is 
true,"  was  the  pursuer's  reply,  "  the  defender  in  his 
gaiety  objects  against  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  as  an 
ill  genealogist ;  and  it  is  owned  that  his  derivation 
from  Adam  and  Noah  was  fantastic  enough,  and 
indeed  but  lusus  ingenii ;  but,  after  all,  the 
defender's  criticism  will  not  hinder  him  to  pass 
for  a  most  knowing  gentleman."  The  case  was 
decided  in  favour  of  the  Earl  of  Sutherland,  so  far 
as  some  of  his  contentions  were  concerned.  But  it 
is  somewhat  curious  that  his  advocate  overlooked 
the  fact  that  the  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  of  1630, 
who  had  been  the  "  Chancellor  of  the  Inquest,"  was 
not  the  author  of  the  book  containing  the  genealogy 
of  the  Urquharts,  but  that  it  was  written  by  his 
son.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that  it  was  a 
matter  of  notoriety  that  the  elder  Sir  Thomas  had 
been  a  believer  in  the  long  pedigree  which  his 
more  famous  son  had,  years  after,  elaborated  and 
published.1 

1  In  some  ways  the  elder  Sir  Thomas  reminds  us  of  the  pedantic 
and  undignified  monarch,  James  vi.,  from  whom  he  received 
knighthood.  Both  were  the  first  Protestants  of  their  respective 
houses,  both  were  attached  to  prelacy  rather  than  to  Presbyterian- 
ism,  and  both  were  wasteful  and  slovenly  in  money  matters.  If 
the  above  conjecture  be  well  founded,  they  had  a  further  point  of 
resemblance  to  each  other,  in  their  interest  in  fabulous  genealogies. 
And  it  may  be  said  of  them  both  that  they  prepared  a  series  of 
misfortunes  for  their  chivalrous,  high-spirited  sons. 


CHAPTER  VI 

EKSKTBAAATPON :  or,  THE  JEWEL,  and 
LOGOPANDECTEISION  :  or,  THE  UNIVERSAL 
LANGUAGE. 

IE  THOMAS  UKQUHART'S  previous 
excursions  into  literature  had  been 
of  a  somewhat  tentative  kind,  and 
calculated  to  whet  the  desire  of  a 
judicious  reader  for  him  to  enter  upon 
more  serious  undertakings.  He  had  appeared  in  the 
world  of  letters  in  several  different  aspects, — as  a 
a  man  of  science,  and  as  the  representative  and 
poet,  as  historian  of  a  family  which,  for  long  descent 
and  glorious  achievements,  could  not  be  rivalled,  if  his 
statements  concerning  it  were  to  be  credited, — but 
no  one  could  forecast,  from  what  he  had  already 
published,  the  nature  of  his  next  literary  exploit. 

The  volume  which  followed  the  Pedigree  of  the 
Urquharts   has  the  strange  name   above  printed,1 

1  Its  title-page  is  as  follows :— EKSKTBAAATPON  :  Or,  The 
Discovery  of  A  MOST  EXQUISITE  JEWEL,  more  precious  then 
[than]  DIAMONDS  inchased  in  Gold,  the  like  whereof  was  never 
seen  in  any  age ;  found  in  the  kennel  of  JFbrc^ster-streets,  the  day 
after  the  Fight,  and  six  before  the  Autumnal  Equinox,  anno  1651. 
Serving  in  this  place,  To  Frontal  a  VINDICATION  of  the  honour  of 
SCOTLAND,  from  that  Infamy,  whereinto  the  Rigid  Presbyterian 


THE  JEWEL  149 

but  most  of  those  who  have  occasion  to  mention  it 
more  than  once  find  it  more  convenient  to  call  it 
"The  Jewel."  1  Its  contents  are  of  such  a  character 
that  one  who  had  read  it  carefully  would  find  it 
difficult  to  state  off-hand  or  in  a  single  sentence 
what  they  were.  A  Scottish  Divinity  professor  of 
somewhat  erratic  habits  began,  on  one  occasion,  a 

party  of  that  Nation,  out  of  their  Covetousness  and  ambition,  most 
dissembledly  hath  involved  it.  Dixtichon  ad  Librum  sequitur, 
quo  tres  ter  ad&quant  Musarum  numerum,  casus  et  articuli. 

voc.  nom.  1  abl.  2  abl.  dot. 

O  thou'rt  a  Book  in  truth  with  love  to  many, 

3  abl.  4  all.  ace.  gen. 

Done  by  and  for  the  free'st  spoke  Scot  of  any. 

Ejficicns  et  finis  sunt  sibi  invicem  causas.  LONDON,  Printed  by  Ja: 
Cottrel ;  and  are  to  be  sold  by  Rich.  Boddeky>  at  the  Middle- 
Temple-gate.  1652. 

1  EKZKTBAAATPON  is  supposed  to  be  the  Greek  for  "  Gold  out 
of  the  dirt."  Dr  Irving,  the  author  of  a  very  carefully-written 
memoir  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  in  his  Lives  of  Scottish  Writers, 
.  vol.  ii.,  is  a  little  puzzled  by  this  extraordinary  name.  The  latter 
part  of  it  was,  he  thought,  perhaps  connected  with  atipiov — "to 
morrow" — in  allusion  to  the  fact  that  this  "exquisite  Jewel"  was 
taken  out  of  the  kennel  the  morrow  after  the  battle  of  Worcester. 
But  the  word  is  evidently  atpov — the  Lat.  aurum,  l '  gold. "  In  the 
"  Postilla"  to  the  Pedigree  of  the  Urquharts,  our  author  says  that 
' '  the  shire  of  Cromartie  .  .  .  hath  the  names  of  its  towns,  villages, 
hamlets,  dwellings,  promontories,  hillocks,  temples,  dens,  groves, 
fountains,  rivers,  pools,  lakes,  stone  heaps,  akers,  and  so  forth, 
of  pure  and  perfect  Greek."  We  need  not  be  surprised  that  Sir 
Thomas's  Greek  has  more  affinity  with  the  vernacular  form  of  the 
language  current  in  the  Cromartie  of  his  time  than  with  the  Attic 
of  the  age  of  Pericles, 

"For  Oreke  oj  Athcnes  was  to  him  unknawe." 

Probably  in  this  northern  dialect  of  the  Greek  tongue  avpov  was 
used  instead  of  the  more  classical  xPvff^'  Another  indication  of 
the  difference  between  the  Cromartian  and  Attic  forms  of  speech 
is  given  by  Sir  Thomas  in  the  same  treatise  in  the  name  'AXe£ dvdrjp, 
which  Thucydides  would  have  written  ' 


150  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

lecture  in  which  he  was  to  deal  with  several  mis 
cellaneous  items,  with  the  words,  "  Gentlemen,  my 
subject  to-day  will  be  hotch-potch."  This  is  an 
exact  description  of  The  Jewel,  and  those  to  whom 
nature  has  given  the  mental  apparatus  needed  for 
appreciating  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  will  rejoice  and 
not  repine  at  the  fact  that  the  feeding  laid  before 
them  is  of  a  confused  character.  Accordingly  no 
logical  sequence  will  be  allowed  to  mar  the  sym 
metry  of  this  chapter  in  which  The  Jewel  is 
described. 

The  main  contents  of  the  work  are  lists  of  the 
ancestors,  male  and  female,  of  the  Urquhart  family 
from  the  beginning  down  to  the  year  1652,  taken 
from  the  Pedigree ;  a  narrative  of  the  sad  fate  that 
overtook  the  author's  manuscripts  after  the  battle 
of  Worcester ;  some  pages  of  one  of  them  which 
contained  a  scheme  for  a  Universal  Language  ;  a 
denunciation  of  the  "  unjust  usurpation  of  the 
Presbyterian  Clergy,  and  the  judaical  practices  of 
some  merchants"  by  which  discredit  had  been  cast 
upon  the  Scottish  name ;  an  account  of  Scotsmen 
famous  for  martial  exploits  or  for  learning  during 
the  previous  half-century ;  a  statement  of  personal 
wrongs  inflicted  upon  the  author  by  ministers  of 
his  own  parishes  ;  arguments  in  favour  of  the  union 
of  Scotland  and  England ;  and  apologies  for  the 
simple  and  unadorned  strain  in  which  the  work  is 
written.  All  through  the  volume  Sir  Thomas  is 
spoken  of  in  the  third  person,  and  the  signature  of 
1  *  Christianus  Presbyteromastix  "  is  attached  to  the 
preface,  or  "  the  Epistle  Liminary,"  as  it  is  called, 
but  there  is  scarcely  any  attempt  made  to  keep  up 


RAPIDITY  OF  COMPOSITION  151 

the  pretence  of  anonymity.  The  object  of  the 
writer  is  to  try  to  obtain  for  the  prisoner  of  war 
restoration  to  complete  liberty  and  the  enjoyment 
of  his  property,  and  he  seeks  to  correct  the  evil 
impression,  which  the  conduct  of  certain  persons 
in  Scotland  had  produced  upon  the  English  people, 
by  narrating  the  martial  and  literary  achieve 
ments  of  more  worthy  representatives  of  his 
nation. 

The  rapidity  with  which  the  work  had  been 
produced  is  described  by  the  writer  in  the  following 
terms.  "  Laying  aside  all  other  businesses,"  he 
says,  "  and  cooping  my  self  up  daily  for  some  hours 
together,  betwixt  the  case  and  the  printing  press,  I 
usually  afforded  the  setter  copy  at  the  rate  of  above 
a  whole  printed  sheet  in  the  day ;  which,  although 
by  reason  of  the  smallness  of  a  Pica  letter,  and  close 
couching  thereof,  it  did  amount  to  three  full  sheets 
•  of  my  writing ;  the  aforesaid  setter,  nevertheless  (so 
nimble  a  workman  he  was),  would  in  the  space  of 
twenty-four  hours  make  dispatch  of  the  whole,  and 
be  ready  for  another  sheet.  He  and  I  striving  thus 
who  should  compose  fastest,  he  with  his  hand,  and 
I  with  my  brain ;  and  his  uncasing  of  the  letters, 
and  placing  them  in  the  composing  instrument, 
standing  for  my  conception ;  and  his  plenishing  of 
the  gaily,  and  imposing  of  the  form,  encountering 
with  the  supposed  equi-value  of  my  writing,  we 
would  almost  every  foot  or  so  jump  together  in 
this  joynt  expedition,  and  so  neerly  overtake 
other  in  our  intended  course,  that  I  was  oftentimes, 
(to  keep  him  doing),  glad  to  tear  off  parcels  of  ten  or 
twelve  lines  apeece,  and  give  him  them,  till  more 


152  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

were  ready ; l  unto  which  he  would  so  suddenly  put 
an  order,  that  almost  still,  before  the  ink  of  the 
written  letters  was  dry,  their  representatives  were, 
(out  of  their  respective  boxes),  ranked  in  the  compos 
ing-stick  ;  by  means  of  which  great  haste,  I  writing 
but  upon  the  loose  sheets  of  cording-quires,  which,  as 
I  minced  and  tore  them,  looking  like  pieces  of  waste 
paper,  troublesome  to  get  rallyed,  after  such  dis 
persive  scattredness,  I  had  not  the  leisure  to  read 
what  I  had  written,  till  it  came  to  a  proof,  and 
sometimes  to  a  full  revise.  So  that  by  vertue  of 
this  unanimous  contest,  and  joint  emulation  be 
twixt  the  theoretick  and  practical  part,  which  of  us 
should  overhye  other  in  celerity,  we  in  the  space  of 
fourteen  working  daies  compleated  this  whole  book, 
(such  as  it  is),  from  the  first  notion  of  the  brain  to 
the  last  motion  of  the  press ;  and  that  without  any 
other  help  on  my  side,  either  of  quick  or  dead,  (for 

1  Sir  Egerton  Brydges,  Bart.,  an  author  who  combines  a  great 
many  of  the  peculiarities  of  the  two  Sir  Thomas  Urquharts,  the 
father  and  the  son,  and  who  has  recorded  his  experiences  in  an 
Autobiography,  lays  stress  in  like  manner  upon  this  quality  of 
speed  in  composition.  Thus  he  says  of  his  little  novel,  Mary  de 
Clifford  (published  in  1792),  "it  was  written  with  a  fervent 
rapidity,  which  no  one  seems  to  believe ; — begun  in  October,  1791, 
and  the  sheets  sent  to  the  press  by  the  post,  as  fast  as  they  were 
scribbled."  The  passage  in  which  he  refers  to  the  vexations  to 
which  he  had  been  subjected  is  worth  quoting,  on  account  of  its 
similarity  to  our  Sir  Thomas's  story.  "I  have  suffered,"  he  says, 
"a  hundred  times  more  disappointments,  and  crosses,  and  insults, 
and  wrongs,  and  deprivations,  than  Chatterton,  yet  my  spirit, 
though  bent  and  sunk,  was  never  broken.  I  am  calm  and  defiant, 
though  not  hopeful,  in  proportion  as  the  storm  presses  me  ; — and 
what  trials  have  I  not  undergone  ?  I  do  not  mean  to  relate  all 
these  trials  ;  it  would  involve  the  conduct  of  obscure  individuals, 
many  of  whom  are  still  living  "  (Autobiography,  pp.  8,  9). 


SNAPS  AND  SHAVERS  153 

books  I  had  none,  nor  possibly  would  I  have  made 
use  of  any,  although  I  could  have  commanded 
them),  then  [than]  what,  (by  the  favour  of  God), 
my  own  judgment  and  fancy  did  suggest  unto 
me." 1 

The  account  which  our  author  gives  of  the 
plunder  of  his  manuscripts  after  the  battle  of 
Worcester,  and  of  the  strange  series  of  accidents 
by  which  some  of  the  documents  which  make  up 
The  Jewel  were  preserved,  is  so  odd  and  amus 
ing  that  it  would  be  a  pity  to  deprive  our  readers 
of  it,  though  it  is  related  by  Sir  Thomas  at  great 
length.  "  No  sooner,"  he  says,  "  had  the  total  rout 
of  the  regal  party  at  Worcester  given  way  to  the 
taking  of  that  city,  and  surrendring  up  of  all  the 
prisoners  to  the  custody  of  the  marshal-general 
and  his  deputies,  but  the  liberty,  customary  at 
such  occasions  to  be  connived  at  in  favours  of 
a  victorious  army,  imboldened  some  of  the  new- 
levied  forces  of  the  adjacent  counties  to  confirm 
their  conquest  by  the  spoil  of  the  captives.  For 
the  better  atchievement  of  which  designe,  not 
reckoning  those  great  many  others  that  in  all  the 
other  corners  of  the  town  were  ferreting  every 
room  for  plunder,  a  string  or  two  of  exquisite  snaps 
and  clean  shavers  [snappers-up  and  plunderers  ?] 
(if  ever  there  were  any),  rushing  into  Master  Spils- 
bury's  house,  (who  is  a  very  honest  man,  and  hath 
an  exceeding  good  woman  to  his  wife),  broke  into 
an  upper  chamber,  where  finding,  (besides  scarlet 
cloaks,  buff  suits,  arms  of  all  sorts,  and  other  such 
rich  chaffer,  at  such  an  exigent  escheatable  to  the 

1  Works,  p.  181. 


154  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

prevalent  soldier  *),  seven  large  portmantles  f ul  of 
precious  commodity ;  in  three  whereof,  after  a  most 
exact  search  for  gold,  silver,  apparel,  linen,  or  any 
whatever  adornments  of  the  body,  or  pocket  im 
plements,  as  was  seized  upon  in  the  other  four, 
not  hitting  on  any  things  but  manuscripts  in  folio, 
to  the  quantity  of  six  score  and  eight  quires  and  a 
half,  divided  into  six  hundred  fourty  and  two 
quinternions  and  upwards,  the  quinternion  con 
sisting  of  five  sheets,  and  the  quire  of  five  and 
twenty ;  besides  some  writings  of  suits  in  law,  and 
bonds,  in  both  worth  above  three  thousand  pounds 
English,  they  in  a  trice  carried  all  whatever  els 
was  in  the  room  away  save  those  papers,  which 
they  then  threw  down  on  the  floor  as  unfit  for 
their  use ;  yet  immediately  thereafter,  when  upon 
carts  the  aforesaid  baggage  was  put  to  be  trans 
ported  to  the  country,  and  that  by  the  example  of 
many  hundreds  of  both  horse  and  foot,  whom  they 
had  loaded  with  spoil,  they  were  assaulted  with  the 
temptation  of  a  new  booty,  they  apprehending  how 
useful  the  paper  might  be  unto  them,  went  back 
for  it,  and  bore  it  straight  away ;  which  done,  to 
every  one  of  those  their  camarads  whom  they  met 
with  in  the  streets,  they  gave  as  much  thereof,  for 
packeting  up  of  raisins,  figs,  dates,  almonds,  cara 
way,  and  other  such  like  dry  confections  and  other 
ware,  as  was  requisite ;  who,  doing  the  same  them 
selves,  did  together  with  others  kindle  pipes  of 
tobacco  with  a  great  part  thereof,  and  threw  out  all 
the  remainder  upon  the  streets 

1  I.e.  at  such  an  extremity  liable  to  be  forfeited  to  the  victorious 
soldier. 


RESCUED  FROM  THE  MIRE  155 

"  Of  those  dispersedly-rejected  bundles  of  paper, 
some  were  gathered  up  by  grocers,  druggists, 
chandlers,  pie-makers,  or  such  as  stood  in  need  of 
any  cartapaciatory  utensil,  and  put  in  present 
service,  to  the  utter  undoing  of  all  the  writing 
thereof,  both  in  its  matter  and  order.  One  quin- 
ternion,  nevertheless,  two  days  after  the  fight  on 
the  Friday  morning,  together  with  two  other  loose 
sheets  more,  by  vertue  of  a  drizelling  rain,  which 
had  made  it  stick  fast  to  the  ground,  where  there 
was  a  heap  of  seven  and  twenty  dead  men  lying 
upon  one  another,  was  by  the  command  of  one 
Master  Braughton  taken  up  by  a  servant  of  his ; 
who,  after  he  had  (in  the  best  manner  he  could) 
cleansed  it  from  the  mire  and  mud  of  the  kennel, 
did  forthwith  present  it  to  the  perusal  of  his 
master ;  in  whose  hands  it  no  sooner  came,  but  in 
stantly  perceiving  by  the  periodical  couching  of  the 
discourse,  marginal  figures,  and  breaks  here  and 
there,  according  to  the  variety  of  the  subject,  that 
the  whole  purpose  was  destinated  for  the  press,  and 
by  the  author  put  into  a  garb  befitting  either  the 
stationer  or  printer's  acceptance ;  yet  because  it 
seemed  imperfect,  and  to  have  relation  to  sub 
sequent  tractates,  he  made  all  the  enquiry  he  could 
for  trial  whether  there  were  any  more  such  quin- 
ternions  or  no ;  by  means  whereof  he  got  full 
information  that  above  three  thousand  sheets  of  the 
like  paper,  written  after  that  fashion,  and  with  the 
same  hand,  were  utterly  lost  and  imbezzeled,  after 
the  manner  aforesaid ;  and  was  so  fully  assured  of 
the  misfortune,  that  to  gather  up  spilt  water,  com 
prehend  the  windes  within  his  fist,  and  recover 


156  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

those  papers  again,  he  thought  would  be  a  work  of 
one  and  the  same  labour  and  facility."  l 

The  anonymous  personage  who  gives  the  above 
account  says  that  he  heard  of  Mr  Braughton's 
discovery  of  these  remarkable  documents,  and  also 
of  "  the  great  moan  made  for  the  loss  of  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart's  manuscripts,"  and,  putting  the 
two  facts  together,  resolved  to  ask  Sir  Thomas  if 
the  papers  found  at  Worcester  belonged  to  him. 
He  examined  them,  and  identified  them  as  part  of 
the  preface  to  a  grammar  and  lexicon  of  a  Universal 
Language,  of  which  he  was  the  inventor.  The  loss 
of  a  work  of  such  a  size  and  of  such  great  im 
portance  did  not  greatly  depress  him.  He  stated 
that  if  he  got  but  encouragement  and  time,  freedom 
and  the  enjoyment  of  his  ancestral  estates,  he 
doubted  not  but  that  he  could  supply  the  missing 
sheets — the  originals  of  which  had  come  to  such 
base  uses  and  disastrous  fate  at  Worcester.  The 
papers,  therefore,  found  by  Mr  Braughton  are 
published  in  order  that  the  readers  may  see  the 
reasonableness  of  giving  Sir  Thomas  what  he  asked, 
in  view  of  the  astounding  benefits  which  he  would 
in  return  confer  upon  them.  This  is  put  with 
great  clearness  and  brevity  in  a  couplet  prefixed  to 
the  above  narrative : 

"He  should  obtain  all  his  desires, 
Who  offers  more  than  he  requires." 

The  fragment  of  the  treatise  concerning  the 
Universal  Language,  which  was  picked  up  out  of 
the  gutter  of  Worcester  streets,  wiped  clean,  and 

1  Works,  pp.  189,  190. 


SCOTTISH  SOLDIERS  157 

presented  to  the  public  in  The  Jewel,  was  re- 
published  with  additions  in  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's 
next  work,  so  that  we  may  here  pass  it  over  with 
out  further  notice  and  allude  to  some  of  the  other 
matters  treated  of. 

In  order  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  his  country, 
Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  tells  at  considerable  length  of 
the  fame  won  by  various  compatriots  of  his  in  war 
in  every  part  of  Europe,  during  the  earlier  half  of 
the  seventeenth  century,  and  he  draws  the  attention 
of  his  readers  to  the  fact  that,  at  no  battle  in  the 
period  named,  were  all  the  Scots  that  fought  over 
thrown  and  totally  routed.  The  explanation  of 
this  statement  is  that  there  were  always  Scots  on 
both  sides,  so  that,  if  some  were  defeated  and  taken 
prisoners,  others  of  that  nation  were  victorious  and 
givers  of  quarter.  This  part  of  the  work  is  of 
great  historical  value,  and,  as  Burton  remarks,  is 
not  liable  to  the  reproach  of  Urquhart's  usual 
wandering  profuseness  of  language — its  leading 
defect,  on  the  other  hand,  being  its  too  great 
resemblance  at  times  to  a  muster-roll. 

The  choicest  and  most  remarkable  passage  in  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart's  original  works  is,  undoubtedly, 
the  description  he  gives  in  The  Jewel  of  his 
fellow-countryman  "  the  Admirable  Crichton,"  who 
belonged  to  the  latter  part  of  the  sixteenth  century. 
In  an  appendix  l  our  readers  may  find  a  long  extract 
from  it,  in  which  that  hero's  feats  are  related.  But 
for  fear  of  making  the  appendices  out  of  all  pro 
portion  to  the  size  of  this  volume,  the  whole  sketch 
might  have  been  given.  To  most  people  the  name 

1  Appendix  II.  p.  215. 


158  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

of  "  the  Admirable  Crichton  "  is  now  a  mere  pro 
verbial  phrase  to  describe  a  universal  genius,  and 
whether  the  person  who  bore  it  is  a  historical  or  a 
mythical  character,  is  a  matter  of  some  uncertainty. 
If  any  who  are  possessed  of  only  this  amount  of 
information  on  the  subject  seek  for  more  by  reading 
our  author's  description  of  Crichton,  the  proba 
bility  is  that  they  will  decide  that  he  is  quite 
mythical.  The  extraordinary  flightiness,  turgidity, 
and  bombast  which  mark  the  narrative,  in  spite  of 
its  many  conspicuous  merits,  make  it  seem  a  mere 
piece  of  burlesque,  rather  than  a  genuine  history ; l 
and  yet  there  is  ample  evidence  of  an  unimpeach 
able  kind  of  the  truthfulness  of  the  main  state 
ments  which  it  contains.  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's 
narrative  was  for  a  long  time  one  of  the  principal 
sources  of  information  concerning  the  brilliant 
young  Scotchman,  and  the  result  was  that  a  general 
disbelief  in  the  whole  history  became  prevalent.2 

1  "This  part  is  written  in  a  euphuistic,  rhapsodical  vein,  and 
affords  an  indication  of  the  saturation  of  Urquhart's  mind  with  the 
style  of  Rabelais.     It  might  almost  be  pieced  together  from  the 
meeting  of  Pantagruel  with  the  Limousin  scholar,  the  discomfiture 
of  Thaumast  by  Panurge,  and  the  meeting  of  Pantagruel  and  his 
party  with  Queen  Entelechia"  ("W.  F.  Smith's  Introduction  to 
Rabelais}. 

2  Dr  Kippis,  the  editor  of  the  Biographia  £ritannica,  or  Lives 
of  the  Most  Eminent  Persons  who  have  Flourished  in  Great  Britain 
and  Ireland   (1789),    had   a  bad   time  in  writing  the  notice  of 
Crichton  that  appears  in  it.     He  says  that  he  entered  upon  the 
task  with  diffidence,  and  even  with  anxiety.     On  the  one  hand, 
he  was  desirous  not  to  detract  from  Crichton's  real  merit,  and,  on 
the  other,  he  wished  to  form  a  just  estimate  of  the  truth  of  the 
facts  which  are  recorded  concerning  him.     Part  of  his  perturbation 
of  mind  was  due  to  the  indignation  which  he  felt  towards  our 
author,  whose  narrative  of  Crichton's  adventures  he  regarded  as 


THE  ADMIRABLE  CRICHTON  159 

As  Burton  says,  "  It  was  from  the  hands  of  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  that  the  world  accepted  of  an 
idol  which,  after  a  period  of  worship,  it  cast  down, 
but  so  hastily,  as  it  was  discovered,  that  it  had 
again  to  be  set  up,  but  rather  in  surly  justice  than 
the  old  devout  admiration." 1  Tytler,  in  his  Life  of 
the  Admirable  Crichton,  gives  full  proof  from  con 
temporary  writers  that  the  accomplishments  and 
feats  ascribed  to  that  personage  are  authentic. 

James  Crichton  was  born  in  1560,  of  a  noble 
family,  at  Eliock,  in  Perthshire.  At  the  age  of  ten 
he  became  a  student  at  St.  Andrews,  then  the  most 
famous  university  in  Scotland.  Before  he  was 
fifteen  years  of  age  he  graduated  as  Master  of  Arts, 

utterly  untrustworthy.  At  an  early  stage  in  the  article  he 
remarks:  "And  here  it  must  be  observed  that  no  credit  can  be 
granted  to  any  facts  which  depend  upon  the  sole  authority  of  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart.  ...  I  must  declare  my  full  persuasion  that 
Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  is  an  author  whose  testimony  to  facts  is 
totally  unworthy  of  regard  ;  and  it  is  surprising  that  a  perusal  of 
his  works  does  not  strike  every  mind  with  this  conviction.  His 
productions  are  so  inexpressibly  absurd  and  extravagant,  that  the 
only  rational  judgment  which  can  be  pronounced  concerning  him 
is,  that  he  was  little,  if  at  all,  better  than  a  madman.  To  the 
character  of  his  having  been  a  madman  must  be  added  that  of  his 
being  a  liar.  Severe  as  this  term  may  be  thought,  I  apprehend 
that  a  diligent  examination  of  the  treatise  which  contains  the 
memorials  concerning  Crichton  would  show  that  it  is  strictly  true." 
The  censure  uttered  by  Dr  Kippis  is  very  severe,  but  some  excuse 
for  him  is  easily  found.  He  was  anxious  to  make  his  dictionary 
of  biography  a  mine  of  facts  on  which  the  public  could  rely  with 
absolute  confidence  ;  and  he  saw  before  him  the  danger  of  quoting 
as  an  authority  a  writer  like  Urquhart,  who  so  palpably  elongated 
facts  and  embroidered  them  with  fancies.  His  opinion  with 
regard  to  the  Pedigree  of  the  Urquharts  is  given  on  p.  144. 

1  The  Scot  Abroad,  p.  256.  In  the  Adventurer,  No.  81,  Dr 
Johnson  has  reproduced  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  narrative  of  the 
career  of  Crichton,  but  has  toned  down  its  glowing  colours. 


160  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

and  stood  third  in  order  of  merit  among  the 
students  of  his  year.  After  leaving  the  university 
he  spent  three  years  in  the  pursuit  of  learning, 
devoting  himself  to  one  after  another  of  the  various 
branches  of  the  science  and  philosophy  of  his  time, 
until  he  had  gone  through  nearly  the  whole  of 
them ;  and,  by  force  of  natural  ability,  aided,  no 
doubt,  by  intense  application,  he  acquired  the  use 
of  ten  different  languages. 

Some  time  probably  in  the  year  1578  he  began 
his  foreign  travels,  with  the  desire  not  only  to 
enlarge  his  experience  of  the  world,  but  also  to 
display  the  extent  of  his  learning  in  those  public 
disputations  which  were  still  in  fashion  at  the 
continental  universities.  In  form  and  countenance 
he  is  said  to  have  been  a  perfect  model  of  manly 
beauty ;  whilst  in  all  the  accomplishments  of  his 
time  he  was  as  well  versed  as  in  the  branches  of 
learning.  He  was  a  skilful  swordsman,  a  bold 
rider,  a  graceful  dancer,  a  sweet  singer,  and  a 
cultivated  musician.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in 
Paris  he  set  up,  in  accordance  with  a  custom  of  the 
time,  in  various  parts  of  the  city,  challenges  to 
literary  and  philosophic  disputation,  and  announced 
that  he  would  present  himself  on  a  certain  day  at 
the  College  of  Navarre,  to  answer  any  questions 
that  might  be  put  to  him  "  in  any  science,  liberal 
art,  discipline,  or  faculty,  whether  practical  or 
theoretic,"  and  this  in  any  one  of  twelve  specified 
languages — Hebrew,  Syriac,  Arabic,  Greek,  Latin, 
Spanish,  French,  Italian,  English,  Dutch,  Flemish,  or 
Sclavonian.  Our  readers  may  find  in  the  appendix 
a  full  narrative  in  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  inim- 


EXPLOITS  OF  PANTAGRUEL  161 

itable  style  of  this  extraordinary  episode.  Though 
Crichton  seemed  to  make  no  preparation  for  the 
learned  encounter,  to  which  he  had  challenged  the 
most  scholarly  men  in  France,  he  acquitted  himself 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  astonish  all  beholders,  and 
to  receive  the  congratulations  of  the  president  and 
professors  of  the  University  of  Paris.  From  this 
display  of  his  intellectual  powers  and  acquirements, 
as  well  as  from  the  brilliant  figure  he  cut  at  the 
balls  and  tournaments,  which  were  such  favourite 
employments  of  the  Court  of  France  at  that  time, 
he  acquired  the  title  by  which  he  is  now  universally 
known — that  of  "  the  Admirable  Crichton." 1 

It  is  worth  while  to  compare  the  passage  in 
Kabelais  which  describes  the  similar  feats  of  the 
giant  Pantagruel  with  the  account  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  gives  of  Crichton's  intellectual  tourna 
ments.2  To  us  there  seems  something  very 

1  The   reader   will   remember   that    this    simply   meant    the 
"Wonderful  Crichton  "—this  use  of  the  word  "admire"   being 
now  archaic. 

2  The  passage  in  Rabelais  is  as  follows: — "Pantagruel  .  .  . 
would  one  day  make  trial  of  his  knowledge.     Thereupon  in  all 
the  Carrefours,  that  is,  throughout  all  the  foure  quarters,  streets 
and  corners  of  the  city,  he  set  up  Conclusions  to  the  number  of 
nine  thousand  seven  hundred  sixty  and  foure,*  in  all  manner  of 
learning,  touching  in  them  the  hardest  doubts  that  are  in  any 
science.     And  first  of  all,  in  the  Fodder-street  t  he  held  disputes 

*  Pico  della  Mirandola  in  the  winter  of  1486-87  offered  to  maintain  at  Rome 
900  theses  de  mnni  scibili  (W.  F.  8.). 

f  Rue  de  la  Feurre  (near  the  Place  Maubert)  was  the  street  in  Paris  where 
the  poorer  students  used  to  lodge.  It  got  it*  name  because  straw  served 
them  for  beds  and  furniture.  Dante  says  in  Par.  x.  137 : 

"  Essa  e  la  luce  eterna  di  Sigieri, 
Ohe,  leggendo  nel  vico  degli  strami, 
Sillogizzo  invidiosi  veri."  (Ibid.). 

II 


i6a  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

ridiculous  in  the  practice  of  posting  up  placards  on 
the  walls,  challenging  all-comers  to  disputation,  but 
in  the  sixteenth  century  it  would  not  necessarily 
appear  in  this  light.  Rabelais,  indeed,  laughed  at 
it ;  but  then  he  laughed  at  many  things  which  the 
people  of  his  time  did  not  think  absurd.  John 
Hill  Burton  is  of  the  opinion  that  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart,  in  describing  the  way  in  which  Crichton 
conducted  himself  on  the  field  which  had  witnessed 
Pantagruel's  feats,  had  the  ridicule  of  Eabelais  in 
view,  and  that,  in  spite  of  his  laudations,  we 

against  all  the  Regents  or  Fellowes  of  Colledges,  Artists  or  Masters 
of  Arts,  and  Oratours,  and  did  so  gallantly,  that  he  overthrew 
them,  and  set  them  all  upon  their  tailes.  He  went  afterwards  to 
the  Sorbonne,  where  he  maintained  argument  against  all  the 
Theologians  or  Divines,  for  the  space  of  six  weeks,  from  foure 
a  clock  in  the  morning  until  six  in  the  evening,  except  an  interval 
of  two  houres  to  refresh  themselves,  and  take  their  repast.  And  at 
this  were  present  the  greatest  part  of  the  Lords  of  the  Court, 
the  Masters  of  Requests,  Presidents,  Counsellors,  those  of  the 
Accompts,  Secretaries,  Advocates,  and  others  :  as  also  the  Sheriffes 
of  the  said  town,  with  the  Physicians  and  Professors  of  the  Canon- 
Law.  Amongst  which  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the  greatest  part 
were  stubborn  jades,  and  in  their  opinions  obstinate  ;  but  he  took 
such  course  with  them,  that,  for  all  their  ergo's  and  fallacies,  he 
put  their  backs  to  the  wall,  gravelled  them  in  the  deepest 
questions,  and  made  it  visibly  appear  to  the  world,  that,  compared 
to  him,  they  were  but  monkies,  and  a  knot  of  mufled  calves. 
Whereupon  everybody  began  to  keep  a  bustling  noise,  and  talk  of 
his  so  marvellous  knowledge,  through  all  degrees  of  persons  in  both 
sexes,  even  to  the  very  laundresses,  brokers,  rostmeat-sellers, 
penknife-makers,  and  others,  who,  when  he  past  along  in  the 
street,  would  say,  This  is  he !  in  which  he  took  delight,  as 
Demosthenes  the  prince  of  Greek  oratours  did  when  an  old  crouch 
ing  wife,  pointing  at  him  with  her  fingers,  said,  That  is  the 
man  "  *  (ii.  chap.  10). 

*  Of.  "At  pulchrum  est,  digito  monstrari,  et  dicier  :  Hie  est"  (Pers.  i.  28). 
(Ibid.) 


CRICHTON  IN  ITALY  163 

caiinot  help  having  the  impression  that  his  tongue 
is  all  the  time  in  his  cheek.  We  think  that  this 
is  unfair  to  Sir  Thomas.  There  is  no  reason  why 
those  who  looked  on  in  admiration  at  a  real  tourna 
ment  should  not  also  enjoy  seeing  a  burlesque 
one.  So  that  it  is  quite  possible  that  our  author 
smiled  while  he  translated  the  French  satire,  and 
that  he  glowed  with  honest  pride  and  admiration 
as  lie  recounted  his  fellow-countryman's  exploits 
before  the  University  of  Paris. 

After  serving  for  a  couple  of  years  in  the  French 
army,  Crichton  journeyed  into  Italy,  and  in  the 
month  of  August,  1580,  arrived  in  Venice.  He 
made  the  acquaintance  of  the  famous  printer,  Aldus 
Manutius,  who  introduced  him  to  the  principal 
men  of  learning  and  note  in  that  city.  Here  he 
maintained  the  reputation  he  had  acquired  in  Paris, 
and  lives  of  him  were  written  and  published.  From 
Venice  he  proceeded  to  Padua,  and  from  thence  to 
the  Court  of  Mantua,  where  the  adventure  occurred 
with  which  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  begins  the 
narrative  of  his  celebrated  fellow-countryman's 
exploits,  namely,  the  defeat  and  death  of  the  travel 
ling  bravo,  whose  challenge  he  had  accepted.  Sir 
Thomas  is  the  only  authority  for  this  incident  in 
Crichton's  history.  As  there  is  no  reason  to  believe 
that  he  invented  it,  we  are  at  liberty  to  suppose 
that  he  found  it  in  some  one  of  the  lives  of 
Crichton  which  he  met  with  in  his  Italian  travels, 
but  which  has  not  come  down  to  us,  or  that  he 
heard  of  it  from  some  of  those  who  witnessed  it. 
For,  as  Urquhart  was  born  only  twenty-three  years 
after  Crichton's  death,  he  must,  in  the  course  of 


164  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

his  continental  travels,  have  met  some  who  were 
his  contemporaries.1 

In  consequence  of  this  achievement,  and  also 
of  the  brilliant  reputation  acquired  by  Crichton,  he 
was  appointed  by  the  Duke  of  Mantua,  companion 
and  tutor  to  his  son,  Vincenzio  de  Gonzaga,  a 
young  man  of  some  literary  culture,  but  of  furious 
temper  and  dissolute  morals.  Very  soon  after, 
Crichton  met  his  death  in  a  tragical  manner.  He 
was  walking  home  one  evening  in  the  streets  of 
Mantua,  from  a  visit  to  his  mistress,  and  was 
playing  a  guitar,  when  suddenly  he  was  attacked 
by  a  riotous  party  of  men  in  masks,  whom,  how 
ever,  he  speedily  put  to  flight.  He  seized  the 
leader  of  the  party,  overpowered  him,  and  tore  off 
his  mask,  and  found  to  his  horror  that  it  was  his 
own  pupil,  the  son  of  the  Duke  of  Mantua.  He 
instantly  dropped  upon  one  knee,  and,  in  a  spirit 
of  romantic  devotion,  took  his  sword  by  the  blade, 
and  presented  its  hilt  to  the  prince.  Vincenzio, 
heated  with  wine,  irritated  at  his  discomfiture,  and 
also,  it  is  said  by  some,  inspired  by  jealousy,  took 
the  sword  and  plunged  it  into  Crichton's  heart. 
The  brilliant  young  Scotsman  was  but  twenty-two 
years  of  age  when  he  thus  met  his  fate. 

The  narrative  which  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  gives 
of  the  death  of  his  hero  is  marked  by  the  same 
richness  of  description  as  is  to  be  found  in  the 

1  He  says  in  reference  to  the  whole  history  of  Crichton  :  ' '  The 
verity  of  this  story  I  have  here  related,  concerning  this  incompar 
able  Crichton,  may  be  certified  by  above  two  thousand  men  yet 
living,  who  have  known  him"  (Works,  p.  244).  There  can 
scarcely  have  been  so  many,  unless  centenarians  were  much 
commoner  then  than  now. 


CRICHTON'S  LAST  EVENING  165 

account  of  his  exploits  as  a  scholar,  a  swordsman, 
and  an  actor.  In  language  of  astonishing  luxuriance 
and  frequent  happiness  of  phrase,  he  enlarges  upon 
the  incidents  of  the  last  evening  of  Crichton's  life, 
and  depicts  the  tender  intercourse  of  the  lovers 
before  the  sudden  and  bloodly  close  of  their 
courtship.  With  a  minuteness  which,  as  Tytler 
remarks,  reminds  one  of  the  multitude  of  particulars 
by  the  enumeration  of  which  Mrs  Quickly  sought 
to  bring  to  FalstafFs  remembrance  his  promise  to 
marry  her,1  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  depicts  the  lovers 
in  the  "  alcoranal  paradise "  in  which  they  were 
embowered  on  that  evening.  "  Nothing,"  he  says, 
"  tending  to  the  pleasure  of  all  the  senses  was 
wanting;  the  weather  being  a  little  chil  and 
coldish,  they  on  a  blue  velvet  couch  sate  by  one 
another  towards  a  char-coale  fire  burning  in  a 
silver  brasero,  whilst  in  the  next  room  adjacent 
thereto  a  pretty  little  round  table  of  cedar  wood 
was  a  covering  for  the  supping  of  them  two 
together ;  the  cates  prepared  for  them,  and  a  week 

1  "  Thou  didst  swear  to  me  upon  a  parcel-gilt  goblet,  sitting  in 
my  Dolphin-chamber,  at  the  round  table,  by  a  sea-coal  fire,  upon 
Wednesday  in  Wheeson  week,  when  the  prince  broke  thy  head 
for  liking  his  father  to  a  singing-man  of  Windsor  ;  thou  didst 
swear  to  me  then,  as  I  was  washing  thy  wound,  to  marry  me  and 
make  me  my  lady  thy  wife.  Canst  thou  deny  it  ?  Did  not  good- 
wife  Keech,  the  butcher's  wife,  come  in  then  and  call  me  gossip 
Quickly  ?  coming  in  to  borrow  a  mess  of  vinegar  ;  telling  us  she 
had  a  good  dish  of  prawns  ;  whereby  thou  didst  desire  to  eat 
some ;  whereby  I  told  thee  they  were  ill  for  a  green  wound  ? 
And  didst  thou  not,  when  she  was  gone  down  stairs,  desire  me  to 
be  no  more  so  familiarity  with  such  poor  people  ;  saying  that  ere 
long  they  should  call  me  madam  ?  And  didst  thou  not  kiss  me, 
and  bid  me  fetch  thee  thirty  shillings  ?  I  put  thee  now  to  thy 
book-oath  :  deny  it,  if  thou  canst"  (2  Henry  IV,  n.  i.). 


166  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

before  that  time  bespoke,  were  of  the  choisest 
dainties  and  most  delicious  junkets  that  all  the 
territories  of  Italy  were  able  to  afford,  and  that 
deservedly,  for  all  the  Romane  Empire  could  not 
produce  a  completer  paire  to  taste  them." l 

A  tragical  note  rings  through  the  description  of 
the  lamentation  of  the  hapless  girl  over  her 
murdered  lover.  "  She,  rending  her  garments  and 
tearing  her  haire,  like  one  of  the  Graces  possest 
with  a  .Fury,  spoke  thus :  '  0  villains  !  what  have 
you  done  ?  you  vipers  of  men,  that  have  thus 
basely  slaine  the  valiant  Crichtoun,  the  sword  of 
his  own  sexe  and  the  buckler  of  ours,  the  glory  of 
this  age,  and  restorer  of  the  lost  honour  of  the 
Court  of  Mantua  :  0  Crichtoun,  Crichtoun  ! ' " 2 

The  sequel  of  the  story  is  in  the  same  vein 
of  florid  eloquence.  "  The  whole  court,"  says  Sir 
Thomas,  "  wore  mourning  for  him  full  three 
quarters  of  a  yeer  together.  His  funeral  was  very 
stately,  and  on  his  hearse  were  stuck  more  epitaphs, 
elegies,  threnodies,  and  epicediums,  then  [than],  if 
digested  into  one  book,  would  have  outbulk't  all 
Homer's  works ;  some  of  them  being  couched  in 
such  exquisite  and  fine  Latin,  that  you  would  have 
thought  great  Virgil,  and  Baptista  Mantuanus,  for 
the  love  of  their  mother-city,  had  quit  the  Elysian 
fields  to  grace  his  obsequies ;  and  other  of  them, 
besides  what  was  done  in  other  languages,  composed 
in  so  neat  Italian,  and  so  purely  fancied,  as  if 
Ariosto,  Dante,  Petrark,  and  Bembo  had  been 
purposely  resuscitated,  to  stretch  even  to  the 
utmost  their  poetick  vein  to  the  honour  of  this 

1  Works,  p.  234.  2  Ibid.  p.  243. 


THE  SOLITARY  TURTLE  167 

brave  man ;  whose  picture  till  this  hour  is  to  be 
seen  in  the  bed-chambers  or  galleries  of  the  most 
of  the  great  men  of  that  nation,  representing  him 
on  horseback,  with  a  lance  in  one  hand  and  a  book 
in  the  other  ;  and  most  of  the  young  ladies  likewise, 
that  were  anything  handsome*  in  a  memorial  of  his 
worth,  had  his  effigies  in  a  little  oval  tablet  of  gold 
hanging  'twixt  their  breasts,  and  held,  for  many 
yeers  together,  that  metamazion,  or  intermammilary 
ornament,  an  as  necessary  outward  pendicle  for  the 
better  setting  forth  of  their  accoutrements,  as 
either  fan,  watch,  or  stomacher.  My  lord  Duke, 
upon  the  young  lady  that  was  Crichtoun's  mistres 
and  future  wife,  although  she  had  good  rents  and 
revenues  of  her  own  by  inheritance,  was  pleased  to 
conferr  a  pension  of  five  hundred  ducats  a  yeer. 
The  Prince  also  bestowed  as  much  on  her  during 
all  the  days  of  his  life,  which  was  but  short,  for  he 
did  not  long  enjoy  himself  after  the  cross  fate  of 
so  miserable  an  accident.  The  sweet  lady,  like  a 
turtle  bewailing  the  loss  of  her  mate,  spent  all  the 
rest  of  her  time  in  a  continual  solitariness."  * 

After  giving  a  long  list  of  his  fellow-countrymen 
who  had  won  fame  in  foreign  lands  by  their  valour, 

1  The  italics  are  ours. 

a  Works,  p.  224.  At  one  of  Charles  Lamb's  Wednesday 
evenings  in  Mitre  Court  Building,  Hazlitt  tells  us,  "the  name  of 
the  Admirable  Crichton  was  suddenly  started  as  a  splendid 
example  of  ivaste  talents,  so  different  from  the  generality  of  his 
countrymen."  A  North  Briton  present  declared  himself  descended 
from  that  prodigy  of  learning  and  accomplishment,  and  said  he 
had  family  plate  in  his  possession  as  vouchers  for  the  fact,  with  the 
initials  engraved  upon  them  of  A.  C. — "Admirable  Crichton  !" 
A  phrenological  report  upon  this  gentleman  by  Charles  Lamb 
would  have  enlarged  "the  public  stock  of  harmless  pleasure." 


1 68  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

learning,  or  skill,  in  order  to  put  to  silence  those 
who  maligned  his  nation,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart 
takes  up  a  less  pleasing  topic — that  of  contem 
porary  politics.  In  the  plainest  and  most  forcible 
manner  he  repudiates  the  whole  policy  of  the 
dominant  party  in  Scotland,  and  declares  that  a 
true  Eoyalist  or  Malignant  like  himself  had  much 
more  in  common  with  an  Independent,  than  either 
of  them  had  with  a  Presbyterian ;  and  he  enlarges 
upon  the  turbulent  disloyalty  with  which  so  many 
of  the  last-named  party  had,  in  his  opinion,  con 
ducted  themselves  towards  their  sovereigns  since 
Queen  Mary's  time,  evidently  in  forgetfulness  for 
the  moment  that  his  newly  -  found  friends,  the 
Independents,  had  executed  Charles  I.  and  abolished 
monarchy. 

His  account  of  the  mode  in  which  the  Presbyterian 
or  "  Consistorian  "  party  were  in  the  habit  of  treating 
their  kings  is  very  amusing.  "  Of  a  king,"  he  says, 
"  they  onely  make  use  for  their  own  ends,  and  so 
they  will  of  any  other  supreme  magistracie  that  is 
not  of  their  own  erection.  Their  kings  are  but  as 
the  kings  of  Lacedemon,  whom  the  Ephors  presumed 
to  fine  for  any  small  offence ;  or  as  the  puppy 
[puppet]  kings,  which,  after  children  have  trimmed 
with  bits  of  taffata,  and  ends  of  silver  lace,  and  set 
them  upon  wainscoat  cupboards  besides  marmalade 
and  sugar-cakes,  are  oftentimes  disposed  of,  even  by 
those  that  did  pretend  so  much  respect  unto  them, 
for  a  two-peny  custard,  a  pound  of  figs,  or  mess  of 
cream.  Verily,  I  think  they  make  use  of  kings  in 
their  Consistorian  State,  as  we  do  of  card  kings  in 
playing  at  the  hundred ;  any  one  whereof,  if  there 


MOCK-KINGS  169 

be  appearance  of  a  better  game  without  him,  and 
that  the  exchange  of  him  for  another  incoming  card 
is  like  to  conduce  more  for  drawing  of  the  stake,  is 
by  good  gamesters  without  any  ceremony  discarded  : 
or  as  the  French  on  the  Epiphany-day  use  their 
Roy  de  la  Febve,  or  king  of  the  bean ;  whom,  after 
they  have  honoured  with  drinking  of  his  health, 
and  shouting  Le  Eoy  boit,  le  Roy  loit,  they  make  pay 
for  all  the  reckoning;  not  leaving  him  sometimes 
one  peny,  rather  then  [than]  that  the  exorbitancie 
of  their  debosh  should  not  be  satisfied  to  the  full. 
They  may  be  likewise  said  to  use  their  king  as  the 
players  at  nine-pins  do  the  middle  kyle,  which  they 
call  the  king;  at  whose  fall  alone  they  aim,  the 
sooner  to  obtain  the  gaining  of  their  prize ;  or 
as  about  Christmas  we  do  the  King  of  Misrule, 
whom  we  invest  with  that  title  to  no  other  end 
but  to  countenance  the  bacchanalian  riots  and 
preposterous  disorders  of  the  family  where  he  is 
installed.  The  truth  of  all  this  appears  by  their 
demeanour  to  Charles  the  Second,  whom  they 
crowned  their  king  at  Sterlin,  and  who,  though 
he  be  for  comeliness  of  person,  valour,  affability, 
mercy,  piety,  closeness  of  counsel,  veracity,  foresight, 
knowledge,  and  other  vertues  both  moral  and  in 
tellectual,  in  nothing  inferior  to  any  of  his  hundred 
and  ten  predecessors,  had  nevertheless  no  more  rule 
in  effect  over  the  Presbyterian  Senate  of  Scotland, 
then  [than]  any  of  the  six  foresaid  mock-kings  had 
above  those  by  whom  they  were  dignified  with  the 
splendour  of  royal  pomp." l 

1  Works,  p.  277.    The  charity  which  "believeth  all  things  and 
hopeth  all  things,"  or  the  credulity  which  persuades  itself  of  the 


170  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

The  passage  in  The  Jewel  which  tells  of  the  faults 
of  the  clergy,  as  illustrated  by  the  conduct  of  the 
ministers  of  the  parishes  of  which  Sir  Thomas  was 
patron,  has  already  been  given  in  these  pages,  and 
therefore  need  not  be  repeated  here ;  but  room 
must  be  found  for  the  paragraph  in  which  he 
denounces  those  who  by  their  covetousness  had  cast 
a  slur  upon  the  Scottish  name.  The  art  of  writing 
such  English  perished  with  him,  its  inventor ;  and 
one  cannot  be  too  thankful  for  such  a  passage  as 
the  following.  "  Another  thing  there  is,"  he  says, 
"  that  fixeth  a  grievous  scandal  upon  that  nation  in 
matter  of  philargyrie,  or  love  of  money,  and  it  is 
this :  There  hath  been  in  London,  and  repairing  to 
it,  for  these  many  years  together,  a  knot  of  Scotish 
bankers,  collybists,  or  coine-coursers,  of  traffickers 
in  merchandise  to  and  againe,  and  of  men  of  other 
professions,  who  by  hook  and  crook,  fas  et  nefas, 
slight  and  might,  (all  being  as  fish  their  net  could 
catch),  having  feathered  their  nests  to  some  purpose, 
look  so  idolatrously  upon  their  Dagon  of  wealth,  and 
so  closely,  (like  the  earth's  dull  center),  hug  all  unto 
themselves,  that  for  no  respect  of  vertue,  honour, 
kinred,  patriotism,  or  whatever  else,  (be  it  never  so 

truth  of  the  things  which  it  wishes  to  believe,  is  manifest  in  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart's  estimate  of  the  character  of  Charles  n.  Less 
charitable  or  more  impartial  critics  are  probably  inclined  to  the 
opinion  that  the  existence  in  that  sovereign  of  a  number  of  the 
above-mentioned  virtues  was  as  mythical  as  that  of  a  good  many  of 
his  "hundred  and  ten  predecessors."  So  far  as  "comeliness"  is 
concerned,  Charles  u.  at  a  later  period  had  a  much;humbler  view  of 
the  matter  than  Sir  Thomas  here  expresses.  For  he  complained 
that  when  they  wished  to  represent  a  villain  on  the  stage  they 
made  up  a  figure  somewhat  like  himself.  See  Cibber's  Apology, 
p.  111. 


WORSHIPPERS  OF  DAGON 


171 


recoinniendable),  will  they  depart  from  so  much  as 
one  single  peny,  whose  emission  doth  not,  without 
any  hazard  of  loss,  in  a  very  short  time  supeiiucrate 
beyond  all  conscience  an  additionall  increase  to 
the  heap  of  that  stock  which  they  so  much  adore ; 
which  churlish  and  tenacious  humor  hath  made 
many  that  were  not  acquainted  with  any  else  of 
that  country,  to  imagine  all  their  compatriots  in 
fected  with  the  same  leprosie  of  a  wretched  peevish 
ness,  whereof  those  quomodocunquizing  clusterfists 
and  rapacious  varlets  have  given  of  late  such 
cannibal-like  proofs,  by  their  inhumanity  and 
obdurate  carriage  towards  some,  (whose  shoe-strings 
they  are  not  worthy  to  unty),  that  were  it  not  that 
a  more  able  pen  then  [than]  mine  will  assuredly 
not  faile  to  jerk  them  on  all  sides,  in  case,  by  their 
better  demeanour  for  the  future,  they  endeavour  not 
to  wipe  off  the  blot  wherewith  their  native  country, 
by  their  sordid  avarice  and  miserable  baseness,  hath 
been  so  foully  stained,  I  would  at  this  very  instant 
blaze  them  out  in  their  names  and  surnames,  not 
withstanding  the  vizard  of  Presbyterian  zeal  where 
with  they  maske  themselves,  that  like  so  many 
wolves,  foxes,  or  Athenian  Timons,  they  might  in 
all  times  coining  be  debarred  the  benefit  of  any 
honest  conversation." l 

After  suggesting  a  number  of  ways  in  which  the 
tone  of  society  in  Scotland  might  be  raised  and 
sweetened — one  of  which  is  the  establishment  of 
"a  free  schoole  and  standing  library  in  every 
parish  " 2 — Sir  Thomas  proceeds  to  argue  in  a  very 

1  Works,  p.  212. 

2  His  unhappy  prejudices  against  the  Presbyterian  clergy  are 


172  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

sensible  and  convincing  manner  for  complete  union 
between  Scotland  and  England.  The  subject  is 
introduced  by  lengthy  quotations  from  speeches  by 
Bacon,  delivered  by  him  in  Parliament  as  far  back 
as  the  year  1608,  in  which  the  advantages  of  such 
an  arrangement  are  set  forth. 

The  style  of  our  author  is  seen  at  its  worst  in 
the  peroration  to  The  Jewel,  in  which  he  apologizes 
for  the  comparative  simplicity,  if  not  baldness,  by 
which,  in  the  opinion  of  some,  it  might  be  thought 
to  be  characterised.  "  I  could  truly,"  he  says,  "  have 
enlarged  this  discourse  with  a  choicer  variety  of 
phrase,  and  made  it  overflow  the  field  of  the 
reader's  understanding,  with  an  inundation  of  greater 
eloquence ;  and  that  one  way,  tropologetically,  by 
metonymical,  ironical,  metaphorical,  and  synec- 
dochical  instruments  of  elocution,  in  all  their 
several  kinds,  artificially  affected,  according  to  the 
nature  of  the  subject,  with  emphatical  expressions 
in  things  of  great  concernment,  with  catachrestical 
in  matters  of  meaner  moment ;  attended  on  each 
side  respectively  with  an  epiplectick  and  exegetick 
modification ;  with  hyperbolical,  either  epitatically 
or  hypocoristically,  as  the  purpose  required  to  be 
elated  or  extenuated,  with  qualifying  metaphors, 
and  accompanied  by  apostrophes ;  and  lastly,  with 
allegories  of  all  sorts,  whether  apologal,  affabulatory, 
parabolary,  senigmatick,  or  parsemial.  And  on  the 
other  part,  schematologetically  adorning  the  proposed 

irrepressible,  for  immediately  after  suggesting  "a  standing  library 
in  custody  of  the  minister  of  the  parish,"  he  adds,  "with  this 
proviso,  that  none  of  the  books  should  be  embezeled  by  him  or  any 
of  his  successors  "  ( Works,  p.  282). 


THE  GARDEN  OF  RHETORIC  173 

theam  with  the  most  especial  and  chief  flowers  of 
the  garden  of  rhetorick,  and  omitting  no  figure  either 
of  diction  or  sentence,  that  might  contribute  to  the 
ear's  enchantment,  or  perswasion  of  the  hearer.  I 
could  have  introduced,  in  case  of  obscurity,  synony- 
mal,  exargastick,  and  palilogetick  elucidations ;  for 
sweetness  of  phrase,  antimetathetick  commutations 
of  epithets ;  for  the  vehement  excitation  of  a  matter, 
exclamation  in  the  front,  and  epiphonemas  in  the 
reer.  I  could  have  used,  for  the  promptlier  stirring 
up  of  passion,  apostrophal  and  prosopopceial  diver 
sions  ;  and,  for  the  appeasing  and  settling  of  them, 
some  epanorthotick  revocations,  and  aposiopetick 
restraines.  I  could  have  inserted  dialogismes, 
displaying  their  interrogatory  part  with  communi 
catively  pysmatick  and  sustentative  flourishes ;  or 
proleptically,  with  the  refutative  schemes  of  antici 
pation  and  subjection,  and  that  part  which  concerns 
the  responsory,  with  the  figures  of  permission  and 
concession.  Speeches  extending  a  matter  beyond 
what  it  is,  auxetically,  digressively,  transitiously,  by 
ratiocination,  aetiology,  circumlocution,  and  other 
wayes,  I  could  have  made  use  of ;  as  likewise  with 
words  diminishing  the  worth  of  a  thing,  tapinotically, 
periphrastically,  by  rejection,  translation,  and  other 
meanes,  I  could  have  served  myself." * 

1  We  have  reason  to  be  thankful  to  Sir  Thomas  for  his  kindness 
in  refraining  from  the  style  of  composition  which  he  here  indicates, 
for  we  can  scarcely  credit  his  assurance  that  the  results  would  have 
been  less  terrifying  than  the  description  of  the  processes  by  which 
they  would  have  been  reached.  There  is  no  need  for  an  apology, 
for  he  has  really  done  pretty  well  as  it  is.  Mr  Ruskin  had  once  a 
vision  of  ten  thousand  school-inspectors  assembled  on  Cader  Idris. 
What  horror  would  seize  such  a  company,  if  they  were  treated  as  a 


174  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

He  goes  on  for  a  long  time  in  this  strain,  and 
is  at  pains  to  explain  that,  if  the  work  had  been 
written  in  this  more  elaborate  manner,  it  would  not 
necessarily  have  been  found  tedious  even  by  young 
ladies.  "  I  could  have  presented  it  to  the  imagina 
tion,"  he  says,  "  in  so  spruce  a  garb,  that  spirits 
blest  with  leisure,  and  free  from  the  urgency  of 
serious  employments,  would  happily  have  bestowed 
as  liberally  some  few  houres  thereon  as  on  the 
perusal  of  a  new-coined  romance,  or  strange  history 
of  love  adventures.  For  although  the  figures  and 
tropes  above  rehearsed  seem  in  their  actu  signato,  (as 
they  signifie  meer  notional  circumstances,  affections, 
adjuncts,  and  dependencies  on  words),  to  be  a  little 
pedantical,  and  to  the  smooth  touch  of  a  delicate 
ear  somewhat  harsh  and  scabrous,  yet  in  their 
exerced  act,  (as  they  suppone  for  things  reduplicat- 
ively  as  things  in  the  first  apprehension  of  the 
minde,by  them  signified),!  could, even  in  far  abstruser 
purposes,  have  so  fitly  adjusted  them  with  apt  and 
proper  termes,  and  with  such  perspicuity  couched 
them,  as  would  have  been  suitable  to  the  capacities 
of  courtiers  and  young  ladies,1  whose  tender  hearing, 
for  the  most  part,  being  more  taken  with  the  in- 
class  in  elementary  English,  and  the  above  passage  were  read  out 
as  an  exercise  in  dictation  !  Nay,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  even  the 
more  august  assembly  in  Dover  House,  the  Lords  of  Education 
themselves,  would  be  panic-stricken  at  such  a  task.  Only 
Macaulay's  "school-boy"  would  probably  be  found  to  enter  upon 
it  with  unblenched  countenance,  and  to  accomplish  it  successfully. 
1  This  reminds  us  of  Bottom  the  weaver.  ' '  I  will  roar  that  I 
will  do  any  man's  heart  good  to  hear  me.  .  .  .  [Yet  not  to  frighten 
the  ladies.]  I  will  aggravate  my  voice  so  that  I  will  roar  you  as 
gently  as  any  sucking  dove  :  I  will  roar  you  an  'twere  any  night 
ingale"  (Midsummer -Night's  Dream,  I.  ii.). 


A  UNIVERSAL  LANGUAGE  175 

sinuating  harmony  of  a  well-concerted  period,  in  its 
isocoletick  and  parisonal  members,  then  [than]  with 
the  never-so-pithy  a  fancy  of  a  learned  subject, 
destitute  of  the  illustriousness  of  so  pathetick 
ornaments,  will  sooner  convey  perswasion  to  the 
interior  faculties  from  the  ravishing  assault  of  a 
well-disciplined  diction,  in  a  parade  of  curiously- 
mustered  words  in  their  several  ranks  and  files 
then  [than]  by  the  vigour  and  fierceness  of  never  so 
many  powerful  squadrons  of  a  promiscuously-digested 
elocution  into  bare  logical  arguments ;  for  the  sweet 
ness  of  their  disposition  is  more  easily  gained  by 
undermining  passion  then  [than]  storming  reason, 
and  by  the  musick  and  symmetry  of  a  descourse 
in  its  external  appurtenances,  then  [than]  by  all 
the  puissance  imaginary  of  the  ditty  or  purpose 
disclosed  by  it."1 

The  last  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  original  works 
was  his  "  LOGOPANDECTEISION,  or  an  INTRODUCTION  TO 
THE  UNIVERSAL  LANGUAGE,"  a  portion  of  which,  as 
already  mentioned,  had  been  embedded  in  the  con 
glomerate  mass  of  The  Jewel.  The  idea  of  a  universal 
language  was  not  originated  by  Urquhart,  for  it  is 
said  that  something  of  the  kind  had  been  planned  a 
generation  earlier  by  the  celebrated  William  Bedell 
(1570-1642),  the  Bishop  of  Kilmore  and  Ardagh, 
who  is  better  known  for  promoting  the  transla 
tion  of  the  Bible  into  the  Irish  tongue.  We  are 
told  by  Burnet,  who  wrote  his  life,  that  he  had 
in  his  diocese  a  clergyman  named  Johnston,  a  man 
of  ability,  but,  unfortunately,  of  "  mercurial  wit." 
In  order  to  give  him  adequate  employment,  and  to 

1  Wvrto,  pp.  292,  293. 


176  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

keep  him,  we  suppose,  out  of  mischief,  Bedell 
planned  out  a  scheme  for  a  universal  character, 
which  should  be  understood  by  all  nations  as 
readily  as  the  Arabic  numerals  or  the  figures  in 
geometry,  and  started  Johnston  upon  the  task  of 
completing  it.  He  made,  we  are  told,  considerable 
progress  with  the  scheme,  but  his  labours  were 
interrupted,  and  the  results  of  them  destroyed,  by 
the  frightful  rebellion  of  1641. 

The  Logopandecteision 1  is  divided  into  six  books, 
which  bear  names  of  the  remarkable  kind  which 
seem  to  come  so  readily  to  Urquhart's  tongue,  and 
are  so  hard  to  be  compassed  by  the  tongues  of 
others.  The  "  Epistle  Dedicatorie  "  is  an  elaborate 
piece  of  writing,  and  is  animated  by  considerable 
bitterness  of  spirit.  It  is  addressed  to  Nobody — 
the  person  who  has  assisted  him  in  his  labours, 
pitied  him  in  his  sorrows,  and  relieved  him  in  his 
penury.  It  is  only  the  first  book — entitled 
"  Neaudethaumata,  or  Wonders  of  the  New  Speech  " 
— which  makes  a  pretence  of  dealing  with  the  pro 
fessed  subject  of  the  volume,  and  of  laying  the 

1  Logopandecteision,  or  an  INTRODUCTION  to  the  UNIVEESAL 
LANGUAGE.  Digested  into  these  Six  several  Books,  Neaude- 
thaumata,  Chrestasebeia,  Cleronomaporia,  Chryseomystes,  Neleo- 
dicastes,  and  Philoponauxesis.  By  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  of 
Cromartie,  Knight.  Now  lately  contrived  and  published,  both 
for  his  own  utilitie,  and  that  of  all  pregnant  and  ingenious  Spirits. 
Credere  quaerenti  nonne  haec  justissima  res  est  ?  Qui  non  plura 
cupit,  quam  ratio  ipsa  jubet.  Englished  thus,  To  grant  him  his 
demands,  were  it  not  just?  Who  craves  no  more,  then  [than] 
reason  sayes  he  must.  London.  Printed,  and  are  to  be  sold  by 
Giles  Calvert  at  the  Black  Spread  Eagle  at  the  West- end  of  Pauls  ; 
and  by  Richard  Tomlins  at  the  Sun  and  Bible  near  Pye-corner. 
1653. 


PROQUIRITATIONS  177 

great  scheme  before  the  reader.  Much  to  the 
gratification  of  the  judicious  student  of  the  work, 
Urquhart  rambles  off  in  the  remaining  books  into 
autobiographical  details,  from  which  we  have  already 
gleaned  heavily  in  the  earlier  chapters  of  this 
volume,  and  the  only  connexion  between  them  and 
the  Universal  Language  is  that  they  show  the 
difficulties  which  prevented  the  author  from  carry 
ing  out  his  plan.  The  sources  from  which  these 
difficulties  arose  are  vaguely  indicated  in  the  titles  of 
the  books:  thus,  the  second  is  called  " Chrestasebeia, 
or  Impious  Dealing  of  Creditors  " ;  the  third,  "  Clero- 
nomaporia,  or  the  Intricacy  of  a  Distressed  Successor 
or  Apparent  Heir  "  ;  the  fourth,  "  Chryseomystes,  or 
the  Covetous  Preacher";  and  the  fifth,  "Neleodicastes, 
or  the  Pitiless  Judge."  While  the  sixth  book  is  en 
titled  "  Philoponauxesis,  or  Furtherance  of  Industry," 
and  tells  of  the  marvellous  benefits  which  would  accrue 
to  all  branches  of  trade,  manufacture,  and  industry 
in  Scotland,  if  the  writer's  demands  were  granted, 
and  he  were  at  liberty  to  carry  out  the  multitudin 
ous  schemes  with  which  his  mind  was  filled.  The 
volume  concludes  with  requests  or  "  proquiritations  " 
from  thirty-two  distinct  petitioners,  who  modestly 
conceal  themselves  from  public  notice  under  the 
shelter  of  the  initial  letters  of  their  names,  that  the 
State  would,  for  the  various  weighty  reasons  which 
they  allege,  grant  the  desire  of  Sir  Thomas  to  be 
set  free,  and  to  be  established  in  possession  of  the 
estates  and  honours  which  his  family  had  enjoyed 
from  time  immemorial.  This  section  of  the  work 
suggests  failure  in  ingenuity  on  the  part  of  the 
author,  for  few  persons  above  the  condition  of 
12 


178  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

idiocy  could  surely  be  found  capable  of  believing 
that  the  reasons  and  initials  alike  were  anything 
else  than  the  concoction  of  Sir  Thomas  himself. 

Very  slight  indeed  can  be  the  notice  which  we 
are  able  to  give  of  the  proposed  Universal  Language, 
the  description  of  which,  as  set  forth  in  the  early 
part  of  the  Logopandecteision,  is  more  like  an  in 
coherent  dream  than  anything  else.  There  is  no 
evidence  that  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  ever  really 
made  a  grammar  or  vocabulary  of  the  new  language. 
Indeed,  he  writes  about  it  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
lead  one  to  think  that  he  had  made  no  way  in  the 
real  working  out  of  the  scheme,  but  merely  dreamed 
of  what  he  was  going  to  do.  In  the  new  tongue 
which  was  to  supersede  all  others  there  were  to  be 
twelve  parts  of  speech,  all  words  would  have  at 
least  ten  synonyms,  nouns  and  pronouns  would 
have  eleven  cases  and  four  numbers — singular, 
dual,  plural,  and  redual — and  verbs  would  have 
four  voices,  seven  moods,  and  eleven  tenses.  "  In 
this  tongue,"  says  the  author,  "  there  are  eleven 
genders,1  wherein,"  he  truthfully  adds,  "  it  exceedeth 

1  Eleven  genders  seem  nine  more  than  are  necessary,  and  the  use 
of  such  a  large  number  suggests  to  one  that  in  Sir  Thomas's 
Universal  Language  the  distinctions  in  question  were  to  receive 
an  undue  amount  of  attention.  At  the  same  time,  fault  has  been 
found  with  our  English  language  for  being  somewhat  defective  in 
accentuating  these  distinctions  ;  and  an  attempt  to  correct  this 
shortcoming,  to  a  certain  extent,  has  been  made  by  Southey  in 
The  Doctor.  He  proposed  to  anglicise  the  orthography  of  the 
female  garment,  "which  is  indeed  the  sister  to  the  shirt,"  and 
then  to  utilise  the  hint  offered  in  its  new  form  :  thus  Hemise  and 
Shemise.  In  letter- writing  every  person  knows  that  male  and  female 
letters  have  a  distinct  character  ;  they  should  therefore,  he  thought, 
be  generally  distinguished  thus,  Hepistle  and  Shepistle.  And  as 


MERITS  OF  THIS  LANGUAGE  179 

all  other  languages."  "  Every  word  in  this  language," 
we  are  told,  "  signifieth  as  well  backward  as  forward, 
and  however  you  invert  the  letters,  still  shall  you 
fall  upon  significant  words,  whereby  a  wonderful 
facility  is  obtained  in  making  of  anagrams.  .  .  . 
Of  all  languages,  this  is  the  most  compendious  in 
complement,  and  consequently  fittest  for  courtiers 
and  ladies.  ...  As  its  interjections  are  more 
numerous,  so  are  they  more  emphatical  in  their 
respective  expression  of  passions,  then  [than]  that 
part  of  speech  is  in  any  other  language  whatsoever."  1 
And  finally  Sir  Thomas  vouches  for  its  conciseness 
in  a  hyperbole  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  excel. 
"  This  language,"  he  says,  "  affordeth  so  concise 
words  for  numbering,  that  the  number  for  setting 
down,  whereof  would  require  in  vulgar  arithmetic 
more  figures  in  a  row  then  [than]  there  might  be 
grains  of  sand  containable  from  the  center  of  the 
earth  to  the  highest  heavens,  is  in  it  expressed  by 

there  is  the  same  marked  difference  in  the  writing  of  the 
two  sexes,  he  proposed  Penmanship  and  Penwomanship.  Erroneous 
opinions  in  religion  being  promulgated  in  this  country  by  women 
as  well  as  men,  the  teachers  of  such  false  doctrine  may  be  divided 
into  Heresiarchs  and  Sheresiarchs,  so  that  we  should  speak  of  the 
Heresy  of  the  Quakers  and  the  Sheresy  of  Joanna  Southcote's 
people.  The  troublesome  affection  of  the  diaphragm,  which  every 
one  has  experienced,  is,  upon  the  same  principle,  to  be  called, 
according  to  the  sex  of  the  patient,  Hecups,  or  Shecups,  which, 
upon  the  principle  of  making  our  language  truly  British,  is  better 
than  the  more  classical  form  of  Hiccups  and  Haccups.  In  its  object 
ive  use  the  word  becomes  Hiscups  or  Hercups  ;  and  in  like  manner 
Histerics  should  be  altered  into  Herterics,  the  complaint  never 
being  masculine.  It  is  perhaps  a  little  surprising  that  this 
suggestion  should  have  lain  before  the  British  public  for  half  a 
century,  and  have  been  left  unutilised. 
1  Works,  pp.  316-318. 


i8o  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

two  letters."1  A  considerable  revenue  might  be 
secured  if  the  rule  found  at  the  end  of  some  of 
Grimm's  Household  Tales  were  applied  to  this  state 
ment,  and  strictly  enforced :  "  Whosoever  does  not 
believe  this  must  pay  a  thaler."  In  a  very  innocent 
manner  our  author  excuses  himself  for  the  extra 
vagant  praise  he  has  poured  out  upon  his  own 
invention.  "  Why  it  is,"  he  exclaims,  "  I  should 
extoll  the  worth  thereof,  without  the  jeopardy  of 
vaine  glory,  the  reason  is  clear  and  evident,  being 
necessitated  ...  to  merchandise  it  for  the  redin 
tegrating  of  an  ancient  family,  it  needeth  not  be 
thought  strange,  that  in  some  measure  I  descend 
to  the  fashion  of  the  shop-keepers,  who,  to  scrue 
up  the  buyer  to  the  higher  price,  will  tell  them  no 
better  can  be  had  for  mony,  'tis  the  choicest  ware 
in  England,  and  if  any  can  match  it,  he  shall  have 
it  for  nought  .  .  .  [And  so]  I  went  on  in  my 
laudatives,  to  procure  the  greater  longing,  that  an 
ardent  desire  might  stir  up  an  emacity  [a  pro 
pensity  to  buy],  to  the  furtherance  of  my  proposed 
end."  One  is  obliged  sadly  to  assent  to  his  further 
statement  about  such  conduct  — "  whereof  .  .  . 
there  wanteth  not  store  of  presidents  [precedents]." 2 

Hugh  Miller,  animated  by  the  patriotic  zeal 
which  prompts  one  North  Briton  to  stand  by 
another,  and  with  the  desire  to  make  out  the  best 
case  possible  for  one  who  was  not  only  a  fellow- 
countryman,  but  also  a  fellow-townsman,  speaks  in 
high  terms  of  Urquhart's  inventive  powers  as  dis 
played  in  the  Logopandecteision.  "  The  new  chemical 
vocabulary,"  he  says,  "with  all  its  philosophical 

1  Works,  pp.  316-318,  2  Ibid.  p.  332. 


CHEMICAL  NOMENCLATURE  181 

ingenuity,  is  constructed  on  principles  exactly 
similar  to  those  which  he  divulged  more  than  a 
hundred  years  prior  to  its  invention,  in  the  preface 
to  his  Universal  Language." ]  This  is  a  statement 
which  it  is  rather  difficult  to  understand.  The  only 
indication  of  the  nature  of  the  new  tongue  which 
we  can  glean  from  Sir  Thomas's  description  of  it, 
is  that  every  letter  of  every  word  in  it  would  have 
a  meaning,  so  that  when  anyone  who  knew  the 
principles  of  the  language  heard  a  word  for  the 
first  time,  he  would  understand  it.2  Now,  of  course, 
it  is  true  that  anyone  who  knows  the  principle  of 
the  nomenclature  of  salts,  to  which,  we  suppose, 
Hugh  Miller  refers,  can  tell  a  good  deal  about  a 

1  Sceiies  and  Legends,  chap.  vii. 

3  A  somewhat  similar  project  was  described  in  the  Marquis  of 
Worcester's  Century  of  the  Names  and  Scantling  of  .  .  .  Inventions 
(1663),  in  which  the  steam-engine  is  anticipated.  The  passage 
is  as  follows: — "32.  How  to  compose  an  universal  character, 
methodical,  and  easie  to  be  written,  yet  intelligible  in  any 
language  :  so  that  if  an  English-man  write  it  in  English,  a  French 
man,  Italian,  Spaniard,  Irish,  Welsh,  being  scholars,  yea,  Grecian 
or  Hebritian,  shall  as  perfectly  understand  it  in  their  owne  Tongue, 
as  if  they  were  perfect  English,  distinguishing  the  Verbs  from  the 
Nouns,  the  Numbers,  Tenses,  Cases  as  properly  expressed  in  their 
own  Language  as  it  was  written  in  English." 

A  writer  in  Blackwood 's  Magazine  in  1820  affirms  that  he  has 
good  reasons  for  believing  that  the  above  volume  was  really 
by  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart,  and  wras  dishonestly  put  forth  as  the 
work  of  the  Marquis  of  Worcester.  He  does  not  give  us  any 
of  his  reasons.  The  style  of  the  little  volume  bears  no  resemblance 
to  that  of  our  author,  and  this  fact  is  of  itself  almost  conclusive 
proof  that  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  The 
Scottish  knight  could  scarcely  open  his  lips  without  revealing  his 
identity.  It  is  rather  difficult  to  believe,  too,  that  a  manuscript 
lost  by  Sir  Thomas  in  the  streets  of  Worcester  should  have  been 
picked  up  by  the  Marquis  of  Worcester.  The  coincidence  would 
be  a  very  extraordinary  one. 


182  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

salt  from  the  name  of  it,  say,  nitrate  of  potassium, 
KN03,  but  it  would  be  impossible  to  invent  a 
systematic  nomenclature  of  which  this  would  not 
be  true. 

The  same  author  is  also  very  much  impressed  by 
the  fact  that  the  new  language  was  to  contain  the 
dual,  and  regards  this,  on  Lord  Monboddo's  authority, 
as  a  proof  of  philosophical  acumen  on  the  part 
of  the  inventor.  He  does  not  take  any  notice  of 
the  "  redual,"  which  the  language  was  also  to  con 
tain,  and  which  might  have  been  taken  as  an 
indication  of  double-distilled  wisdom.  Lord  Mon- 
boddo  (1714-1799)  says  of  the  Greek  language 
that  if  there  "  were  nothing  else  to  convince  him  of 
its  being  a  work  of  philosophers  and  grammarians, 
its  dual  number  would  of  itself  be  sufficient ;  for  as 
certainly  as  the  principles  of  body  are  the  point, 
the  line,  and  the  surface,  the  principles  of  number 
are  the  monad  and  the  duad,  though  philosophers 
only  are  aware  of  the  fact."  The  idea  that  this 
venerated  instrument  for  the  expression  or  conceal 
ment  of  thought  was  the  concoction  of  a  committee 
of  primitive  sages,  and  that  they  deliberately  in 
vented  the  dual,  and  added  it  as  another  spike  to 
the  chevaux  -  de  -frise  through  which  our  young 
people,  of  both  sexes,  have  to  struggle l  on  their 
way  to  the  Temple  of  Learning,  is  truly  revolting. 
One  would  not  like  to  think  that  the  ancient 

1  Hear  Heine's  angry  allusions  to  his  early  scholastic  experiences, 
in  which  he  suggests  another  and  less  honourable  origin  of  the 
Greek  tongue  :  ' '  Vom  Griechischen  will  ich  gar  nicht  sprechen — 
ich  argere  mich  sonst  zu  viel.  Die  Monche  im  Mittelalter  hatten 
so  ganz  Unrecht  nicht,  wenn  sie  behaupteten,  dass  das  Griechische 
erne  Eriindung  des  Teufels  sei"  (Das  Buch  Le  Grand,  vii.). 


LOSS  OF  THE  DUAL 


'83 


Greeks  were  quite  so  malicious  as  to  do  a  thing 
like  that.  It  is  more  probably  the  case  that,  like 
other  Aryans,1  they  received  the  dual  as  part  of 
the  inheritance  of  the  past,  handed  down  to  them, 
and  retained  it ;  while  in  some  of  the  cognate 
languages l  it  was  gradually  rubbed  off,  very  much 
in  the  same  way  as  Lord  Monboddo's  men  lost  their 
tails,  when  they  gave  up  their  arboreal  habits, 
and  betook  themselves  to  sedentary  occupations. 

1  Sanskrit,  Old  Persian,  Lithuanian,  and  old  Slavonic  have  the 
dual  both  in  declension  and  conjugation,  and  in  the  first  of  these 
it  is  used  much  more  frequently  than  in  Greek.  Faint  traces  of  it  in 
declension  are  to  be  found  in  Teutonic  speech,  though  in  conjuga 
tion  it  is  only  in  the  Gothic  that  the  dual  is  used.  In  old  Gaelic 
the  dual  is  a  regular  feature  of  declension,  but  not  of  conjugation. 


CHAPTEE  VII 

TEANSLATION  OF  KABELAIS 

HE  foundation  on  which  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart's  literary  fame  securely 
rests  is  his  translation  into  English 
of  the  first  three  books  of  the  works 
of  Eabelais.  Of  these  the  first  and 
second  appeared  in  two  separate 
volumes  in  the  year  1653 — exactly  a  century  after 
the  death  of  the  great  French  satirist — and  the 
third  was  published  by  Pierre  Antoine  Motteux 
in  1693,  long  after  Sir  Thomas's  own  death.1 

1  The  title-page  of  the  first  book  does  not  contain  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart's  name,  but  on  it  is  his  motto  ("Mean,  speak,  and  do 
well ").  It  runs  as  follows  :— "  The  first  Book  of  the  Works  of  MR. 
FRANCIS  EABELAIS,  Doctor  in  Physick  :  Containing  Five  Books  of 
the  Lives,  Heroick  Deeds,  and  Sayings  of  GARGANTUA  and  his 
Sonne  PANTAGRUEL.  Together  with  the  Pantagrueline  Prognosti 
cation,  the  Oracle  of  the  divine  Bacbuc,  and  response  of  the  bottle. 
Hereunto  are  annexed  the  Navigations  unto  the  sounding  Isle  and 
the  Isle  of  the  Apedefts  :  as  likewise  the  Philosophical  cream  with 
a  Limosin  Epistle.  All  done  by  Mr.  Francis  Rabelais,  in  the 
French  Tongue,  and  now  faithfully  translated  into  English,  etivoei 
eti\oye  Kal  eflirpaTTe.  London,  Printed  for  Richard  Baddeley, 
within  the  Middle  Templegate.  1653."  On  the  title-page  of  the 
second  book  are  the  translator's  initials,  S.  T.  V.  C.  (Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  of  Cromartie).  While  on  that  of  the  third  book  we  have 
his  name  in  full :  "  Now  faithfully  translated  into  English  by  the 
unimitable  pen  of  Sir  Thomas  Urwhart,  Kt.  and  Bar.  The  Trans- 


OBSCURITY  OF  RABELAIS  185 

The  difficulty,  singularity,  and  obscurity  of  the 
writings  of  Kabelais  had  probably  been  hindrances 
in  the  way  of  their  being  presented  to  the  English 
public  in  their  own  tongue ;  for,  though  the  register 
of  the  Stationers'  Company  preserves  a  record  of 
two  attempts  at  translation,  these  seem  to  have  been 
but  fragmentary,  and  to  have  dropped  still-born  from 
the  press.  The  works  themselves  are  not  known  to 
be  extant,  and  nothing  more  than  the  bare  name  of 
them  survives. 

The  difficulties  which  lie  in  the  way  of  the 
ordinary  reader  who  wishes  to  become  acquainted 
with  the  works  of  Eabelais  are  very  considerable.1 
The  fantastical  style  of  the  satirist,  his  countless 
allusions  to  contemporary  persons  and  events,  his 

lator  of  the  Two  First  Books.  Never  before  Printed.  London : 
Printed  for  Richard  Baldwin,  near  the  Oxford  Arms  in  Warwick 
Lane,  1693."  Copies  of  the  first  and  second  books  of  the  above 
date  are  in  the  British  Museum,  but  erroneously  catalogued — not 
under  Urquhart,  but  only  under  C.,  S.  T.  V.  A  second  edition  of 
them  both  seems  from  the  Bodleian  Catalogue  to  have  been  pub 
lished  in  1664.  Both  are  very  rare,  it  is  said,  owing  to  the 
destruction  caused  by  the  fire  of  London  in  1666. 

1  For  those  who  are  not  special  students,  adequate  information 
concerning  Rabelais  and  extracts  from  his  works  are  to  be  got  in 
Sir  Walter  Besant's  luminous  and  charming  volume  in  the  series  of 
Foreign  Classics  for  English  Readers  (Blackwood),  and  in  Morley's 
Universal  Library  (Routledge).  In  one  of  his  poems  Browning 
describes  the  steps  taken  by  a  reader  to  banish  the  memory  of  a 
dreary  pedant,  whose  book  he  had  been  perusing.  He  says  : 

"Then  I  went  indoors,  brought  out  a  loaf, 
Half  a  cheese,  and  a  bottle  of  Chablis ; 
Lay  on  the  grass,  and  forgot  the  oaf 
Over  a  jolly  chapter  of  Rabelais." 

Some  have  turned  over  Rabelais  and  searched  for  the  jolly  chapter 
in  vain,  and  have,  perhaps,  attributed  their  failure  to  the  want  of 
a  bottle  of  Chablis. 


1 86  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

out-of-the-way  learning,  the  care  with  which  he 
conceals  at  such  length  the  seriousness  of  his 
purpose,  and  the  incredible  grossness  of  manners 
which  so  often  disfigures  his  pages,  are  obstacles 
which  can  with  difficulty  be  surmounted.  The  last- 
mentioned  characteristic  is,  indeed,  a  grave  and  in 
grained  fault,  which  must  for  ever  be  a  slur  upon 
the  writer's  fame.  Yet  we  may  say  of  him  what 
Don  Pedro  says  of  Benedick,  "  The  man  doth  fear 
God  howsoever  it  seems  not  in  him  by  some  large 
jests  he  will  make " ;  or  what  Mrs  Blower  in  St 
Ronan's  Well  says  of  her  deceased  husband,  "  He 
was  a  merry  man,  but  he  had  the  root  of  the  matter 
in  him  for  a'  his  light  way  of  speaking."  Coleridge 
— "  the  brother,"  according  to  Mr  Birrell,  "  whose 
praise  is  throughout  all  the  churches" — speaks  of 
Eabelais  in  very  high  terms  indeed ;  "  Beyond  a 
doubt,"  he  says,  "  he  was  among  the  deepest,  as 
well  as  boldest  thinkers  of  his  age.  His  buffoonery 
was  not  merely  Brutus'  rough  stick,  which  contained 
a  rod  of  gold :  it  was  necessary  as  an  amulet  against 
the  monks  and  legates.1  Never  was  there  a  more 
plausible,  and  seldom,  I  am  persuaded,  a  less  appro 
priate  line  than  the  thousand  times  quoted 

'  Rabelais  laughing  in  his  easy  chair ' 
of  Mr  Pope.     The  caricature  of  his  filth  and  zany- 

1  This  is  somewhat  doubtful.  The  Sorbonne  and  the  Parliaments 
might  have  been  moved  by  ultra- orthodox  opponents  to  prosecute 
Rabelais  on  this  account.  The  true  explanation  seems  to  be  that 
the  form  of  his  book  was  popular,  and  the  popular  French  litera 
ture  of  the  Middle  Ages — fableaux,  farces,  and  burlesque  romances 
— can  hardly  be  exceeded  in  the  matter  of  coarseness  (Ency.  Brit.) 
"Kabelais"), 


LIFE  OF  RABELAIS 


187 


ism  show  how  fully  he  both  knew  and  felt  the 
danger  in  which  he  stood.  I  could  write  a  treatise 
in  praise  of  the  moral  elevation  of  Eabelais'  work, 
which  would  make  the  church  stare  and  the  con 
venticle  groan,1  and  yet  would  be  truth,  and  nothing 
but  the  truth.  I  class  Kabelais  with  the  great 
creative  minds  of  the  world,  Shakespeare,  Dante, 
Cervantes,  etc." 

Frangois  Kabelais  was  born  in  Touraine,  accord 
ing  to  the  date  usually  given,  and  which  there  is 
no  reason  to  question,  in  the  same  year  as  Luther 
and  Kaphael,  A.D.  1483,  and  died  in  Paris  in  1553. 
His  father  had  a  small  estate,  and  was  an  apothe 
cary  (or,  as  some  say,  a  tavern-keeper)  in  the  town 
of  Chinon,  at  the  foot  of  the  castle  where,  three 
centuries  before,  our  Henry  n.  had  died,  and 
whither,  a  little  more  than  fifty  years  before 
Frangois  was  born,  Joan  of  Arc  had  come  with 
promises  of  supernatural  aid  to  Charles  VII.  He 
was  the  youngest  of  five  sons,  and,  as  was  often  the 
case  in  those  days,  was  provided  for  by  being  made 
a  monk,  while  the  other  members  of  the  family 
divided  amongst  them  the  paternal  estate.  In  one 
passage  in  his  works  he  speaks  of  mothers  who 
"  cannot  bear  their  children  nor  brook  them  in 
their  houses  nine,  nay  often  not  seven  years,  but  by 
putting  a  shirt  over  their  robe,  and  by  cutting  a  few 
hairs  on  the  top  of  their  head  .  .  .  they  transform 

1  This  is  surely  an  early  allusion  to  the  superior  sensitiveness  on 
some  points  of  the  "Nonconformist  Conscience"  The  fact  alluded 
to  should  inspire  joy  rather  than  call  forth  sneers,  for  when  a 
conscience  becomes  sensitive  on  some  points  there  are  reasonable 
hopes  of  its  becoming  sensitive  on  others. 


i88  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

them  into  birds,"  i.e.,  get  rid  of  them  as  soon  as 
possible,  and  thrust  them  into  monasteries.  This 
seems  to  have  been  his  own  sad  fate. 

In  course  of  time,  after  the  schoolboy  period  of 
his  life  was  past,  he  entered  the  order  of  Franciscan 
monks  at  the  convent  of  Fontenay-le-Comte  in 
Poitou,  and  took  holy  orders ;  and  it  was  here,  dur 
ing  the  next  fifteen  years  (1509—1524),  that  he 
devoted  himself  to  the  acquisition  of  everything  in 
the  shape  of  literature  or  learning,  and  laid  the 
foundation  of  the  astonishing  erudition  which  his 
works  display.  His  long  residence  in  the  monas 
tery  had  inspired  Eabelais  with  a  deep  hatred  of 
monasticism  and  monks,  and,  after  being  allowed  to 
exchange  the  Franciscan  for  the  Benedictine  order, 
he  laid  down  the  regular  habit  and  took  that  of  a 
secular  priest,  and  left  the  convent  without  the 
sanction  of  his  superior — a  breach  of  ecclesiastical 
discipline  which  exposed  him  to  severe  censure. 
After  wandering  hither  and  thither  in  the  pursuit 
of  medical  knowledge,  he  entered  the  University  of 
Montpellier,  graduated  as  a  physician,  and  practised 
there  with  credit  and  success.  After  being  Hospital 
Physician  at  Lyons,  he  spent  some  time  in  Kome, 
as  a  medical  attendant  upon  Jean  du  Bellay,  Bishop 
of  Paris.  While  here  he  succeeded  in  making  his 
peace  with  the  Church,  and  by  a  papal  Bull  (17th 
January  1536)  was  allowed  to  return  to  the  Bene 
dictine  order  and  to  practise  physic  according  to 
canonical  rules,  i.e.,  to  charge  no  fees  and  to  use 
neither  fire  nor  knife.  This  release  from  ecclesiast 
ical  disabilities  allowed  him  to  be  appointed  to  a 
place  in  the  abbey  of  St  Maur-des-Fosses,  near 


THE  ENEMY  OF  HUMBUG  189 

Paris.  After  another  period  of  exile  and  wandering 
he  was  nominated  cure*  of  Meudon,  an  office  which  he 
resigned  after  two  years.  Three  months  afterwards 
he  died  in  Paris  (9th  April,  1553),  and  was  buried 
in  the  cemetery  of  the  parish  of  St  Paul's. 

The  publication  of  the  satirical  writings  of 
Rabelais  was  spread  over  a  long  series  of  years, 
from  1532  or  1533,  when  the  first  instalment, 
in  his  Gargantua,  was  brought  out,  down  to 
1564,  eleven  years  after  his  death,  when  the 
fifth  and  concluding  book  of  his  Pantagruel  was 
issued  in  its  entirety.  The  main  object  of  his 
satire  was  what  used  to  be  called  "  the  intolerance, 
superstition,  and  disgusting  follies  and  vices  of  the 
Romish  Church,"  but,  incidentally,  pretenders  to 
knowledge  of  every  kind  come  under  his  lash.  For 
when  imposture,  folly,  and  humbug  grow  too  rank 
and  noisome,  there  arise,  it  can  scarcely  be  by  acci 
dent,  men  like  Lucian,  Rabelais,  and  Voltaire,  whose 
calling  it  is  to  cut  them  down.  That  theirs  is  an 
ill-requited  office  is  sufficiently  plain  from  the  odium 
which,  in  spite  of  their  beneficent  labours,  is  often 
associated  with  their  names.  "  [Hast  thou]  only  a 
torch  for  burning,  no  hammer  for  building  ? "  says 
the  somewhat  wearisome  Heir  Teufelsdrockh  to 
the  last  named  of  these  satirists,  "  take  our  thanks, 
then,  and — thyself  away." x  Yet  the  torch  for 
burning  is  as  necessary  as  the  hammer  for  building, 
if  the  site  for  the  Temple  of  Truth  is  to  be  pre 
pared.  It  may  well  be  that  burning  down  and 
rooting  up  are  needed  before  building  can  be  begun, 
and  some  of  those  who  have  endeavoured  to  benefit 

1  Sartor  Resartus,  chap.  ix. 


190  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

mankind  have  felt  themselves  called  to  the  one  sort 
of  work  rather  than  to  the  other. 

The  form  which  Eabelais  chooses  for  the  frame 
work  of  his  satire  is  the  burlesque  adventures  of 
the  giant  Gargantua,  of  whom  many  legends  were 
current  in  Touraine,  and  of  his  son  Pantagruel, 
sometimes  spoken  of  as  also  a  giant,  and  at  others 
as  a  wise  and  virtuous  prince  of  ordinary  propor 
tions.  Along  with  the  strange,  tangled,  and  chaotic 
story  of  their  exploits  the  writer  from  time  to  time 
enunciates  admirable  ideas,  which  must  have  seemed 
revolutionary  to  his  contemporaries,  and  some  of 
which  even  we  have  not  yet  realised. 

The  translation  of  Eabelais  by  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart  is  his  great  literary  achievement.  "  It  is 
impossible,"  says  Tytler,  "  to  look  into  it  without 
admiring  the  air  of  ease,  freshness,  and  originality 
which  the  translator  has  so  happily  communicated 
to  his  performance.  All  those  singular  qualifica 
tions  which  unfitted  Urquhart  to  succeed  in  serious 
composition — his  extravagance,  his  drollery  (?),  his 
unbridled  imagination,  his  burlesque  and  endless 
epithets — are  in  the  task  of  translating  Eabelais 
transplanted  into  their  true  field  of  action,  and 
revel  through  his  pages  with  a  licence  and  buoyancy 
which  is  quite  unbridled,  yet  quite  allowable.  In 
deed,  Urquhart  and  Eabelais  appear,  in  many  points, 
to  have  been  congenial  spirits,  and  the  translator 
seems  to  have  been  born  for  his  author." l 

As  might  have  been  expected,  the  translation  is 
not  marked  by  painful  exactness  of  rendering.  On 
the  contrary,  evidences  of  carelessness  and  in- 
1  Life  of  Crichton,  p.  182. 


AN  UNBRIDLED  TRANSLATOR 


191 


accuracy  are  by  no  means  uncommon,  but  yet  the 
work  is,  as  some  one  calls  it,  "one  of  the  most 
perfect  transfusions  of  an  author  from  one  language 
to  another,1  that  ever  man  accomplished."  The 
great  merits  of  the  translation  consist  in  its  pre 
serving  the  very  air  and  style  of  the  original,  and 
in  the  astonishing  richness  of  vocabulary  which  it 
manifests.  Where  Eabelais  invents  a  word,  Sir 
Thomas  invents  one,  or  two,  or  three ;  and  if  the 
former  has  a  list  of  twenty  or  thirty  epithets,  the 
latter  has  no  hesitation  in  supplying  his  readers 
with  forty  or  sixty,  which  seem  quite  as  good  as 
the  original  stock  which  he  thus  enlarges.  Some 
times,  too,  as  Mr  W.  F.  Smith,  a  very  distinguished 
student  of  Eabelais,  remarks,  "  in  translating  a 
single  word  of  the  French  he  often  empties  all  the 
synonyms  given  by  Cotgrave  into  his  version." 

Mr  Tytler,  in  the  above-quoted  criticism  on 
Urquhart's  translation,  speaks  of  the  peculiarities  of 
his  style  as  "  revelling  through  his  pages  with  a 
licence  and  buoyancy  which  is  quite  unbridled,  yet 
quite  allowable."  One  is  obliged  to  demur  to  the 
last  adjective.  A  translator,  like  a  compositor, 
should  be  under  some  obligation  to  adhere  to  tjie 
text  before  him ;  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the 
success  of  Urquhart's  version  is  occasionally  inter 
fered  with  by  this  same  "  unbridled  revelling." 
The  style  of  Kabelais  is  graphic  and  vigorous,  and 

1  In  addition  to  any  aid  Urquhart  may  have  received  from  friends 
who  were  intimately  acquainted  with  the  French  language,  he  was 
deeply  indebted  to  Cotgrave's  French  Dictionary,  published  in 
1611,  and  dedicated  to  "Sir  William  Cecil,  Knight,  Lord  Burghley, 
and  sonne  and  heir  apparaiit  unto  the  Earlc  of  Exeter,"  i.e.,  the 
grandson  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  Lord  Burghley. 


i92  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

at  times  exceedingly  graceful,  and  occupies  a  high 
place  in  French  literature.  Any  tampering  with  it, 
therefore,  in  the  way  of  alteration  or  addition,  was 
not  likely  to  be  an  improvement. 

But,  even  after  all  deductions  are  made,  the  praise 
bestowed  upon  Urquhart's  work  has  been  fully 
deserved.  "  The  buoyancy  and  unembarrassed  sweep 
of  its  general  character,"  says  Sir  Theodore  Martin, 
"  which  gives  his  Kabelais  more  the  look  of  an 
original  than  of  a  translation,  its  rich  and  well- 
compacted  diction,  the  many  happy  turns  of  phrase 
that  are  quite  his  own,  have  fairly  earned  for  it  the 
high  estimation  in  which  it  has  long  been  held. 
His  task  was  one  of  extreme  difficulty,  and  there 
have  perhaps  been  few  men  besides  himself  that 
could  have  brought  to  it  the  world  of  omnigenous 
knowledge  which  it  required.  It  was  apparently 
Urquhart's  ambition  to  realise  in  his  own  person 
the  ideal  of  human  accomplishment,  to  be  at  once 

'Complete  in  feature  and  in  mind, 
With  all  good  grace  to  grace  a  gentleman.' 

He  had  left  no  source  of  information  unexplored, 
few  aspects  of  life  unobserved,  and,  in  the  trans 
lation  of  Eabelais,  he  found  full  exercise  for  his 
multiform  attainments.  Ably  as  the  work  has 
been  completed  by  Motteux,  one  cannot  but  regret 
that  the  worthy  Knight  of  Cromarty  had  not 
spared  him  the  task."1 

The  merits  of  the  translation  can  scarcely  be 
exhibited  in  selections  torn  from  their  context,  and 
perhaps  only  partly  intelligible ;  but  perhaps  the 

1  Rabelais,  p.  xxi. 


THE  ABBEY  OF  THELEMA  193 

following  may  be  welcome  to  the  reader.  Let  us 
take  these  extracts  from  the  graceful  and  charming 
sketch  of  the  Abbey  of  Thelema,  which  was  to  be 
different  from  all  other  monastic  communities, 
and  was  to  be  the  home  of  a  society  of  young 
people  living  together  in  all  innocence  and  joy,  free 
from  sordid  cares,  and  devoted  to  the  studies,  exer 
cises,  and  accomplishments  which  are  appropriate 
to  refined  and  noble  spirits. 

" '  First,  then/  said  Gargantua,  '  you  must  not 
build  a  wall  about  your  convent,  for  all  other 
abbies  are  strongly  walled  and  mured  about.  .  .  . 
Moreover,  seeing  there  are  certain  convents  in  the 
world,  whereof  the  custome  is,  if  any  woman  come 
in,  I  mean  chaste  and  honest  women,  they  immedi 
ately  sweep  the  ground  which  they  have  trod 
upon ; l  therefore  was  it  ordained,  that  if  any  man 
or  woman,  entered  into  religious  orders,  should  by 
chance  come  within  this  new  abbey,  all  the  rooines 
should  be  thoroughly  washed  and  cleansed  through 
which  they  had  passed.  And  because  in  all  other 
monasteries  and  nunneries  all  is  compassed,  limited, 
and  regulated  by  houres,  it  was  decreed  that  in  this 
new  structure  there  should  be  neither  clock  nor 
dial,  but  that,  according  to  the  opportunities  and 
incident  occasions,  all  their  hours  should  be  dis 
posed  of ;  for/  said  Gargantua,  '  the  greatest  losse 
of  time,  that  I  know,  is  to  count  the  hours.  What 
good  comes  of  it  ?  Nor  can  there  be  any  greater 
dotage  in  the  world  then  [than]  for  one  to  guide 
and  direct  his  courses  by  the  sound  of  a  bell,  and 
not  by  his  owne  judgement  and  discretion.' 

1  I.f.  the  C'urthu.sians  :  like  their  impudence  ! 
13 


i94  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

"  Item,  Because  at  that  time  they  put  no  women 
into  nunneries,  but  such  as  were  either  purblind, 
blinkards,  lame,  crooked,  ill-favoured,  misshapen, 
fooles,  senselesse,  spoyled,  or  corrupt ;  nor  en- 
cloystered  any  men,  but  those  that  were  either 
sickly,  ill-bred  lowts,  simple  sots,  or  peevish  trouble- 
houses  ;  .  .  .  therefore  was  it  ordained,  that  into 
this  religious  order  should  be  admitted  no  women 
that  were  not  faire,  well  featur'd,  and  of  a  sweet 
disposition;  nor  men  that  were  not  comely,  per 
sonable,  and  well  conditioned. 

"  Item,  Because  in  the  convents  of  women  men 
come  not  but  under-hand,  privily,  and  by  stealth,  it 
was  therefore  enacted,  that  in  this  house  there  shall 
be  no  women  in  case  there  be  not  men,  nor  men  in 
case  there  be  not  women. 

"  Item,  Because  both  men  and  women,  that  are 
received  into  religious  orders  after  the  expiring  of 
their  noviciat  or  probation-year,  were  constrained 
and  forced  perpetually  to  stay  there  all  the  days  of 
their  life,  it  was  therefore  ordered,  that  all  whatever, 
men  or  women,  admitted  within  this  abbey,  should 
have  full  leave  to  depart  with  peace  and  contentment, 
whensoever  it  should  seem  good  to  them  so  to  do. 

"  Item,  for  that  the  religious  men  and  women 
did  ordinarily  make  three  vows,  to  wit,  those  of 
chastity,  poverty,  and  obedience,  it  was  therefore 
constituted  and  appointed,  that  in  this  convent 
they  might  be  honourably  married,  that  they  might 
be  rich,  and  live  at  liberty. 

"  In  regard  of  the  legitimat  time  of  the  persons 
to  be  initiated,  and  years  under  and  above  which 
they  were  not  capable  of  reception,  the  women  were 


MANNER  OF  LIVING 


'95 


to  be  admitted  from  ten  till  fifteen,  and  the  men 
from  twelve  till  eighteen." x 

After  an  elaborate  description  of  the  magnificence 
of  the  abbey  and  of  its  endowments,  and  of  the 
apparel  worn  by  the  members  of  the  new  order,  we 
are  told  of  "  how  the  Theleinites  were  governed,  and  of 
their  manner  of  living"  "  All  their  life,"  we  read, 
"  was  spent  not  in  lawes,  statutes,  or  rules,  but  accord 
ing  to  their  own  free  will  and  pleasure.  They  rose 
out  of  their  beds,  when  they  thought  good  ;  they  did 
eat,  drink,  labour,  sleep,  when  they  had  a  minde  to  it, 
and  were  disposed  for  it.  None  did  awake  them, 
none  did  offer  to  constrain  them  to  eat,  drink,  nor  to 
do  any  other  thing  ;  for  so  had  Gargantua  established 
it.  In  all  their  rule,  and  strictest  tie  of  their  order, 
there  was  but  this  one  clause  to  be  observed, 

DO  WHAT  THOU  WILT; 

Because  men  that  are  free,  well-borne,  well-bred, 
and  conversant  in  honest  companies,  have  naturally 
an  instinct  and  spurre  that  prompteth  them  unto 
vertuous  actions,  and  withdraws  them  from  vice, 
which  is  called  honour.  Those  same  men  when  by 
base  subjection  and  constraint  they  are  brought 
under  and  kept  down,  turn  aside  from  that  noble 
disposition,  by  which  they  formerly  were  inclined  to 
vertue,  to  shake  off  and  break  that  bond  of  servi 
tude,  wherein  they  are  so  tyrannously  inslaved  ;  for 
it  is  agreeable  with  the  nature  of  man  to  long  after 
things  forbidden,  and  to  desire  what  is  denied  us.2 

1  Book  i.  chap.  52. 

2  "  Nitimi(r  in  vet  it  urn,  semper  cupivws  negata"  (Ovid,  Amor, 
iii.  4,  17). 


196  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

"  By  this  liberty  they  entered  into  a  very  laud 
able  emulation,  to  do  all  of  them  what  they  saw 
did  please  one.  If  any  of  the  gallants  or  ladies 
should  say,  Let  us  drink,  they  would  all  drink. 
If  any  one  of  them  said,  Let  us  play,  they  all 
played.  If  one  said,  Let  us  go  a-walking  into  the 
fields,  they  went  all.  If  it  were  to  go  a-hawking 
or  a-hunting,  the  ladies  mounted  upon  dainty,  well- 
paced  nags,  seated  in  a  stately  palfrey  saddle,1 
carried  on  their  lovely  fists,  miniardly  begloved 
every  one  of  them,  either  a  sparhawk,  or  a  laneret, 
or  a  marlin,  and  the  young  gallants  carried  the 
other  kinds  of  hawkes.  So  nobly  were  they  taught, 
that  there  was  neither  he  nor  she  amongst  them 
but  could  read,  write,  sing,  play  upon  several 
musical  instruments,  speak  five  or  sixe  several 
languages,  and  compose  in  them  all  very  quaintly, 
both  in  verse  and  prose.  Never  were  seen  so 
valiant  knights,  so  noble  and  worthy,  so  dextrous 
and  skilful  both  on  foot  and  a  horseback,  more 
brisk  and  lively,  more  nimble  and  quick,  or  better 
handling  all  manner  of  weapons  then  [than]  were 
there.  Never  were  seene  ladies  so  proper 2  and 
handsome,  so  miniard  and  dainty,  lesse  froward,  or 
more  ready  with  their  hand,  and  with  their  needle, 
in  every  honest  and  free  action  belonging  to  that 
sexe,  then  [than]  were  there.  For  this  reason, 
when  the  time  came,  that  any  man  of  the  said 
abbey,  either  at  the  request  of  his  parents,  or  for 
some  other  cause,  had  a  minde  to  go  out  of  it,  he 

1  Avec  leur  palefroy  guorrier — rather,    "with  their  prancing 
palfrey."     Guorrier  from  Gr.  yavpos — haughty. 

2  Of.  Heb.  xi.  23,  "a  proper  child." 


PANURGE 


197 


carried  along  with  him  one  of  the  ladies,  namely, 
her  whom  he  had  before  that  chosen  for  his  mis- 
tris,1  and  [they]  were  married  together.  And  if 
they  had  formerly  in  Theleme  lived  in  good  devotion 
and  amity,  they  did  continue  therein  and  increase 
it  to  a  greater  height  in  their  state  of  matrimony : 
and  did  entertaine  that  mutual  love  till  the  very 
last  day  of  their  life,  in  no  lesse  vigour  and  fervency, 
then  [than]  at  the  very  day  of  their  wedding."  2 

Such  is  the  dream  which  floated  before  the  mind 
of  Eabelais,  but,  unhappily,  it  is  still  an  airy  fancy, 
and  has  never  received  a  local  habitation  and  a 
name.  Mrs  Grundy,the  vegetarians,  the  teetotallers, 
the  anti-tobacco  people,  and  the  enemies  of "  rational 
costume "  have  up  to  the  present  forbidden  the 
erection  of  any  such  building. 

One  of  the  most  prominent  figures  in  the  story  of 
Pantagruel  is  his  favourite,  Panurge,  who  is  a  rogue, 
a  drunkard,  a  coward,  and  a  malicious  scoundrel,  but 
who  yet,  like  Falstaff,  in  spite  of  all  his  moral  defici 
encies,  manages  to  appear  as  an  amusing  personage. 
Into  his  lips  is  put,  with  a  fine  disregard  of  congruity, 
an  eloquent  speech,  which  begins  in  praise  of  debt, 
and  ends  by  setting  forth  the  interdependence  of  all 
things  in  the  universe.  Panurge  is  represented  as 
having  threescore  and  three  ways  of  making  money, 
and  two  hundred  and  fourteen  of  spending  it,  so  that 
he  is  always  poor,  and  his  sovereign  Pantagruel  re 
monstrates  with  him  on  account  of  his  prodigal  habits. 

He  replies  as  follows :  "  Be  still  indebted  to  some- 


1  Celle  laquelle  Vauroit  prins  pour  son  derot — rather, 
had  chosen  him  as  her  devoted  servant." 
3  Book  i.  chap.  f>7. 


her,  \vlio 


198  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

body  or  other,  that  there  may  be  somebody  always 
to  pray  for  you;  [to  pray]  that  the  giver  of  all 
good  things  may  grant  unto  you  a  blessed,  long, 
and  prosperous  life ;  fearing,  if  fortune  should  deal 
crossly  with  you,  that  it  might  be  his  chance  to 
come  short  of  being  paid  by  you,  he  will  always 
speak  good  of  you  in  every  company,  ever  and 
anon  purchase  new  creditors  unto  you  ;  to  the  end, 
that  through  their  means  you  may  make  a  shift  by 
borrowing  from  Peter  to  pay  Paul,1  and  with  other 
folk's  earth  fill  up  his  ditch.  When  of  old  in  the 
region  of  the  Gauls,  by  the  institution  of  the 
Druids,2  the  servants,  slaves,  and  bondmen  were 
burnt  quick  at  the  funerals  and  obsequies  of  their 
lords  and  masters,  had  not  they  fear  enough,  think 
you,  that  their  lords  and  masters  should  die  ?  For, 
per  force,  they  were  to  die  with  them  for  company. 
Did  not  they  uncessantly  send  up  their  supplica 
tions  to  their  great  God  Mercury,3  as  likewise  unto 
Dis,  the  Father  of  Wealth,4  to  lengthen  out  their 
days,  and  preserve  them  long  in  health  ?  Were 
not  they  very  careful  to  entertain  them  well, 
punctually  to  look  unto  them,  and  to  attend  them 
faithfully  and  circumspectly  ?  For  by  those  means 
were  they  to  live  together  at  least  until  the  hour 
of  death.  Believe  me  your  creditors  with  a  more 
fervent  devotion  will  beseech  [Providence]  to  pro- 

1  ^i.faire  versure=Ija,t.  facere  versuram  (Cic.  Att.  v.  1,  §  2),  to 
borrow  money  to  pay  another  debt  (F.  "VV.  S.)' 

2  Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  19. 

3  "  Dcum  maxime  Mercurium  colunt "  (B.  G.  vi.  17)  (Ibid.). 

4  "  Galli  se  omnes  ab  Ditc  patre  prognatos  dicunt "  (B.  G.  vi.  18). 
Dis  is  called  $ere  des  escuz,  as  identical  with  Plutus,  the  god  of 
hidden  wealth  (Ibid.). 


THE  PRAISE  OF  DEBT  199 

long  your  life,  they  being  of  nothing  more  afraid 
than  that  you  should  die.  ...  I,  in  this  only 
respect  and  consideration  of  being  a  debtor,  esteem 
myself  worshipful,  reverend,  and  formidable.  For, 
against  the  opinion  of  most  philosophers,  that  of 
nothing  ariseth  nothing,  yet,  without  having 
bottomed  on  so  much  as  that  which  is  called  the 
First  Matter  [Primary  Matter],  did  I  out  of  nothing 
become  such  [a]  maker  and  creator,  that  I  have 
created — what  ? — a  gay  number  of  fair  and  jolly 
creditors.  Nay,  creditors,  I  will  maintain  it,  even 
to  the  very  fire  itself  exclusively,1  are  fair  and 
goodly  creatures.  Who  lendeth  nothing  is  an 
ugly  and  wicked  creature.  .  .  .  You  can  hardly 
imagine  how  glad  I  am,  when  every  morning  I 
perceive  myself  environed  and  surrounded  with 
brigades  of  creditors, — humble,  fawning,  and  full  of 
their  reverences.  And  whilst  I  remark  that,  as  I 
look  more  favourably  upon,  and  give  a  chearfuller 
countenance  to  one  than  to  the  other,  the  fellow 
thereupon  buildeth  a  conceit  that  he  shall  be  the  first 
dispatched,  and  the  foremost  in  the  date  of  pay 
ment  ;  and  he  valueth  my  smiles  at  the  rate  of 
ready  money.  ...  I  have  all  my  life-time  held 
debt  to  be  as  an  union  or  conjunction  of  the 
heavens  with  the  earth,  and  the  whole  cement 
whereby  the  race  of  mankind  is  kept  together ; 2  yea, 

1  Exclusively,  i.e.,  "  I  will  affirm  it,  but  not  go  to  the  stake  for 
it"  (F.  W.  S.). 

2  A  fine  passage  in  one  of  Soutli's  Sermons  was  evidently  sug 
gested  by  the  above  chapter  in  Rabelais.     "  The  World  is  main 
tained  by  Intercourse  ;  and  the  whole  Course  of  Nature  is  a  great 
Exchange,  in  which  one  good  Turn  is  and  ought  to  be  the  stated 
Price  of  another.     If  you  consider  the  Universe  as  one  Body,  you 


200  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

of  such  vertue  and  efficacy,  that,  I  say,  the  whole  pro 
geny  of  Adam  would  very  suddenly  perish  without  it." 
He  then  goes  on  to  describe  a  world  in  which 
there  are  no  debtors  and  no  debts.  There  will  be  no 
regular  course  among  the  planets,  but  all  will  be  in 
disorder.  Jupiter,  reckoning  himself  to  be  nothing 
indebted  to  Saturn,  will  go  near  to  thrust  him  out 
of  his  place ;  Saturn  and  Mars  will  combine  to 
promote  the  confusion ;  Mercury,  being  debtor  to 
no  one,  will  no  longer  serve  any;  Venus,  because 
she  shall  have  lent  nothing,  will  no  longer  be 
venerated.  "The  moon,"  he  says,  "will  remain 

shall  find  Society  and  Conversation  to  supply  the  Office  of  the 
Blood  and  Spirits  ;  and  it  is  Gratitude  that  makes  them  circulate. 
Look  over  the  whole  Creation,  and  you  shall  see  that  the  Band  or 
Cement  that  holds  together  all  the  Parts  of  this  great  and  glorious 
Fabric  is  Gratitude,  or  something  like  it :  you  may  observe  it  in 
all  the  Elements,  for  does  not  the  Air  feed  the  Flame  ?  and  does  not 
the  Flame  at  the  same  time  warm  and  enlighten  the  Air  ?  Is  not 
the  Sea  always  sending  forth,  as  well  as  taking  in  ?  And  does  not 
the  Earth  quit  scores  with  all  the  Elements,  in  the  noble  Fruits 
and  Productions  that  issue  from  it  ?  And  in  all  the  Light  and 
Influence  that  the  Heavens  bestow  upon  this  lower  "World,  though 
the  lower  World  cannot  equal  their  Benefaction,  yet  with  a  Kind 
of  grateful  Return,  it  reflects  those  Rays  that  it  cannot  recompense  : 
so  that  there  is  some  Return  however,  though  there  can  be  no 
Requital.  ...  In  short,  Gratitude  is  the  great  Spring  that  sets  all 
the  Wheels  of  Nature  agoing ;  and  the  whole  Universe  is  supported 
by  giving  and  returning,  by  Commerce  and  Commutation.  And 
now,  thou  ungrateful  Brute,  thou  Blemish  to  Mankind,  and 
Reproach  to  thy  Creation  ;  what  shall  we  say  of  thee,  or  to  what 
shall  we  compare  thee  ?  For  thou  art  an  Exception  from  all  the 
visible  World  ;  neither  the  Heavens  above  nor  the  Earth  beneath 
afford  anything  like  thee  :  and  therefore,  if  thou  wouldest  find  thy 
Parallel,  go  to  Hell,  which  is  both  the  Region  and  the  Emblem  of 
Ingratitude ;  for  besides  thyself,  there  is  nothing  but  Hell  that 
is  always  receiving  and  never  restoring"  (I.  SEKM.  xi.  "Of  the 
odious  Sin  of  Ingratitude"). 


A  WORLD  WITHOUT  LENDING        201 

bloody  and  obscure.  For  to  what  end  should  the 
sun  impart  unto  her  any  of  his  light  ? l  He  owed 
her  nothing.  Nor  yet  will  the  sun  shine  upon  the 
earth,  nor  the  stars  send  down  any  good  influence,2 
because  the  terrestrial  globe  hath  desisted  from 
sending  up  their  wonted  nourishment  by  vapours 
and  exhalations,  wherewith  Heraclitus  said,  the 
Stoicks  proved,  Cicero  maintained,  they  were 
cherished  and  alimented.  .  .  .  No  rain  will 
descend  upon  the  earth,  nor  light  shine  thereon  ; 
no  wind  will  blow  there,  nor  will  there  be  in  it  any 
summer  or  harvest.  .  .  .  Such  a  world  without 
lending  will  be  no  better  than  a  dog-kennel,  a  place 
of  contention  and  wrangling.  .  .  .  Men  will  not 
then  salute  one  another ;  it  will  be  but  lost  labour 
to  expect  aid  or  succour  from  any,  or  to  cry  fire, 
water,  murther,  for  none  will  put  to  their  helping 
hand.  Why  ?  He  lent  no  money,  there  is  nothing 
due  to  him.  Nobody  is  concerned  in  his  burning, 
in  his  shipwrack,  in  his  ruine,  or  in  his  death ;  and 
that  because  he  hitherto  hath  lent  nothing,  and 
would  never  thereafter  have  lent  anything.  In 
short,  Faith,  Hope,  and  Charity  would  be  quite 
banish'd  from  such  a  world — for  men  are  born  to 
relieve  and  assist  one  another." 

1  "  Nee  fratris  radiis  obnoxia  surgere  Luna"  (Virg.  Ckorg.  i.  396) 
(F.  W.  S.). 
'2  Influence,  much  used  as  an  astrological  term.     Cf.  Milton  : 

"taught  the  fix'd 
Their  influence  malignant  when  to  shower." 

Par.  Lost,  x.  662. 
"  Bending  one  way  their  precious  influence." 

Hymn  on  the  Nativity,  71. 
(Hid.). 


202  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

"  But,  on  the  contrary,"  he  went  on  to  say,  "  be 
pleased  to  represent  unto  your  fancy  another  world, 
wherein  every  one  lendeth,  and  every  one  oweth,  all 
are  debtors,  and  all  creditors.  0  how  great  will 
that  harmony  be,  which  shall  thereby  result  from 
the  regular  motions  of  the  heavens !  Methinks  I 
hear  it  every  whit  as  well  as  ever  Plato  did.1  What 
sympathy  will  there  be  amongst  the  elements  !  0 
how  delectable  then  unto  nature  will  be  our  own 
works  and  productions !  Whilst  Ceres  appeareth 
loaden  with  corn,  Bacchus  with  wines,  Flora  with 
flowers,  Pomona  with  fruits,  and  Juno  fair  in  a 
clear  air,  wholsom  and  pleasant.  I  lose  myself  in 
this  high  contemplation.  Then  will  among  the 
race  of  mankind,  peace,  love,  benevolence,  fidelity, 
tranquillity,  rests,  banquets,  feastings,  joy,  gladness, 
gold,  silver,  single  money  [small  change],  chains, 
rings,  with  other  ware,  and  chaffer  of  that  nature, 
be  found  to  trot  from  hand  to  hand.  No  suits  at 
law,  no  wars,  no  strife,  debate,  nor  wrangling;  none 
will  be  there  an  usurer,  none  will  be  there  a  pinch- 
penny,  a  scrape-good  wretch,  or  churlish  hard 
hearted  refuser.  Will  not  this  be  the  golden  age 
in  the  reign  of  Saturn  ? — the  true  idea  of  the 
Olympick  regions,  wherein  all  [other]  vertues  cease, 

1  Plato  never  pretends  that  the  "music  of  the  spheres"  can  be 
heard.  He  adopts  the  theory  to  some  extent  from  the  Pytha 
goreans.  Aristotle  (de  Coelo,  ii.  9),  that  the  noise  caused  by 
the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is  so  prodigious  and 
continuous,  that,  being  accustomed  to  it  from  our  birth,  we  do  not 
notice  it.  The  only  notice  in  Plato  that  can  be  construed  into  a 
statement  about  audible  music  of  the  spheres  is  in  Rep.  x., 
where  he  speaks  of  a  siren  standing  upon  each  of  the  circles  of  the 
planetary  system  uttering  one  note  in  one  tone  ;  and  from  all  the 
eight  notes  there  results  a  single  harmony  (F.  "W.  S. ). 


AMPLIFICATION  OF  THE  TEXT        203 

charity  alone  ruleth,  governeth,  domineereth,  and 
triumpheth  ?  All  will  be  fair  and  goodly  people 
there,  all  just  and  vertuous.  0  happy  world  !  0 
people  of  that  world  most  happy !  Yea,  thrice  and 
four  times  blessed  is  that  people !  I  think  in  very 
deed  that  I  am  amongst  them." ] 

In  one  curious  passage  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart 
amplifies  the  text  of  the  author  whom  he  trans 
lates,  and  supplies  his  readers  with  an  astonishing 
list  of  onomatopoeic  words,  many  of  which  will 
probably  be  new  to  those  who  have  not  come  across 
this  passage  before.  Eabelais  has  nine  of  these 
words,  but  the  translator 2  enlarges  the  list  to 
seventy-one.  Pantagruel  is  arguing  against  fast 
ing  and  solitude  as  aids  to  a  contemplative 
life,  and  quotes  the  authority  of  his  father 
Gargantua. 

"  He  [Gargantua]  gave  us  also,"  he  said,  "  the 
example  of  the  philosopher,  who,  when  he  thought 
most  seriously  to  have  withdrawn  himself  unto  a 
solitary  privacy,  far  from  the  rusling  clutterments 
of  the  tumultuous  and  confused  world,  the  better 
to  improve  his  theory,  to  contrive,  comment,  and 
ratiocinate,  was,  notwithstanding  his  uttermost 
endeavours  to  free  himself  from  all  untoward 
noises,  surrounded  and  environ'd  about  so  with  the 
barking  of  currs  [bawling  of  mastiffs,  bleating  of 
sheep,  prating  of  parrets,  tatling  of  jack-daws, 
grunting  of  swine,  girning  of  boars,  yelping  of 

1  Book  iii.  chaps.  3,  4. 

2  It  is  quite  possible  that  Motteux,  who  published  the  third  book 
of  Rabelais  after  Urquhart's  death,  is  responsible  for  some  of  the 
interpolations. 


204  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

foxes,  mewing  of  cats,  cheeping  of  mice,  squeaking 
of  weasils,  croaking  of  frogs,  crowing  of  cocks, 
kekling  of  hens,  calling  of  partridges,  chanting  of 
swans,  chattering  of  jays,  peeping  of  chickens, 
singing  of  larks,  creaking  of  geese,  chirping  of 
swallows,  clucking  of  moorfowls,  cucking  of  cuckos, 
bumling  of  bees,  rammage  of  hawks,  chirming  of 
linots,  croaking  of  ravens,  screeching  of  owls, 
whicking  of  pigs,  gushing  of  hogs,  curring  of  pigeons, 
grumbling  of  cushet-doves,  howling  of  panthers, 
curkling  of  quails,  chirping  of  sparrows,  crackling 
of  crows,  nuzzing  of  camels,  wheening  of  whelps, 
buzzing  of  dromedaries,  mumbling  of  rabets,  cricking 
of  ferrets,  humming  of  wasps,  mioling  of  tygers, 
bruzzing  of  bears,  sussing  of  kitnings,  clamring  of 
scarfes,  whimpring  of  fullmarts,  boing  of  buffaloes, 
warbling  of  nightingales,  quavering  of  rneavises, 
drintling  of  turkies,  coniating  of  storks,  frantling 
of  peacocks,  clattering  of  mag-pyes,  murmuring  of 
stock- doves,  crouting  of  cormorants,  cigling  of 
locusts,  charming  of  beagles,  guarring  of  puppies, 
snarling  of  messens,  rantling  of  rats,  guerieting  of 
apes,  snuttering  of  monkies,  pioling  of  pelicanes, 
quecking  of  ducks],  yelling  of  wolves,  roaring  of 
lions,  neighing  of  horses,  crying  of  elephants, 
hissing  of  serpents,  and  wailing  of  turtles,  that  he 
was  much  more  troubled  than  if  he  had  been  in 
the  middle  of  the  crowd  at  the  fair  of  Fontenay  or 
Niort."1  In  spite  of  the  amplification  of  the 

1  Book  iii.  chap.  13.  Fontenay  le  Comte  in  Lower  Poitou  and 
Niort  were  noted  for  their  busy  yearly  fairs.  There  can  be  doubt 
that  the  above  passage  was  suggested  to  Rabelais  by  what  St  Jerome 
records  of  the  experience  of  St  Hilarion  in  the  desert.  ' '  Sic  atten- 


EARLIEST  EDITIONS  205 

original  text  of  Kabelais,  two  of  the  sounds  are 
omitted — "  the  braying  of  asses,"  and  the  noise 
made  by  grass-hoppers  (sonnent  les  ciyales),  which 
we  might  have  called  "  chirping,"  if  the  swallows 
and  sparrows  had  not  taken  possession  of  that  term. 
As  already  stated,  the  first  two  books  were  all 
that  were  published  in  the  lifetime  of  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart.  They  appeared  as  separate  volumes  in 
1653.  The  unsold  stock  of  each  was  reissued  in 

tuatus,"  he  says, "  (jojunio  et  vigiliis],  et  in  tantum  exeto  corpore,  ut 
ossibus  vix  haereret,  qnadam  nocte  coepit  infantum  audire  vagitus, 
balatus  pecorum,  mugitus  bourn,  planctnm  quasi  mulierum,  leonum 
rugitus,  murmur  exercitus,  et  prorsus  variarum  portenta  vocurn," 
etc.  ( Vita  Sancti  Hilarionis).  In  Burton's  Anatomy  of  Melan 
choly  (iii.  4.  1.  2)  there  is  the  following  reference  to  the  same 
passage:  "Monks,  Anachorites,  and  the  like,  after  much  empti 
ness  become  melancholy,  vertiginous,  they  think  they  hear 
strange  noises,  confer  with  Hob-goblins,  Devils.  .  .  .  Hilarion, 
as  Hieromc  reports  in  his  life,  and  Athanasius  ofAntonius,  was  so 
bare  with  fasting,  that  the  skin  did  scarce  stick  to  the  bones  ;  for 
want  of  vapours  (sic)  he  could  not  sleep,  and  for  want  of  sleep 
became  idle-headed,  Jward  every  night  infants  cry,  Oxen  Ion; 
Wolves  hmcl,  Lions  roar  (as  he  thought),  clattering  of  chains, 
strange  voices,  and  the  like  illusions  of  Devils."  It  is  probable 
also  that  Rabelais  had  read  the  following  passage  in  the  Life  of 
Octa,  by  ^Elius  Spartianus  (c.  A.D.  317):  "Familiare  illi  fuit 
has  quaestiones  grammaticis  proponere,  ut  dicerent,  singula 
animalia  quomodo  vocem  emitterent,  velut,  Agni  balant,  porcelli 
grunniunt,  palumbes  minurriunt,  ursi  saeviunt,  leones  rugiunt, 
leopardi  rictant,  elephanti  barriunt,  ranae  coaxant,  equi  hinniunt, 
asini  rudunt,  tauri  mugiunt,  casque  de  veteribus  approbare."  Nor 
is  it  likely  that  Rabelais  was  unacquainted  with  the  verses  in  Teofilo 
Foiengo's  (1491-1544)  Merlini  Cocaii  Hacaronicont  which  run  thus  : 
"  Nam  Leo  rugitum  mittit,  Lupus  ac  ululatum, 
Bos  boat,  et  nitrescit  equus,  Gallusque  cucullat, 
Sgnavolat  et  Gattus,  baiat  Canis,  Ursus  adirat, 
Raucagat  Oca,  rudit  Mullus,  sed  raggiat  Asellus  ; 
Denique  quodque  animal  propria  cum  voce  gridabat." 

Macaronea,  xx. 


206  SIR  THOMAS  URQUHART 

1664,  in  one  volume,  an  additional  title-page,  an 
extra  preface,  and  a  life  of  Eabelais  being  prefixed 
to  them.  The  volume  became  very  scarce,  and  in 
1693—94  Pierre  Antoine  Motteux,  a  Frenchman, 
who  was  master  of  exceedingly  racy  and  idiomatic 
English,  published  an  edition  containing  the  third 
Jbook.  This  was  extremely  inaccurate,  so  far  as 
typography  was  concerned,  and  gave  the  public  the 
version  of  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  with  certain 
unspecified  changes  made  by  the  editor  in  order  to 
impart  to  it  additional  "smartness."  In  1708 
Motteux  published  a  complete  translation  of 
Eabelais,  the  version  of  the  fourth  and  fifth  books 
being  supplied  by  himself,1  as  supplementary  to 
Urquhart's  work.  After  the  death  of  Motteux,  a 
somewhat  pretentious  editor  named  Ozell2  brought 
out  the  combined  versions,  with  notes  principally 
taken  from  the  French  of  Duchat,  and  this  has 

1  In  the  introduction  to  this  volume  Motteux  says  that  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart  was  "a  learned  physician."     It  is  difficult  to 
understand  what  could  have  given  rise  to  such  a  statement.     Sir 
Thomas  had  many  projects  for  the  benefit  of  the  human  race,  but 
there  is  no  evidence  of  his  ever  having  cherished  that  of  combating 
disease.     One  cannot  help  thinking  of  the  magniloquent  terms  in 
which  he  would  have  extolled  his  remedies,  if  the  fates  had  led 
him  to  the  concoction  of  patent  medicines.     It  is  doubtful,  how 
ever,  whether  he  would  have  had  what  is  technically  known  as  "a 
good  bed-side  manner."     It  is  quite  possible  that  Motteux  simply 
meant  that  Sir  Thomas  was  well  acquainted  with  medical  science, 
and  not  that  he  was  a  physician  by  profession.     Yet  his  words 
have  often  been  understood  as  asserting  the  latter.     Thus  we  find 
the  erroneous  statement  in  Granger's  Biographical  Dictionary, 
the  Amsterdam  (1741)  edition  of  Rabelais,  and  Sir  John  Hawkins' 
Life  of  Johnson,  p.  294. 

2  Both  Ozell  and  Motteux  figure  in  Pope's  Dunciad,  in  i.  296, 
and  ii.  412,  respectively. 


A  LAST  GLIMPSE 


207 


been    reprinted    time    after    time    since     its    first 
appearance  in   1737. 

At  least  seventeen  editions  of  Urquhart's  work, 
either  by  itself  or  with  Motteux's  supplementary 
matter,  have  been  issued  since  his  day,  and  there  is 
no  sign  of  its  fame  waxing  dim  through  the  lapse  of 
time  ;  and  therefore  the  immortality  after  which  he 
longed  has  in  a  measure  been  won  by  him.  And 
so,  once  more  before  we  take  our  leave  of  him,  we 
look  again  into  the  twilight  of  the  past,  and  see 
his  striking  figure — the  soldier,  the  scholar,  and 
the  author — crowned  with  the  wreath  which  his 
ow.n  hands  have  placed  upon  his  brows,  but  which 
succeeding  generations  declare  him  worthy  to  bear. 


APPENDICES 

I.   PRIMITIVE  FATHERS  AND  MOTHERS  OF   THE 
NAME  OF  URQUHART. 

II.   THE  ADMIRABLE  CRICHTON. 


APPENDIX   1 


THE  NAMES  OF  THE  CHIEFS  OF  THE  NAME  OF 
URQUHART,  AND  OF  THEIR  PRIMITIVE  FATHERS; 
as  by  Authentick  Records  and  Tradition  they 
were  from  time  to  time  through  the  various 
Generations  of  that  Family  successively  con 
veyed,  till  the  present  yeer  1652  (p.  143). 

The  ancestors  of  Sir  Thomas,  for  whose  existence  there  is  evidence  apart 
from  his  assertions,  are  indicated  by  their  names  being  printed  iu  italics.  If 
the  editor  of  the  Tracts  (1774)  were  to  be  believed,  the  italics  would  have  to 
begin  with  George,  No.  138  in  the  list.  The  fact  that  the  names  in  this  list  are 
more  numerous  than  those  in  the  list  which  follows,  is  to  be  explained  by 
brothers  succeeding  each  other  occasionally,  when  there  was  no  son  to  inherit 
the  dignity  of  chieftainship. 


1.  Adam. 

2.  Seth. 

3.  Enos. 

4.  Cainan. 

f>.  Mahalaleel 

6.  Jared. 

7.  Enoch. 

8.  Methusalah. 

9.  Lamech. 

10.  Noah. 

11.  Japhet. 

12.  Javan. 

13.  Penuel. 

14.  Tycheros. 

15.  Pasiteles. 

16.  Esormon. 

17.  Cratynter. 

18.  Thrasymedes. 

19.  Evippos. 

20.  Cleotinus. 

21.  Litoboros. 

22.  Apodemos. 

23.  Bathybulos. 


24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 


Phrenedon. 

Zameles. 

Choronomos. 

Leptologon. 

Aglaetos. 

Megalonus. 

Evemeros. 

Callophron. 

Arthmios. 

Hypsegoras. 

Autarces. 

Evages. 

Atari 

Paraprosodos. 

Gethon. 

Holocleros. 

Molin. 

Epitomon. 

Hypotyphos. 

Melobolon. 

Propetes. 

Euplocamos. 

Philophon. 


212 


APPENDIX  I 


47.  Syngenes. 

48.  Polyphrades. 

49.  Cainotomos, 

50.  Kodrigo. 

51.  Dicarches. 

52.  Exagastos. 

53.  Denapon. 

54.  Artistes. 

55.  Thymoleon. 

56.  Eustoclios. 

57.  Bianor. 

58.  Thryllumenos. 

59.  Mellessen. 

60.  Alypos. 

61.  Anochlos. 

62.  Homognios. 

63.  Epsephicos. 

64.  Eutropos. 

65.  Coryphaeus. 

66.  Etoimos. 

67.  Spudaeos. 

68.  Eumestor. 

69.  Griphon. 

70.  Emmenes. 

71.  Pathomachon. 

72.  Anepsios. 

73.  Auloprepes. 

74.  Corosylos. 

75.  Detalcm. 

76.  Beltistos. 

77.  Horseos. 

78.  Orthophron. 

79.  Apsicoros. 

80.  Philaplus. 

81.  Megaletor. 

82.  Nomostor. 

83.  Astioremon. 

84.  Phronematias. 

85.  Lutork. 

86.  Machemos. 

87.  Stichopseo. 

88.  Epalomenos. 

89.  Tycheros(2). 

90.  Apechon. 

91.  Enacmes. 

92.  Javan  (2). 

93.  Lematias. 


94.  Prosenes. 

95.  Sosomenos. 

96.  Philalethes. 

97.  Thaleros. 

98.  Polysenos. 

99.  Cratesimaclios. 

100.  Eunsemon. 

101.  Diasemos. 

102.  Saphenus. 

103.  Bramoso. 

104.  Celanas. 

105.  Vistoso. 

106.  Polido. 

107.  Lustroso. 

108.  Chrestander. 

109.  Spectabundo. 

110.  Philodulos. 

111.  Paladino. 

112.  Comicello. 

113.  Eegisato. 

114.  Arguto. 

115.  Nicarchos. 

116.  Marsidalio. 

117.  Hedumenos. 

118.  Agenor. 

119.  Diaprepon. 

120.  Stragayo. 

121.  Zeron. 

122.  Poly  teles. 

123.  Vocompos. 

124.  Carolo. 

125.  Endymion. 

126.  Sebastian. 

127.  Lawrence. 

128.  Olipher. 

129.  Quintin. 

130.  Goodwin. 

131.  Frederick. 

132.  Sir  Jaspar. 

133.  Sir  Adam. 

134.  Edward. 

135.  Kichard. 

136.  Sir  Philip. 

137.  Eobert. 

138.  George. 

139.  James. 

140.  David. 


APPENDIX  I 


213 


141.  Francis. 

142.  William. 

143.  Adam. 

144.  John. 

145.  Sir  William. 

146.  William. 

147.  Alexander. 


148.  Thomas. 

149.  Alexander. 

150.  Walter. 

151.  #enn/. 

152.  &V  Thomas. 

153.  Sir  Thomas. 


THE  NAMES  OF  THE  MOTHERS  OF  THE  CHIEFS  OF  THE 
NAME  OF  URQUHART,  AS  ALSO  OF  THE  MOTHERS 
OF  THEIR  PRIMITIVE  FATHERS.  The  authority 
for  the  truth  thereof  being  derived  from  the 
same  Authentick  Kecords  and  Tradition  on 
which  is  grounded  the  above- written  Genealogie 
of  their  male  collaterals. 


1.  Eva. 

2.  Shifka. 

3.  Mahla. 

4.  Bilha. 

5.  Timnah. 

6.  Aholima. 

7.  Zilpa. 

8.  Noema. 

9.  Ada. 

10.  Titea. 

11.  Debora. 

12.  Neginothi. 

13.  Hottir. 

14.  Orpah. 

15.  Axa. 

16.  Narfesia. 

17.  Goshenni. 

18.  Briageta. 

19.  Andronia. 

20.  Pusena. 

21.  Emphaneola. 

22.  Bonaria. 

23.  Peninah. 

24.  Asymbleta. 

25.  Carissa. 

26.  Calaglais. 

27.  Theoglena. 

28.  Pammerisla. 


29.  Floridula. 

30.  Chrysocomis. 

31.  Arrenopas. 

32.  Tharsalia. 

33.  Maia. 

34.  Roma. 

35.  Term  nth. 

36.  Vegeta. 
37-  Callimeris. 

38.  Panthea. 

39.  Gonima. 

40.  Ganymena. 

41.  Thespesia. 

42.  Hypermnestra. 

43.  Horatia. 

44.  Philumena. 

45.  Neopis. 

46.  Thymelica. 

47.  Ephamilla. 

48.  Porrima. 

49.  Lampedo. 

50.  Teleclyta. 

51.  Clarabella. 

52.  Eromena. 

53.  Zocallis. 

54.  Lepida. 

55.  Nicolia. 

56.  Proteusa. 


2I4 


APPENDIX  I 


57.  Gozosa. 

58.  Venusta. 

59.  Prosectica. 

60.  Delotera. 

61.  Tracara. 

62.  Pothina. 

63.  Cordata. 

64.  Aretias. 

65.  Musurga. 

66.  Romalia. 

67.  Orthoiusa. 

68.  Recatada. 

69.  Chariestera. 

70.  Kexenora. 

71.  Philerga. 

72.  Thomyris. 

73.  Varonilla. 

74.  Stranella. 

75.  ^Equanima. 

76.  Barosa. 

77.  Epimona. 

78.  Diosa. 

79.  Bonita. 

80.  Aretusa. 

81.  Bendita. 

82.  Eegalletta. 

83.  Isumena. 

84.  Antaxia. 

85.  Bergola. 

86.  Viracia. 

87.  Dynastis. 

88.  Dalga. 

89.  Eutocusa. 

90.  Corriba. 

91.  Prsecelsa. 

92.  Plausidica. 

93.  Donosa. 

94.  Solicselia. 

95.  Bontadosa. 

96.  Calliparia. 

97.  Creleuca. 

98.  Pancala. 

99.  Dominella. 

100.  Mundala. 

101.  Pamphais. 


102.  Pliiltrusa. 

103.  Meliglena. 

104.  Philetium. 

105.  Tersa. 

106.  Dulcicora. 

107.  Gethosyna. 

108.  Collabella. 

109.  Eucnema. 

110.  Tortolina. 

111.  Ripulita. 

112.  Urbana. 

113.  Lampusa. 

114.  Vistosa. 

115.  Hermosina. 

116.  Bramata. 

117.  Zaglopis. 

118.  Androlema. 

119.  Trastevole. 

120.  Suaviloqua. 

121.  Francoline. 

122.  Matilda. 

123.  Allegra. 

124.  Winnifred. 

125.  Dorothy. 

126.  Lawretta. 

127.  Genivieve. 

128.  Marjory. 

129.  Jane. 

130.  Anne. 

131.  Magdalen. 

132.  Girsel. 

133.  Mary. 

134.  Sophia. 

135.  Eleonore. 

136.  Rosalind. 

137.  Lillias. 

138.  Brigid. 

139.  Agnes. 

140.  Susanna. 

141.  Catherine. 

142.  Hekn. 

143.  Beatrice. 

144.  Elizabeth. 

145.  Elizabeth. 

146.  Christian. 


APPENDIX    II 

THE  ADMIRABLE  CRICHTON  (p.  157). 

"  To  speak  a  little  now  of  his  compatriot  Crichtoun, 
I  hope  will  not  offend  the  ingenuous  reader;  who 
may  know,  by  what  is  already  displayed,  that  it 
cannot  be  heterogeneal  from  the  proposed  purpose, 
to  make  report  of  that  magnanimous  act  atchieved 
by  him  at  the  Duke  of  Mantua's  court,  to  the  honour 
not  only  of  his  own,  but  to  the  eternal  renown  also 
of  the  whole  Isle  of  Britain ;  the  manner  whereof 
was  thus : 

"A  certain  Italian  gentleman,  of  a  mighty,  able, 
strong,  nimble,  and  vigorous  body,  by  nature  fierce, 
cruell,  warlike,  and  audacious,  and  in  the  gladiatory 
art  so  superlatively  expert  and  dextrous,  that  all  the 
most  skilful  teachers  of  Escrime,  and  fencing-masters 
of  Italy,  (which  in  matter  of  choice  professors  in  that 
faculty,  needed  never  as  yet  to  yeild  to  any  nation 
in  the  world),  were  by  him  beaten  to  their  good 
behaviour,  and  by  blows  given  in,  which  they  could 
not  avoid,  enforced  to  acknowledge  him  their  over 
coiner;  bethinking  himself,  how,  after  so  great  a 
conquest  of  reputation,  he  might  by  such  means  be 
very  suddenly  enriched,  he  projected  a  course  of  ex 
changing  the  blunt  to  sharp,  and  the  foiles  into 
tucks.  And  in  this  resolution  providing  a  purse 
full  of  gold,  worth  neer  upon  four  hundred  pounds 
English  money,  traveled  alongst  the  most  especial 
and  considerable  parts  of  Spaine,  France,  the  Low- 


216  APPENDIX  II 

Countryes,  Germany,  Pole,  Hungary,  Greece,  Italy, 
and  other  places,  where  ever  there  was  greatest 
probability  of  encountring  with  the  eagerest  and 
most  atrocious  duellists.  And  immediately  after  his 
arrival  to  any  city  or  town  that  gave  apparent  likeli 
hood  of  some  one  or  other  champion  that  would  enter 
the  lists  and  cope  with  him,  he  boldly  challenged  them 
with  sound  of  trumpet,  in  the  chief  market-place,  to 
adventure  an  equal  sum  of  money  against  that  of 
his,  to  be  disputed  at  the  sword's  point  who  should 
have  both.  There  failed  not  several  brave  men, 
almost  of  all  nations,  who,  accepting  of  his  cartels,were 
not  afraid  to  hazard  both  their  person  and  coine 
against  him ;  but,  (till  he  midled  with  this  Crichtoun), 
so  maine  was  the  ascendant  he  had  above  all  his 
antagonists,  and  so  unlucky  the  fate  of  such  as 
offered  to  scuffle  with  him,  that  all  his  opposing 
combatants,  (of  what  state  or  dominion  soever  they 
were),  who  had  not  lost  both  their  life  and  gold,  were 
glad,  for  the  preservation  of  their  person,  (though 
sometimes  with  a  great  expence  of  blood),  to  leave  both 
their  reputation  and  mony  behind  them.  At  last, 
returning  homewards  to  his  own  country,  loaded  with 
honor  and  wealth,  or  rather  the  spoile  of  the  reputa 
tion  of  those  forraginers,  whom  the  Italians  call  Tra- 
montani,  he,  by  the  way,  after  his  accustomed  manner 
of  abording  other  places,  repaired  to  the  city  of 
Mantua,  where  the  Duke,  (according  to  the  courtesie 
usually  bestowed  on  him  by  other  princes),  vouch 
safed  him  a  protection  and  savegard  for  his  person ; 
he  (as  formerly  he  was  wont  to  do,  by  beat  of  drum, 
sound  of  trumpet,  and  several  printed  papers,  disclos 
ing  his  designe,  battered  on  all  the  chief  gates,  posts, 
and  pillars  of  the  town),  gave  all  men  to  understand, 
that  his  purpose  was  to  challenge,  at  the  single 
rapier,  any  whosoever  of  that  city  or  country,  that 
durst  be  so  bold  as  to  fight  with  him,  provided  he 
would  deposite  a  bag  of  five  hundred  Spanish  pistols 


APPENDIX   II 


217 


over  against  another  of  the  same  value,  which  he 
himself  should  lay  down,  upon  this  condition,  that 
the  enjoyment  of  both  should  be  the  conqueror's 
due.  His  challenge  was  not  long  unanswered,  for 
it  happened,  at  the  same  time,  that  three  of  the  most 
notable  cutters  in  the  world,  (and  so  highly  cryed  up 
for  valour,  that  all  the  bravos  of  the  land  were 
content  to  give  way  to  their  domineering,  how 
insolent  soever  they  should  prove,  because  of  their 
former  constantly  obtained  victories  in  the  field), 
were  all  three  together  at  the  court  of  Mantua,  who, 
hearing  of  such  a  harvest  of  five  hundred  pistols  to 
be  reaped,  (as  they  expected),  very  soon,  and  with 
ease,  had  almost  contested  amongst  themselves  for 
the  priority  of  the  first  encounterer,  but  that  one  of 
my  Lord  Duke's  courtiers  moved  them  to  cast  lots 
for  who  should  be  first,  second,  and  third,  in  case 
none  of  the  former  two  should  prove  victorious. 
Without  more  adoe,  he  whose  chance  it  was  to 
answer  the  cartel  with  the  first  defiance,  presented 
himself  within  the  barriers,  or  place  appointed  for 
the  fight,  where,  his  adversary  attending  him,  as  soon 
as  the  trumpet  sounded  a  charge,  they  jointly  fel  to 
work ;  and,  (because  I  am  not  now  to  amplifie  the 
particulars  of  a  combat),  although  the  dispute  was 
very  hot  for  a  while,  yet,  whose  fortune  it  was  to  be 
first  of  the  three  in  the  field,  had  the  disaster  to  be 
first  of  the  three  that  was  foyled ;  for,  at  last,  with 
a  thrust  in  the  throat,  he  was  killed  dead  upon  the 
ground.  This,  nevertheless,  not  a  whit  dismayed  the 
other  two,  for,  the  nixt  day,  he  that  was  second  in 
the  roll  gave  his  appearance  after  the  same  manner 
as  the  first  had  done,  but  with  no  better  success ;  for 
he  likewise  was  laid  flat  dead  upon  the  place,  by 
means  of  a  thrust  he  received  in  the  heart.  The  last 
of  the  three,  finding  that  he  was  as  sure  of  being 
engaged  in  the  fight  as  if  he  had  been  the  first  in 
order,  pluckt  up  his  heart,  knit  his  spirits  together, 


218  APPENDIX  II 

and,  on  the  day  after  the  death  of  the  second,  most 
couragiously  entering  the  lists,  demeaned  himself  for 
a  while  with  great  activity  and  skill ;  but  at  last,  his 
luck  being  the  same  with  those  that  preceded  him, 
by  a  thrust  in  the  belly,  he  within  four  and  twenty 
hours  after  gave  up  the  ghost.  These  (you  may 
imagine),  were  lamentable  spectacles  to  the  Duke  and 
citie  of  Mantua,  who,  casting  down  their  faces  for 
shame,  knew  not  what  course  to  take  for  reparation 
of  their  honour.  The  conquering  duellist,  proud  of 
a  victory  so  highly  tending  to  both  his  honour  and 
profit,  for  the  space  of  a  whole  fortnight,  or  two 
weeks  together,  marched  daily  along  the  streets  of 
Mantua,  (without  any  opposition  or  controulment), 
like  another  Eomulus  or  Marcellus  in  triumph ; 
which,  the  never  too  much  to  be  admired  Crichtoun 
perceiving,  to  wipe  off  the  imputation  of  cowardise 
lying  upon  the  court  of  Mantua,  to  which  he  had 
but  even  then  arrived,  (although  formerly  he  had 
been  a  domestick  thereof),  he  could  neither  eat  nor 
drink  till  he  had  first  sent  a  challenge  to  the  con 
queror,  appelling  him  to  repair  with  his  best  sword 
in  his  hand,  by  nine  of  the  clock  in  the  morning  of 
the  next  day,  in  presence  of  the  whole  court,  and  in 
the  same  place  where  he  had  killed  the  other  three, 
to  fight  with  him  upon  this  quarrel,  that  in  the  court 
of  Mantua  there  were  as  valiant  men  as  he  ;  and,  for 
his  better  encouragement  to  the  desired  undertaking, 
he  assured  him  that,  to  the  aforesaid  five  hundred 
pistols,  he  would  adjoyn  a  thousand  more,  wishing 
him  to  do  the  like,  that  the  victor,  upon  the  point  of 
his  sword,  might  carry  away  the  richer  bootay.  The 
challenge,  with  all  its  conditions,  is  no  sooner  accepted 
of,  the  time  and  place  mutually  condescended  upon, 
kept  accordingly,  and  the  fifteen  hundred  pistols 
hinc  inde  deposited,  but  of  the  two  rapiers  of  equal 
weight,  length,  and  goodness,  each  taking  one,  in 
presence  of  the  Duke,  Diitchess,  with  all  the  noble- 


APPENDIX  II  219 

men,  ladies,  magnificos,  and  all  the  choicest  of  men, 
women,  and  maids  of  that  citie,  as  soon  as  the  signal 
for  the  duel  was  given,  by  the  shot  of  a  great  piece 
of  ordnance  of  threescore  and  four  pound  ball,  the 
combatants,  with  a  lion-like  animosity,  made  their 
approach  to  one  another,  and,  being  within  distance, 
the  valiant  Crichtouu,  to  make  his  adversary  spend  his 
fury  the  sooner,  betook  himself  to  the  defensive  part ; 
wherein,  for  a  long  time,  he  shewed  such  excellent 
dexterity  in  warding  the  other's  blows,  slighting  his 
falsifyings,  in  breaking  measure,  and  often,  by  the 
agility  of  his  body,  avoiding  his  thrust,  that  he 
seemed  but  to  play,  while  the  other  was  in  earnest. 
The  sweetness  of  Crichtoun's  countenance,  in  the 
hotest  of  the  assault,  like  a  glance  of  lightning  on 
the  hearts  of  the  spectators,  brought  all  the  Italian 
ladies  on  a  sudden  to  be  enamoured  of  him ;  whilst 
the  sternness  of  the  other's  aspect,  he  looking  like  an 
enraged  bear,  would  have  struck  terrour  into  wolves, 
and  affrighted  an  English  mastiff.  Though  they 
were  both  in  their  linens,  (to  wit,  shirts  and  drawers, 
without  any  other  apparel),  and  in  all  outward  con 
veniences  equally  adjusted,  the  Italian,  with  re 
doubling  his  stroaks,  foamed  at  the  mouth  with  a 
cholerick  heart,  and  fetched  a  pantling  breath ;  the 
Scot,  in  sustaining  his  charge,  kept  himself  in  a 
pleasant  temper,  without  passion,  and  made  void  his 
designes ;  he  alters  his  wards  from  tierce  to  quart ; 
he  primes  and  seconds  it,  now  high,  now  lowe,  and 
casts  his  body,  (like  another  Prothee),  into  all  the 
shapes  he  can,  to  spie  an  open  on  his  adversary,  and 
lay  hold  of  an  advantage,  but  all  in  vain ;  for  the 
invincible  Crichtoun,  whom  no  cunning  was  able  to 
surprise,  contrepostures  his  respective  wards,  and, 
with  an  incredible  nimbleness  of  both  hand  and  foot, 
evades  the  intent  and  frustrates  the  invasion.  Now 
is  it,  that  the  never  before  conquered  Italian,  finding 
himself  a  little  faint,  enters  into  a  consideration  that 


220  APPENDIX  II 

he  may  be  over-matched;  whereupon  a  sad  appre 
hension  of  danger  seizing  upon  all  his  spirits,  he 
would  gladly  have  his  life  bestowed  on  him  as  a  gift, 
but  that,  having  never  been  accustomed  to  yield, 
he  knows  not  how  to  beg  it.  Matchless  Crichtoun, 
seeing  it  now  high  time  to  put  a  gallant  catastrophe 
to  that  so  long  dubious  combat,  animated  with  a 
divinely  inspired  servencie  to  fulfil  the  expectation 
of  the  ladies,  and  crown  the  Duke's  illustrious  hopes, 
changeth  his  garb,  falls  to  act  another  part,  and, 
from  defender,  turn  assailant ;  never  did  art  so  grace 
nature,  nor  nature  second  the  precepts  of  art  with  so 
much  liveliness,  and  such  observancie  of  time,  as 
when,  after  he  had  struck  fire  out  of  the  steel  of  his 
enemie's  sword,  and  gained  the  feeble  thereof  with 
the  fort  of  his  own,  by  angles  of  the  strongest  position, 
he  did,  by  geometrical  flourishes  of  straight  and 
oblique  lines,  so  practically  execute  the  speculative 
part,  that,  as  if  there  had  been  Eemoras  and  secret 
charms  in  the  variety  of  his  motion,  the  fierceness  of 
his  foe  was  in  a  trice  transqualified  into  the  numbness 
of  a  pageant.  Then  was  it  that,  to  vindicate  the  re 
putation  of  the  Duke's  family,  and  expiate  the  blood 
of  the  three  vanquished  gentlemen,  he  alonged  a 
stoccade  de  pied  ferme  ;  then  recoyling,  he  advanced 
another  thrust,  and  lodged  it  home;  after  which, 
retiring  again,  his  right  foot  did  beat  the  cadence  of 
the  blow  that  pierced  the  belly  of  this  Italian,  whose 
heart  and  throat  being  hit  with  the  two  former 
stroaks,  these  three  franch  bouts  given  in  upon  the 
back  of  the  other ;  besides  that,  if  lines  were  imagined 
drawn  from  the  hand  that  livered  them,  to  the  places 
which  were  marked  by  them,  they  would  represent  a 
perfect  isosceles  triangle,  with  a  perpendicular  from 
the  top  angle  cutting  the  basis  in  the  middle ;  they 
likewise  give  us  to  understand,  that  by  them  he  was 
to  be  made  a  sacrifice  of  atonement  for  the  slaughter 
of  the  three  aforesaid  gentlemen,  who  were  wounded 


APPENDIX  II  221 

in  the  very  same  parts  of  their  bodies  by  other  such 
three  venees  as  these,  each  whereof  being  mortal ; 
and  his  vital  spirits  exhaling  as  his  blood  gushed  out, 
all  he  spoke  was  this,  That  seeing  he  could  not  live, 
his  comfort  in  dying  was,  that  he  could  not  dye  by 
the  hand  of  a  braver  man ;  after  the  uttering  of 
which  words,  he  expiring,  with  the  shril  clareens  of 
trumpets,  bouncing  thunder  of  artillery,  bethwacked 
beating  of  drums,  universal  clapping  of  hands,  and 
loud  acclamations  of  joy  for  so  glorious  a  victory,  the 
aire  above  them  was  so  rarified  by  the  extremity  of 
the  noise  and  vehement  sound,  dispelling  the  thickest 
and  most  condensed  parts  thereof,  that  (as  Plutarch 
speakes  of  the  Grecians,  when  they  raised  their  shouts 
of  allegress  up  to  the  very  heavens  at  the  hearing  of 
the  gracious  proclamations  of  Paulus  ^Emilius  in 
favour  of  their  liberty),  the  very  sparrows  and  other 
flying  fowls  were  said  to  fall  to  the  ground  for  want 
of  aire  enough  to  uphold  them  in  their  flight. 

"  When  this  sudden  rapture  was  over,  and  all  husht 
into  its  former  tranquility,  the  noble  gallantry  and 
generosity,  beyond  expression,  of  the  inimitable 
Crichtoun,  did  transport  them  all  againe  into  a  new 
exstasie  of  ravishment,  when  they  saw  him  like  an 
angel  in  the  shape  of  a  man,  or  as  another  Mars, 
with  the  conquered  enemie's  sword  in  one  hand,  and 
the  fifteen  hundred  pistols  he  had  gained  in  the 
other,  present  the  sword  to  the  Duke  as  his  due, 
and  the  gold  to  his  high  treasurer,  to  be  disponed 
equally  to  the  three  widows  of  the  three  unfortunate 
gentlemen  lately  slaine,  reserving  only  to  himself 
the  inward  satisfaction  he  conceived,  for  having  so 
opportunely  discharged  his  duty  to  the  House  of 
Mantua. 

"  The  reader  perhaps  will  think  this  wonderful ;  and 
so  would  I  too,  were  it  not  that  I  know,  (as  Sir  Philip 
Sydney  sayes),  that  a  wonder  is  no  wonder  in  a  won 
derful  subject,  and  consequently  not  in  him,  who  for 


222  APPENDIX  II 

his  learning,  judgement,  valour,  eloquence,  beauty, 
and  good-fellowship  was  the  perfectest  result  of  the 
joynt  labour  of  the  perfect  number  of  those  six 
deities,  Pallas,  Apollo,  Mars,  Mercury,  Venus,  and 
Bacchus,  that  hath  been  seen  since  the  dayes  of 
Alcibiades;  for  he  was  reported  to  have  been  in- 
riched  with  a  memory  so  prodigious,  that  any  sermon, 
speech,  harangue,  or  other  manner  of  discourse  of  an 
hour's  continuance,  he  was  able  to  recite  without 
hesitation,  after  the  same  manner  of  gesture  and 
pronuntiation,  in  all  points,  wherewith  it  was  de 
livered  at  first;  and  of  so  stupendious  a  judgment 
and  conception,  that  almost  naturally  he  understood 
quiddities  of  philosophy ;  and  as  for  the  abstrusest 
and  most  researched  mysteries  of  other  disciplines, 
arts,  and  faculties,  the  intentional  species  of  them 
were  as  readily  obvious  to  the  interiour  view  and  per 
spicacity  of  his  mind,  as  those  of  the  common  visible 
colours  to  the  external  sight  of  him  that  will  open 
his  eyes  to  look  upon  them ;  of  which  accomplish 
ment  and  Encyclopedia  of  knowledge,  he  gave  on  a 
time  so  marvelous  a  testimony  at  Paris,  that  the 
words  of  Admirabilis  Scotus,  the  Wonderful  Scot,  in 
all  the  several  tongues  and  idiomes  of  Europ,  were, 
(for  a  great  while  together),  by  the  most  of  the  echos 
resounded  to  the  peircing  of  the  very  clouds.  To  so 
great  a  hight  and  vast  extent  of  praise  did  the  never 
too  much  to  be  extolled  reputation  of  the  seraphick 
wit  of  that  eximious  man  attaine,  for  his  command 
ing  to  be  affixed  programs  on  all  the  gates  of  the 
schooles,  halls,  and  colledges  of  that  famous  univer 
sity,  as  also  on  all  the  chief  pillars  and  posts  standing 
before  the  houses  of  the  most  renowned  men  for 
literature,  resident  within  the  precinct  of  the  walls 
and  suburbs  of  that  most  populous  and  magnificent 
city,  inviting  them  all,  (or  any  whoever  else  versed  in 
any  kinde  of  scholastick  faculty),  to  repaire  at  nine  of 
the  clock  in  the  morning  of  such  a  day,  moneth,  and 


APPENDIX  II  223 

yeer,  as  by  computation  came  to  be  just  six  weeks 
after  the  date  of  the  affixes,  to  the  common  schoole 
of  the  colledge  of  Navarre,1  where,  (at  the  prefixed 
time),  he  should,  (God  willing),  be  ready  to  answer  to 
what  should  be  propounded  to  him  concerning  any 
science,  liberal  art,  discipline,  or  faculty,  practical  or 
theoretick,  not  excluding  the  theological  nor  juris- 
prudential  habits,  though  grounded  but  upon  the 
testimonies  of  God  and  man,  and  that  in  any  of  these 
twelve  languages,2  Hebrew,  Syriack,  Arabick,  Greek, 
Latin,  Spanish,  French,  Italian,  English,  Dutch, 
Flemish,  and  Sclavonian,  in  either  verse  or  prose,  at 
the  discretion  of  the  disputant ;  which  high  enterprise 
and  hardy  undertaking,  by  way  of  challenge  to  the 
learndst  men  in  the  world,  damped  the  wits  of  many 
able  scholars  to  consider  whether  it  was  the  attempt 
of  a  fanatick  spirit,  or  lofty  designe  of  a  well-poised 
judgment ;  yet  after  a  few  days  enquiry  concerning 
him,  when  information  was  got  of  his  incomparable 
endowments,  all  the  choicest  and  most  profound 
philosophers,  mathematicians,  naturalists,  mediciners, 
alchymists,  apothecaries,  surgeons,  doctors  of  both 
civil  and  canon  law,  and  divines  both  for  contro 
versies  and  positive  doctrine,  together  with  the  pri- 
mest  grammarians,  rhetoricians,  logicians,  and  others, 
professors  of  other  arts  and  disciplines  at  Paris, 
plyed  their  studys  in  their  private  eels  for  the  space 
of  a  moneth,  exceeding  hard,  and  with  huge  paines 
and  labor  set  all  their  braines  awork  how  to  contrive 
the  knurriest  arguments,  and  most  difficult  questions 
could  be  devised,  thereby  to  puzzle  him  in  the  re 
solving  of  them,  meander  him  in  his  answers,  put 

1  The  College  of  Navarre  was  founded  by  Jeanne  of  Navarre, 
consort  of  Philippe  the  Fair,  in  1305.     Throughout  the  fourteenth 
and  fifteenth  centuries  it  was  the  foremost  foundation  of  the 
University  of  Paris  (F.  W.  S.). 

2  John  Hill  Burton  points  out  the  somewhat  curious  fact  that, 
among  the  hero's  linguistic  accomplishments,  Gaelic,  which  must 
have  been  talked  at  his  own  door,  does  not  appear. 


224  APPENDIX  II 

him  out  of  his  medium,  and  drive  him  to  a  non  plus ; 
nor  did  they  forget  to  premonish  the  ablest  there  of 
forraign  nations  not  to  be  unprepared  to  dispute 
with  him  in  their  own  material  dialects,  and  that 
sometimes  metrically,  sometimes  otherwayes,  pro 
libitu.1  All  this  while  the  Admirable  Scot,  (for  so 
from  thenceforth  he  was  called),  minding  more  his 
hawking,  hunting,  tilting,  vaulting,  riding  of  well- 
managed  horses,  tossing  of  the  pike,  handling  of  the 
musket,  flourishing  of  colours,  dancing,  fencing,  swim 
ming,  jumping,  throwing  of  the  bar,  playing  at  tennis, 
baloon,  or  long  catch ;  and  sometimes  at  the  house 
games  of  dice,  cards,  playing  at  the  chess,  billiards, 
trou-madam,  and  other  such  like  chamber  sports, 
singing,  playing  on  the  lute  and  other  musical  instru 
ments,  masking,  balling,  reveling ;  and,  which  did  most 
of  all  divert,  or  rather  distract  him  from  his  specula 
tions  and  serious  employments,  being  more  addicted 
to,  and  plying  closer  the  courting  of  handsome  ladyes, 
and  a  jovial  cup  in  the  company  of  bacchanalian 
blades,  then  [than]  the  forecasting  how  to  avoid, 
shun,  and  escape  the  snares,  grins  [gins  ?],  and  nets 
of  the  hard,  obscure,  and  hidden  arguments,  ridles, 
and  demands,  to  be  made,  framed,  and  woven  by  the 
professors,  doctors,  and  others  of  that  thrice-renowned 
university.  There  arose  upon  him  an  aspersion  of 
too  great  proness  to  such  like  debordings  and  youth 
ful  emancipations,  which  occasioned  one  less  ac 
quainted  with  himself  then  [than]  his  reputation,  to 
subjoyn,  (some  two  weeks  before  the  great  day 
appointed),  to  that  program  of  his,  which  was  fixed 
on  the  Sorbone  gate,  these  words:  'If  you  would 
meet  with  this  monster  of  perfection,  to  make  search 
for  him  ...  in  the  taverne  ...  is  the  readyest  way 
to  finde  him/  By  reason  of  which  expression, 
(though  truly  as  I  think,  both  scandalous  and  false), 
the  eminent  sparks  of  the  university,  (imagining  that 

1  In  the  matter  of  length  this  is  surely  a  record  sentence. 


APPENDIX  II  225 

those  papers  of  provocation  had  been  set  up  to  no 
other  end,  but  to  scoff  and  delude  them,  in  making 
them  waste  their  spirits  upon  quirks  and  quiddities, 
more  then  [than]  was  fitting),  did  resent  a  little  of 
their  former  toyle,  and  slack  their  studyes,  becoming 
almost  regardless  thereof,  till  the  several  peals  of 
bells  ringing  an  hour  or  two  before  the  time  assigned, 
gave  warning  that  the  party  was  not  to  flee  the 
barriers,  nor  decline  the  hardship  of  academical 
assaults;  but,  on  the  contrary,  so  confident  in  his 
former  resolution,  that  he  would  not  shrink  to  sus- 
taine  the  shock  of  all  their  disceptations.  This 
sudden  alarm  so  awaked  them  out  of  their  last  fort 
night's  lethargy,  that,  calling  to  minde,  the  best  way 
they  might,  the  fruits  of  the  foregoing  moneth's 
labour,  they  hyed  to  the  fore-named  schoole  with  all 
diligence ;  where,  after  all  of  them  had,  according  to 
their  several  degrees  and  qualities,  seated  themselves, 
and  that  by  reason  of  the  noise  occasioned  through 
the  great  confluence  of  people,  which  so  strange  a 
novelty  brought  thither  out  of  curiosity,  an  universal 
silence  was  commanded,  the  Orator  of  the  University, 
in  most  fluent  Latine,  addressing  his  speech  to 
Crichtoun,  extolled  him  for  his  literature,  and  other 
good  parts,  and  for  that  confident  opinion  he  had  of 
his  own  sufficiency,  in  thinking  himself  able  to  justle 
in  matters  of  learning  with  the  whole  university  of 
Paris.  Crichtoun  answering  him  in  no  less  eloquent 
terms  of  Latine,  after  he  had  most  heartily  thanked 
him  for  his  elogies,  so  undeservedly  bestowed,  and 
darted  some  high  encomiums  upon  the  university 
and  the  professors  therein;  he  very  ingeniously 
[ingenuously]  protested  that  he  did  not  emit  his 
programs  out  of  any  ambition  to  be  esteemed  able  to 
enter  in  competition  with  the  university,  but  meerly 
to  be  honoured  with  the  favour  of  a  publick  confer 
ence  with  the  learned  men  thereof.  In  complements 
after  this  manner,  ultra  citroque  habitis,  tossed  to  and 

15 


226  APPENDIX  II 

again,  retorted,  contrerisposted,  backreverted,  and 
now  and  then  graced  with  a  quip  or  a  clinch  for  the 
better  relish  of  the  ear,  being  unwilling  in  this  kind 
of  straining  curtesie  to  yeeld  to  other,  they  spent  a 
full  half  hour  and  more ;  for  he  being  the  centre  to 
which  the  innumerable  diameters  of  the  discourses 
of  that  circulary  convention  did  tend,  although  none 
was  to  answer  but  he,  any  of  them  all,  according  to 
the  order  of  their  prescribed  series,  were  permitted 
to  reply,  or  commence  new  motions  on  any  subject, 
in  what  language  soever,  and  howsoever  expressed ; 
to  all  which,  he  being  bound  to  tender  himself  a 
respondent,  in  matter  and  form  suitable  to  the  im- 
pugners  propounding,  he  did  first  so  transcendently 
acquit  himself  of  that  circumstantial  kinde  of  oratory, 
that,  by  well-couched  periods,  and  neatly  running 
syllables,  in  all  the  twelve  languages,  both  in  verse 
and  prose,  he  expressed  to  the  life  his  courtship 
[courtliness]  and  civility ;  and  afterwards,  when  the 
Rector  of  the  university,  (unwilling  to  have  any  more 
time  bestowed  on  superficial  rhetorick,  or  to  have 
that  wasted  on  the  fondness  of  quaint  phrases,  which 
might  be  better  employed  in  a  reciprocacy  of  dis 
cussing  scientifically  the  nature  of  substantial  things), 
gave  direction  to  the  professors  to  fall  on,  each 
according  to  the  dignity  or  precedency  of  his  faculty, 
and  that  conform  to  the  order  given.  Some  meta 
physical  notions  were  set  abroach,  then  mathematical, 
and  of  those  arithmetical,  geometrical,  astronomical, 
musical,  optical,  cosmographical,  trigonometrical, 
statical,  and  so  forth  through  all  the  other  branches 
of  the  prime  and  mother  sciences  thereof ;  the  next 
bout  was  through  all  natural  philosophy,  according 
to  Aristotle's  method,  from  the  acroamaticks,  going 
along  the  speculation  of  the  nature  of  the  heavens, 
and  that  of  the  generation  and  corruption  of  sub- 
linary  things,  even  to  the  consideration  of  the  soul 
and  its  faculties ;  in  sequel  hereof,  they  had  a  hint 


APPENDIX  II 


227 


at  chymical  extractions,  and  spoke  of  the  principles 
of  corporeal  and  mixed  bodies,  according  to  the  pre 
cepts  of  that  art.  After  this,  they  disputed  of 
medicine,  in  all  its  thereapeutick,  pharmacopeutick, 
and  chirurgical  parts ;  and  not  leaving  natural  magick 
untouched,  they  had  exquisite  disceptations  concern 
ing  the  secrets  thereof.  From  thence  they  proceeded 
to  moral  philosophy,  where,  debating  of  the  true 
enumeration  of  all  vertues  and  vices,  they  had  most 
learned  ratiocinations  about  the  chief  good  of  the  life 
of  man;  and  seeing  the  [that]  cecumenicks  and 
politicks  are  parts  of  that  philosophy,  they  argued 
learnedly  of  all  the  several  sorts  of  governments, 
with  their  defects  and  advantages ;  whereupon  per 
pending,  that,  without  an  established  law,  all  the 
duties  of  ruling  and  subjection,  to  the  utter  ruin  of 
humane  society,  would  be  as  often  violated  as  the 
irregularity  of  passion,  seconded  with  power,  should 
give  way  thereto.  The  Sorbonist,  canonical,  and 
civilian  doctors  most  judiciously  argued  with  him 
about  the  most  prudential  maximes,  sentences,  ordin 
ances,  acts,  and  statutes  for  ordering  all  manner  of 
persones  in  their  consciences,  bodyes,  fortunes,  and 
reputation ;  nor  was  there  an  end  put  to  those 
literate  exercitations  till  the  grammarians,  rhetori 
cians,  poets,  and  logicians  had  assailed  him  with  all 
the  subtleties  and  nicest  quodlibets  their  respective 
habits  could  afford.  Now  when,  to  the  admiration 
of  all  that  were  there,  the  incomparable  Crichtoun 
had,  in  all  these  faculties  above  written,  and  in  any 
of  the  twelve  languages  wherein  he  was  spoke  to, 
whether  in  verse  or  prose,  held  tack  to  all  the  dis 
putants,  who  were  accounted  the  ablest  scholars 
upon  earth  in  each  their  own  profession ;  and  pub- 
lickly  evidenced  such  an  universality  of  knowledge, 
and  accurate  promptness  in  resolving  of  doubts,  dis 
tinguishing  of  obscurities,  expressing  the  members 
of  a  distinction  in  adequate  terms  of  art,  explaining 


228  APPENDIX  II 

those  compendious  tearms  with  words  of  a  more 
easie  apprehension  to  the  prostrating  of  the  sublimest 
mysteries  to  any  vulgar  capacity,  and  with  all 
excogitable  variety  of  learning,  (to  his  own  everlasting 
fame),  entertained,  after  that  kinde,  the  nimble  witted 
Parisians  from  nine  o'clock  in  the  morning  till  six 
at  night ;  the  Eector  now  finding  it  high  time  to  give 
some  relaxation  to  these  worthy  spirits,  which,  dur 
ing  such  a  long  space,  had  been  so  intensively  bent 
upon  the  abstrusest  speculations,  rose  up,  and  saluting 
the  divine  Crichtoun,  after  he  had  made  an  elegant 
panegyrick,  or  encomiastick  speech  of  half  an  houre's 
continuance,  tending  to  nothing  else  but  the  extolling 
of  him  for  the  rare  and  most  singular  gifts  wherewith 
God  and  nature  had  endowed  him,  lie  descended 
from  his  chaire,  and,  attended  by  three  or  four  of 
the  most  especial  professors,  presented  him  with  a 
diamond  ring  and  a  purse  ful  of  gold,  wishing  him  to 
accept  thereof,  if  not  as  a  recompense  proportional 
to  his  merit,  yet  as  a  badge  of  love,  and  testimony  of 
the  universitie's  favour  towards  him.  At  the  tender 
of  which  ceremony,  there  was  so  great  a  plaudite  in 
the  schoole,  such  a  humming  and  clapping  of  hands, 
that  all  the  concavities  of  the  colledges  there  about 
did  resound  with  the  echo  of  the  noise  thereof. 

"  Notwithstanding  the  great  honor  thus  purchased 
by  him  for  his  literatory  accomplishments,  and  that 
many  excellent  spirits,  to  obteine  the  like,  would  be 
content  to  postpose  all  other  employments  to  the 
enjoyment  of  their  studyes,  he,  nevertheless,  the  very 
next  day,  (to  refresh  his  braines,  as  he  said,  for  the 
toile  of  the  former  day's  work),  went  to  the  Louvre  in 
a  buff-suit,  more  like  a  favourite  of  Mars  then  [than] 
one  of  the  Muses'  minions;  where,  in  presence  of 
some  princes  of  the  court,  and  great  ladies,  that 
came  to  behold  his  gallantry,  he  carryed  away  the 
ring  fifteen  times  on  end,  and  broke  as  many  lances 
on  the  Saracen. 


APPENDIX  II 


229 


"  When  for  a  quarter  of  a  yeer  together  he  after 
this  manner  had  disported  himself,  (what  martially, 
what  scholastically),  with  the  best  qualified  men  in 
any  faculty  so  ever,  that  so  large  a  city,  (which  is 
called  the  world's  abridgement),  was  able  to  afford, 
and  now  and  then  solaced  these  his  more  serious 
recreations,  (for  all  was  but  sport  to  him),  with  the 
alluring  imbellishments  of  the  teudrer  sexe,  whose 
inamorato  that  he  might  be,  was  their  ambition ;  he 
on  a  sudden  took  resolution  to  leave  the  Court  of 
France,  and  return  to  Italy,  where  he  had  been  bred 
for  many  yeers  together;  which  designe  he  pro 
secuting  within  the  space  of  a  moneth,  (without 
troubling  himself  with  long  journeys),  he  arrived  at 
the  Court  of  Mantua,  where  immediately  after  his 
abord,  (as  hath  been  told  already),  he  fought  the 
memorable  combat  whose  description  is  above 
related.  Here  it  was  that  the  learned  and  valiant 
Crichtoun  was  pleased  to  cast  anchor,  and  fix  his 
abode ;  nor  could  he  almost  otherwise  do,  without 
disobliging  the  Duke,  and  the  Prince  his  eldest  son ; 
by  either  whereof  he  was  so  dearly  beloved,  that 
none  of  them  would  permit  him  by  any  means  to 
leave  their  Court,  whereof  he  was  the  only  privado, 
the  object  of  all  men's  love,  and  subject  of  their 
discourse ;  the  example  of  the  great  ones,  and 
wonder  of  the  meaner  people ;  the  paramour  of  the 
female  sexe,  and  paragon  of  his  own.  In  the  glory 
of  which  high  estimation,  having  resided  at  that 
Court  above  two  whole  yeers,  the  reputation  of 
gentlemen  there  was  hardly  other  way  es  valued  but 
by  the  measure  of  his  acquaintance ;  nor  were  the 
young  unmaryed  ladies,  of  all  the  most  eminent 
places  thereabouts,  any  thing  respected  of  one 
another,  that  had  not  either  a  lock  of  his  hair,  or 
copy  of  verses  of  his  composing.  Nevertheless  it 
happening  on  a  Shrove- tuesday  at  night,  (at  which 
time  it  is  in  Italy  very  customary  for  men  of  great 


230  APPENDIX  II 

sobriety,  modesty,  and  civil  behaviour  aii  the  rest  of 
the  yeer,  to  give  themselves  over  on  that  day  of 
carnavale,  as  they  call  it,  to  all  manner  of  riot, 
drunkenness,  and  incontinency,  which  that  they  may 
do  with  the  least  imputation  they  can  to  their  credit, 
they  go  maskt  and  muru'd  with  vizards  on  their  faces, 
and  in  the  disguise  of  a  Zanni  or  Pantaloon,  to 
ventilate  their  fopperies,  and  sometimes  intolerable 
enormities,  without  suspicion  of  being  known),  that 
this  ever  renowned  Crichtoun,  (who,  in  the  after 
noon  of  that  day,  at  the  desire  of  my  Lord  Duke,  the 
whole  court  striving  which  should  exceed  each  other 
in  foolery,  and  devising  of  the  best  sports  to  excite 
laughter,  neither  my  Lord,  the  Dutchess,  nor  Priuce, 
being  exempted  from  acting  their  parts,  as  well  as 
they  could),  upon  a  theater  set  up  for  the  purpose, 
begun  to  prank  it,  a  la  Venetiana,  with  such  a 
flourish  of  mimick  and  ethopoetick  gestures,  that  all 
the  courtiers  of  both  sexes,  even  those  that  a  little 
before  were  fondest  of  their  own  conceits,  at  the  sight 
of  his  so  inimitable  a  garb,  from  ravishing  actors  that 
they  were  before,  turned  them  ravished  spectators. 
0  with  how  great  liveliness  did  he  represent  the  con 
ditions  of  all  manner  of  men  !  how  naturally  did  he 
set  before  the  eyes  of  the  beholders  the  rogueries  of 
all  professions,  from  the  overweening  monarch  to  the 
peevish  swaine,  through  all  the  intermediate  degrees 
of  the  superficial  courtier  or  proud  warrior,  dis 
sembled  churchman,  doting  old  man,  cozening  lawyer, 
lying  traveler,  covetous  merchant,  rude  seaman, 
pedantick  scholar,  the  amourous  shepheard,  envious 
artisan,  vainglorious  master,  and  tricky  servant ;  he 
did  with  such  variety  display  the  several  humours  of 
all  these  sorts  of  people,  and  with  a  so  bewitching 
energy,  that  he  seemed  to  be  the  original,  they  the 
counterfeit;  and  they  the  resemblance  whereof  he 
was  the  prototype.  He  had  all  the  jeers,  squibs, 
flouts,  buls,  quips,  taunts,  whims,  jests,  clinches, 


APPENDIX  II 


231 


gybes,  mokes,  jerks,  with  all  the  several  kinds  of 
equivocations,  and  other  sophistical  captions,  that 
could  properly  be  adapted  to  the  person  by  whose 
representation  he  intended  to  inveagle  the  company 
into  a  fit  of  mirth ;  and  would  keep  in  that  miscelany 
discourse  of  his,  (which  was  all  for  the  splene,  and 
nothing  for  the  gall),  such  a  climacterical  and  mer- 
curially  digested  method,  that  when  the  fancy  of  the 
hearers  was  tickled  with  any  rare  conceit,  and  that 
the  jovial  blood  was  moved,  he  held  it  going  with 
another  new  device  upon  the  back  of  the  first,  and 
another,  yet  another,  and  another  againe,  succeeding 
one  another  for  the  promoval  of  what  is  a-stirring 
into  a  higher  agitation;  till  in  the  closure  of  the 
luxuriant  period,  the  decumanal  wave  of  the  oddest 
whimsy  of  all,  enforced  the  charmed  spirits  of  the 
auditory,  (for  affording  room  to  its  apprehension), 
suddenly  to  burst  forth  into  a  laughter,  which 
commonly  lasted  just  so  long  as  he  had  leisure  to 
withdraw  behind  the  skreen,  shift  off,  with  the  help 
of  a  page,  the  suite  he  had  on,  apparel  himself  with 
another,  and  return  to  the  stage  to  act  afresh ;  for 
by  that  time  their  transported,  disparpled,  and 
sublimated  fancies,  by  the  wonderfully  operating 
engines  of  his  solacious  inventions,  had  from  the 
hight  to  which  the  inward  scrues,wheeles,  and  pullies 
of  his  wit  had  elevated  them,  descended  by  degrees 
into  their  wonted  stations,  he  was  ready  for  the 
personating  of  another  carriage;  whereof  to  the 
number  of  fourteen  several  kinds,  (during  the  five 
hours  space  that  at  the  Duke's  desire,  the  solicitation 
of  the  court,  and  his  own  recreation,  he  was  pleased 
to  histrionize  it),  he  shewed  himself  so  natural  a 
representative,  that  any  would  have  thought  he  had 
been  so  many  several  actors,  differing  in  all  things 
else,  save  only  the  stature  of  the  body ;  with  this 
advantage  above  the  most  of  other  actors,  whose 
tongue,  with  its  oral  implements,  is  the  onely  instru- 


233.  APPENDIX  II 

ment  of  their  minds'  disclosing,  that,  besides  his 
mouth  with  its  appurtenances,  he  lodged  almost  a 
several  oratour  in  every  member  of  his  body ;  his 
head,  his  eyes,  his  shoulder,  armes,  hands,  fingers, 
thighs,  legs,  feet,  and  breast,  being  able  to  decipher 
any  passion  whose  character  he  purposed  to  give. 

"  First,  he  did  present  himself  with  a  crown  on  his 
head,  a  scepter  in  his  hand,  being  clothed  in  a  purple 
robe  furred  with  ermyne ;  after  that,  with  a  miter  on 
his  head,  a  crosier  in  his  hand,  and  accoutred  with  a 
paire  of  lawn-sleeves  ;  and  thereafter,  with  a  helmet 
on  his  head,  the  visiere  up,  a  commanding  stick  in 
his  hand,  and  arayed  in  a  buff-suit,  with  a  scarf 
about  his  middle.  Then,  in  a  rich  apparel,  after  the 
newest  fashion,  did  he  shew  himself,  (like  another 
Sejanus),  with  a  periwig  daubed  with  Cypres  powder ; 
in  sequel  of  that,  he  came  out  with  a  three-corner'd 
cap  on  his  head,  some  parchments  in  his  hand,  and 
writings  hanging  at  his  girdle  like  Chancery  bills; 
and  next  to  that,  with  a  furred  gown  about  him,  an 
ingot  of  gold  in  his  hand,  and  a  bag  full  of  money  by 
his  side ;  after  all  this,  he  appeares  againe  clad  in  a 
country-jacket,  with  a  prong  in  his  hand,  and  a 
Monmouth-like-cap  on  his  head ;  then  very  shortly 
after,  with  a  palmer's  coat  upon  him,  a  bourdon  in 
his  hand,1  and  some  few  cockle-shels  stuck  to  his 
hat,  he  look'd  as  if  he  had  come  in  pilgrimage  from 
St  Michael;  immediately  after  that,  he  domineers 
it  in  a  bare  unlined  gown,  with  a  pair  of  whips  in  the 
one  hand,  and  Corderius  in  the  other ;  and  in  suite 
thereof,  he  honderspondered 2  it  with  a  pair  of 
pannier-like  breeches,  a  mountera-cap  on  his  head, 
and  a  knife  in  a  wooden  sheath  dagger-ways  by  his 

1  '  'A  bourdon  in  his  hand  " — "A  musical  instrument  resembling  a 
bassoon,  in  use  with  pilgrims  who  visit  the  body  of  St  James  at 
Compostella  "  (Sir  John  Hawkins). 

2  "Honderspondercd  " — i.e.  floundered.    Fr.  hondrespoiidres  (Eajo. 
iii.  42) — "hundred -pounders,"  heavy,  burly  fellows. 


APPENDIX  II 


233 


side ;  about  the  latter  end,  he  comes  forth  again  with 
a  square  in  one  hand,  a  rule  in  the  other,  and  a 
leather  apron  before  him ;  then  very  quickly  after, 
with  a  scrip  by  his  side,  a  sheep-hook  in  his  hand, 
and  a  basket  full  of  flowers  to  make  nosegayes  for  his 
mistris ;  now  drawing  to  a  closure,  he  rants  it  first 
in  cuerpoy  and  vapouring  it  with  gingling  spurs,  and 
his  armes  a  kenbol  like  a  Don  Diego  he  strouts  it, 
and  by  the  loftiness  of  his  gate,  plaies  the  Capitan 
Spavento ;  then  in  the  very  twinkling  of  an  eye,  you 
would  have  seen  him  againe  issue  forth  with  a  cloak 
upon  his  arm,  in  a  livery  garment,  thereby  repre 
senting  the  serving-man ;  and  lastly,  at  one  time 
amongst  those  other,  he  came  out  with  a  long  gray 
beard,  and  bucked  ruff,  crouching  on  a  staff  tip't  with 
the  head  of  a  barber's  cithern,1  and  his  gloves 
hanging  by  a  button  at  his  girdle. 

"  Those  fifteen  several  personages  did  he  represent 
with  such  excellency  of  garb,  and  exquisiteness  of 
language,  that  condignely  to  perpend  the  subtlety  of 
the  invention,  the  method  of  the  disposition,  the 
neatness  of  the  elocution,  the  gracefulness  of  the 
action,  and  wonderful  variety  in  the  so  dextrous 
performance  of  all,  you  would  have  taken  it  for  a 
comedy  of  five  acts,  consisting  of  three  scenes,  each 
composed  by  the  best  poet  in  the  world,  and  acted 
by  fifteen  of  the  best  players  that  ever  lived,  as  was 
most  evidently  made  apparent  to  all  the  spectators 
in  the  fifth  and  last  hour  of  his  action,  (which,  accord 
ing  to  our  western  account,  was  about  six  a  clock  at 
night,  and  by  the  calculation  of  that  country,  half  an 
hour  past  three  and  twenty,  at  that  time  of  the  yeer), 
for,  purposing  to  leave  off  with  the  setting  of  the 
sun,  with  an  endeavour  nevertheless  to  make  his 

1  "Barber's  cithern" — "The  instrument  now  ignorantly  called  a 
guitar.  It  was  formerly  part  of  the  furniture  of  a  barber's  shop, 
and  was  the  amusement  of  waiting  customers "  (Sir  John 
Hawkins). 


234  APPENDIX  II 

conclusion  the  master-piece  of  the  work,  he,  to  that 
effect,  summoning  all  his  spirits  together,  which 
never  failed  to  be  ready  at  the  cal  of  so  worthy  a 
commander,  did  by  their  assistance,  so  conglomerate, 
shuffle,  mix,  and  interlace  the  gestures,  inclinations, 
actions,  and  very  tones  of  the  speech  of  those  fifteen 
several  sorts  of  men,  whose  carriages  he  did  person 
ate  into  an  inestimable  ollapodrida  of  immaterial 
morsels  of  divers  kinds,  suitable  to  the  very 
ambrosian  relish  of  the  Heliconian  nymphs,  that, 
in  the  peripetia  of  this  drammatical  exercitation, 
by  the  inch  an  ted  transportation  of  the  eyes  and 
eares  of  its  spectabundal  auditorie,  one  would  have 
sworne  that  they  all  had  looked  with  multiplying 
glasses,  and  that,  (like  that  angel  in  the  Scripture 
whose  voice  was  said  to  be  like  the  voice  of  a 
multitude),  they  heard  in  him  alone  the  promiscuous 
speech  of  fifteen  several  actors ;  by  the  various 
ravishments  of  the  excellencies  whereof,  in  the 
frolickness  of  a  jocund  straine  beyond  expectation, 
the  logofascinated  spirits  of  the  beholding  hearers 
and  auricularie  spectators,  were  so  on  a  sudden 
seazed  upon  in  their  risible  faculties  of  the  soul, 
and  all  their  vital  motions  so  universally  affected 
in  this  extremitie  of  agitation,  that,  to  avoid  the 
inevitable  charmes  of  his  intoxicating  ejaculations, 
and  the  accumulative  influences  of  so  powerfull  a 
transportation,  one  of  my  lady  Dutchess'  chief 
maids  of  honour,  by  the  vehemencie  of  the  shock  of 
those  incomprehensible  raptures,  burst  forth  into  a 
laughter  to  the  rupture  of  a  veine  in  her  body;  and 
another  young  lady,  by  the  irresistible  violence  of 
the  pleasure  unawares  infused,  where  the  tender 
receptibilitie  of  her  too  tickled  fancie  was  least  able 
to  hold  out,  so  unprovidedly  was  surprised,  that, 
with  no  less  impetuositie  of  ridibundal  passion 
then  [than],  (as  hath  been  told),  occasioned  a  fracture 
in  the  other  young  ladle's  modestie,  she,  not  being 


APPENDIX  II  235 

able  longer  to  support  the  well  beloved  burthen  of 
so  excessive  delight,  and  intransing  joys  of  such 
mercurial  exhilations  through  the  ineffable  extasie 
of  an  overmastered  apprehension,  fell  back  in  a 
swown,  without  the  appearance  of  any  other  life 
into  her  then  [than]  what,  by  the  most  refined  wits 
of  theological  speculators,  is  conceived  to  be  exerced 
by  the  purest  parts  of  the  separated  entelechises  of 
blessed  saints  in  their  sublimes t  conversations  with 
the  celestial  hierarchies ;  this  accident  procured  the 
incoming  of  an  apothecary  with  restoratives,  as  the 
other  did  that  of  a  surgeon  with  consolidative  medica 
ments.1  The  Admirable  Crichtoun  now  perceiving 
that  it  was  drawing  somewhat  late,  and  that  our 
occidental  rays  of  Phoebus  were  upon  their  turning 
oriental  to  the  other  hemisphere  of  the  terrestrial 
globe ;  being  withall  jealous  that  the  uninterrupted 
operation  of  the  exuberant  diversitie  of  his  jovial- 
issime  entertainment,  by  a  continuate  winding  up  of 
the  humours  there  present  to  a  higher,  yet  higher, 
and  still  higher  pitch,  above  the  supremest  Lydian 
note  of  the  harmonie  of  voluptuousness,  should,  in 
such  a  case,  through  the  too  intensive  stretching  of 
the  already  super-elated  strings  of  their  imagination, 

1  This  incident  reminds  one  of  the  effect  produced  upon  the 
lawyers  in  court  when  "Pantagruel  gave  judgment  upon  the 
difference  of  the  two  lords."  Our  readers  will  remember  that  it 
is  the  author  of  the  above  description  who  is  the  translator  of  the 
narrative  which  tells  of  that  wonderfully  satisfactory  decision. 
"As  for  the  counsellors,  and  other  doctors  in  the  law  that  were 
there  present,  they  were  all  so  ravished  with  admiration  at  the 
more  than  humane  wisdom  of  Pantagruel,  which  they  did  most 
clearly  perceive  to  be  in  him,  by  his  so  accurate  decision  of  this  so 
difficult  and  thornie  cause,  that  their  spirits,  with  the  extremity  of 
the  rapture,  being  elevated  above  the  pitch  of  actuating  the  organs 
of  the  body,  they  fell  into  a  trance  and  sudden  extasie,  wherein 
they  stayed  for  the  space  of  three  long  houres  ;  and  had  been  so  as 
yet,  in  that  condition,  had  not  some  good  people  fetched  store  of 
vinegar  and  rose  water  to  bring  them  again  into  their  former 
sense  and  understanding,  for  the  which  God  be  praised  every 
where.  And  so  be  it."  (Rttbelais,  ii.  13.) 


236  APPENDIX  II 

with  a  transeendeucie  over-reaching  Ela,  and  beyond 
the  well  concerted  gam  of  rational  equanimitie,  in 
volve  the  remainder  of  that  illustrious  companie  into 
the  sweet  labyrinth  and  mellifluent  aufractuosities  of 
a  lacinious  delectation,  productive  of  the  same  incon 
veniences  which  befel  the  two  afore-named  ladies ; 
whose  delicacie  of  constitution,  though  sooner  over 
come,  did  not  argue,  but  that  the  same  extranean 
causes  from  him  proceeding  of  their  pathetick  altera 
tion,  might  by  a  longer  insisting  in  an  efficacious 
agencie,  and  unremitted  working  of  all  the  consecu 
tively  imprinted  degrees  that  the  capacity  of  the 
patient  is  able  to  containe,  prevaile  at  last,  and  have 
the  same  predominancie  over  the  dispositions  of  the 
strongest  complexioned  males  of  that  splendid  society, 
did,  in  his  own  ordinary  wearing  apparel,  with  the 
countenance  of  a  Prince,  and  garb  befitting  the 
person  of  a  so  well  bred  gentleman  and  cavalier, 
Kar  Igo^jj^full  of  majestie,  and  repleat  with  all  excogit- 
able  civilitie,  (to  the  amazement  of  all  that  beheld 
his  heroick  gesture),  present  himself  to  epilogate  this 
his  almost  ex,temporanean  comedie,  though  of  five 
hours  continuance  without  intermission;  and  that 
with  a  peroration  so  neatly  uttered,  so  distinctly 
pronounced,  and  in  such  elegancie  of  selected  tearmes, 
expressed  by  a  diction  so  periodically  contexed  with 
isocoly  of  members,  that  the  matter  thereof  tending 
in  all  humility  to  beseech  the  highnesses  of  the 
Duke,  Prince,  and  Dutchess,  together  with  the 
remanent  lords,  ladies,  knights,  gentlemen,  and 
others  of  both  sexes  of  that  honourable  convention, 
to  vouchsafe  him  the  favour  to  excuse  his  that  after 
noon's  escaped  extravagancies,  and  to  lay  the  blame 
of  the  indigested  irregularity  of  his  wits'  excursions, 
and  the  abortive  issues  of  his  disordered  brain,  upon 
the  customarily  dispensed  with  priviledges  in  those 
Cis.alpinal  regions,  to  authorize  such  like  impertin- 
encies  at  Carnavalian  festivals ;  arid  that,  although, 


APPENDIX  II  237 

according  to  the  most  commonly  received  opinion  in 
that  country,  after  the  nature  of  Load-him,  (a  game 
at  cards),  where  he  that  wins  loseth,  he  who,  at  that 
season  of  the  year,  playeth  the  fool  most  egregiously, 
is  reputed  the  wisest  man ;  he,  nevertheless,  not 
being  ambitious  of  the  fame  of  enjoying  good  qual 
ities,  by  vertue  of  the  antiphrasis  of  the  fruition  of 
bad  ones,  did  meerly  undergo  that  emancipatorie 
task  of  a  so  profuse  liberty,  and  to  no  other  end 
embraced  the  practising  of  such  roaming  and  ex 
orbitant  diversions  but  to  give  an  evident,  or  rather 
infallible,  demonstration  of  his  eternally  bound  duty 
to  the  House  of  Mantua,  and  an  inviolable  testimony 
of  his  never  to  be  altered  designe,  in  prosecuting  all 
the  occasions  possible  to  be  laid  hold  on  that  can  in 
any  manner  of  way  prove  conducible  to  the  advance 
ment  of,  and  contributing  to,  the  readiest  means  for 
improving  those  advantages  that  may  best  promove 
the  faculties  of  making  all  his  choice  endeavours, 
and  utmost  abilities  at  all  times,  effectual  to  the 
long-wished-for  furtherance  of  his  most  cordial  and 
endeared  service  to  the  serenissime  highnesses  of 
My  Lord  Duke,  Prince,  and  Dutchess,  and  of  conse 
crating  with  all  addicted  obsequiousness,  and  sub 
missive  devotion,  his  everlasting  obedience  to  the 
illustrious  shrine  of  their  joynt  commands.  Then 
incontinently  addressing  himself  to  the  Lords,  ladies, 
and  others  of  that  rotonda,  (which,  for  his  daigning 
to  be  its  inmate,  though  but  for  that  day,  might  be 
accounted  in  nothing  inferior  to  the  great  Colisee  of 
Eome,  or  Amphitheater  of  Neems),  with  a  stately 
carriage,  and  port  suitable  to  so  prime  a  gallant,  he 
did  cast  a  look  on  all  the  corners  thereof,  so  bewitch- 
ingly  amiable  and  magically  efficacious  as  if  in  his 
eys  had  bin  a  muster  of  ten  thousand  cupids  eagerly 
striving  who  should  most  deeply  pierce  the  hearts  of 
the  spectators  with  their  golden  darts.  And  truly 
so  it  fell  out,  (that  there  not  being  BO  much  as  one 


238  APPENDIX  II 

arrow  shot  in  vain),  all  of  them  did  love  him,  though 
not  after  the  same  manner,  nor  for  the  same  end ; 
for,  as  the  manna  of  the  Arabian  desarts  is  said  to 
have  had  in  the  mouths  of  the  Egyptian  Israelites, 
the  very  same  tast  of  the  meat  they  loved  best,  so 
the  Princes  that  were  there  did  mainly  cherish  him 
for  his  magnanimity  and  knowledge  ;  his  courtliness 
and  sweet  behaviour  being  that  for  which  chiefly  the 
noblemen  did  most  respect  him ;  for  his  pregnancie 
of  wit,  and  chivalrie  in  vindicating  the  honour  of 
ladies,  he  was  honoured  by  the  knights,  and  the 
esquires  and  other  gentlemen  courted  him  for  his 
affability  and  good  fellowship;  the  rich  did  favour 
him  for  his  judgment  and  ingeniosity ;  and  for  his 
liberality  and  munificence,  he  was  blessed  by  the 
poor;  the  old  men  affected  him  for  his  constancie 
and  wisdome,  and  the  young  for  his  mirth  and 
gallantry;  the  scholars  were  enamoured  of  him 
for  his  learning  and  eloquence,  and  the  souldiers  for 
his  integrity  and  valour;  the  merchants,  for  his 
upright  dealing  and  honesty,  praised  and  extolled 
him,  and  the  artificers  for  his  goodness  and 
benignity;  the  chastest  lady  of  that  place  would 
have  hugged  and  imbraced  him  for  his  discretion 
and  ingenuity ;  whilst  for  his  beauty  and  comeliness 
of  person  he  was,  at  least  in  the  fervency  of  their 
desires,  the  paramour  of  the  less  continent ;  he  was 
dearly  beloved  of  the  fair  women,  because  he  was 
handsome,  and  of  the  fairest  more  dearly,  because 
he  was  handsomer :  in  a  word,  the  affections  of  the 
beholders,  (like  so  many  several  diameters  drawn 
from  the  circumference  of  their  various  intents),  did 
all  concenter  in  the  point  of  his  perfection.  After 
a  so  considerable  insinuation,  and  gaining  of  so 
much  ground  upon  the  hearts  of  the  auditory,  (though 
in  a  shorter  space  then  [than]  the  time  of  a  flash  of 
lightning),  he  went  on,  (as  before),  in  the  same  thred 
of  the  conclusive  part  of  his  discourse,  with  a  resolu- 


APPENDIX  II  239 

tion  not  to  cut  it,  till  the  overabounding  passions 
of  the  company,  their  exorbitant  motions  and  discom 
posed  gestures,  through  excess  of  joy  and  mirth, 
should  be  all  of  them  quieted,  calmed,  and  pacified, 
and  every  man,  woman,  and  maid  there,  (according 
to  their  humour),  reseated  in  the  same  integrity  they 
were  at  first ;  which  when  by  the  articulatest 
elocution  of  the  most  significant  words,  expressive 
of  the  choisest  things  that  fancie  could  suggest,  and, 
conforme  to  the  matter's  variety,  elevating  or  depress 
ing,  flat  or  sharply  accinating  it,  with  that  proportion 
of  tone  that  was  most  consonant  with  the  purpose, 
he  had  attained  unto,  and  by  his  verbal  harmony  and 
melodious  utterance,  setled  all  their  distempered 
pleasures,  and  brought  their  disorderly  raised  spirits 
into  their  former  capsuls,  he  with  a  tongue  tip't  with 
silver,  after  the  various  diapasons  of  all  his  other 
expressions,  and  making  of  a  leg  for  the  spruceness 
of  its  courtsie,  of  greater  decorement  to  him  then 
[than]  cloth  of  gold  and  purple,  farewel'd  the 
companie  with  a  complement  of  one  period  so 
exquisitely  delivered,  and  so  well  attended  by  the 
gracefulness  of  his  hand  and  foot,  with  the  quaint 
miniardise  of  the  rest  of  his  body,  in  the  performance 
of  such  ceremonies  as  are  usual  at  a  court-like 
departing,  that  from  the  theater  he  had  gone  into  a 
lobie,  from  thence  along  three  spacious  chambers, 
whence  descending  a  back  staire,  he  past  through 
a  low  gallerie  which  led  him  to  that  outer  gate, 
where  a  coach  with  six  horses  did  attend  him,  before 
that  magnificent  convention  of  both  sexes,  (to  whom 
that  room,  wherein  they  all  were,  seemed  in  his 
absence  to  be  as  a  body  without  a  soul),  had  the  full 
leisure  to  recollect  their  spirits,  (which,  by  the  neat 
ness  of  his  so  curious  a  close,  were  quoquoversedly 
scattered  with  admiration),  to  advise  on  the  best 
expediency  how  to  dispose  of  themselves  for  the 
future  of  that  [delightful]  night." 


INDEX 


ABERDEEN,  43. 

Attitude  towards  Covenant.  32, 
36. 

"Aberdeen  Doctors,"  37. 

Aberdeen  Sasines,  7  (note). 

Aberdeen  University,  19. 
New  constitution,  10,  11  (note). 

Abercrombie,  Sir  Alexander,  7 
(note). 

Abernethie,  Helen,  wife  of  Thomas 
Urquhart,  141. 

Abraham,  Patriarch,  133. 

Acts  of  the  Parliament  of  Scotland, 
61  (note  3),  71  (note  2),  93 
(note),  101  (notes). 

Adam,  130,  146. 

Advancement  of  Learning,  118 
(note). 

-flUgyptus'  sons,  134. 

^quanima,     sister     of     Marcus 
Coriolanus,  136. 

Agamemnon,  135. 

Ains worth,  W.  Harrison,  Crichton, 
105  (note  2). 

(:Airgiod  cagainn"  (chewing- 
money),  77. 

Airlie,  Earl  of,  19  (note). 

Alcibiades,  136. 

Alexander  of  Macedon,  27,  51. 

Allibone,  Dictionary,  and  Ur 
quhart,  101. 

Alsop,  Captain,  treatment  of  Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart,  89. 

Amadis  of  Gaul,  144  (note  2). 

Anastasius,  quoted,  77  (note  1). 

Anderson,  Gilbert,  minister  of 
Cromartie,  63,  66  (note  3). 

Hugh,  66  (note  3). 

P.  J.,  10,  11  (notes). 

Annals  of  Banff,  quoted,  8  (note 
2),  19  (note),  47  (note  3). 
16 


Annand,  John,  minister  of  Inver 
ness,  and  Sir  Thomas  Ur 
quhart,  68,  82. 

Antiquarian  Notes,  7  (note),  69, 
70  (note). 

Apprizing,  58  (note). 

Arcalaus,  144  (note). 

Archimedes,  124. 

Ardnamurchan,  136  (note  1). 

Ardoch  farm,  55. 

Argyll,  Marquis  of,  and  Coven 
anters,  32. 

Ariosto,  166. 

Hippogriff  and  Astolfo,  107. 

Aristotle,  124,  202  (note). 

Organon,  Ethics,  and  Politics, 
10. 

Arnold,  Matthew,  standard  for 
judging  literature,  143. 

Arran,  136  (note  1). 

Arren,  Earle  of,  115. 

Arundel,  Earl  of,  116. 

Astioremon,  137. 

Asymbleta,  144  (note). 

Atbara,  battle  of,  102  (note  3). 

Atropos,  129. 

BACCHUS,    202 ;   conquers  India, 

135. 
Bacon,    Lord,    Solicitor-General, 

8. 
On  fate  of  solid  and  weighty 

things,  118. 

Rules  for  young  travellers  in 
9,  Civil 


ivil  and  Moral,  26. 
Baddeley',   Richard,    128    (note), 

149  (note). 
Badenoch,  76. 
Baillie,  Robert,  Letters,  81  (note 

1),  82. 
Baldwin,  Richard,  185  (note). 


INDEX 


Balquholly  Castle,  35,  39, 102  (note  j 

3)  :  now  Hatton  Castle. 
Account  of,  39  (note  1). 
Balvenie,  battle  at,  77  (and  note 

2),  79. 
Banff,  8,  18, 

Entry  in  Court-book  of  Burgh, 

15,  19. 

Barclay,  Walter,  41  (note  2). 
Barclays,  38  (note  2). 
Baron,  Dr  Robert,  37  (note  2). 
Basagante,  144  (note). 
Beaton,  Cardinal,  55. 
Bedell,  William,  idea  of  universal 

language,  175. 
Belladrum,  70. 
Bellay,  Jean  du,  Bishop  of  Paris, 

188. 

Bellenden,  Adam,  43  (note). 
Beltistos,  2. 
Bembo,  166. 
Berwick,  44. 

Besant,  Sir  Walter,  185  (note  2). 
Bickerstaffe,  Isaac,  51  (note). 
Biggar,  85. 
Billing,     Baronial     Antiquities, 

39  (note). 
Biographia  Britannica,   quoted, 

144  (note  2),  158  (note  2). 
Birkenbog,  7  (note). 
Birrell,  A.,  186. 
Black  Island,  62  (note  1). 
Blackwood's    Magazine,    quoted, 

181  (note  2). 

(See  also  names  of  subjects.) 
Boece,  Hector,  fictions,  145. 
Book  of  Bon  Accord,  13  (note  1). 
Bracegirdle,  Mrs,  50  (note  2). 
Braughton  discovers  Sir  Thomas 

Urquhart'sMSS.,  155,  156. 
Brisena,  144  (note). 
Browne,  Sir  Thomas  : 
Phraseology,  2. 
Quoted,  49,  137. 
Vulgar  JZrrors,  126. 
Browning,  Robert,  113. 
Bruce,  James,  126  (note  1). 

King  David,  4. 

King  Robert,  grants  Crom- 

artie  to  Sir  Hugh  Ross,  4. 
Bruklay,  7  (note). 


Brydges,  Sir  Egerton,  Auto 
biography  ;  Mary  de  Clifford, 
152  (note  1). 

Bullock,  J.  M.,  History  of  Univer 
sity  of  Aberdeen,  quoted,  36. 
Burghley,  William  Cecil,    Lord, 

191  (note). 

Burnet,  quoted,  82  (note),  175. 
Burns,  Robert,  23. 
Burton,  John  Hill : 

On    "Aberdeen    Doctors"    in 

History  of  Scotland,  37. 
On    description    of    Crichton's 

feats,  162,  223  (note  2). 
On    Sir    Thomas     Urquhart's 

writings,  157,  159. 
Scot  Abroad,  quoted,  159. 
Burton,     Robert,     Anatomy     of 
Melancholy,  205  (note). 

C^ESAE,  DeBello  Gallico,  1 98  (note). 
Caithness,  3,  70,  80  (note  2). 
Calder,  Campbell  of,  7  (note). 
Calendar  of  Proceedings  in  Com 
mittee     for      Advances      of 
Moneys- Taxes,  50  (note). 
Calvert,  Giles,  176  (note). 
Cambridge,  Earl  of,  115. 
Cant  at  Aberdeen,  36. 
Carberry  Tower,  13  (note  3). 
Carlisle,  85. 
Carlyle,  Thomas : 

Oliver  Cromwell,  quoted,  86,  87. 

Sartor  Resartus,  quoted,  189. 
Cartadaque,  144  (note). 
Castalia,  109. 
Cawdor,  66  (note  3). 
Chanonry  Castle  taken,  76. 
Charles  i.  : 

Endeavours  to  force  Episcopacy 
on  Scotland,  31. 

Execution  of,  69,  70,  168. 

Letter    of  Protection    to    Sir 
Thomas  Urquhart,  senior,  15. 

Licence  to  T.  York,  50  (note  2). 

On  knowledge  of  law,  52. 
Charles  1 1.,  97,  99. 

Crowned,  84,  169. 

Lands  in  Scotland,  83. 
Charles  vii.,  187. 
Chatterton,  152  (note). 


INDEX 


243 


Chiuon,  187. 

"  Christianas  Prcsbytcromastix," 

150. 

Gibber,  Apology,  170  (note). 
Cicero,  201  ;  De  OJjkiis,  10. 
Cid,  The,  27. 
Clan  Mackenzie,  72. 
Clanniolinespick,  135  (and  note). 
Clanrurie,  136  (note  1). 
Clare,  Earl  of,  50  (note  2). 
Clare  Street,  50  (note  2). 
Clio,  109  (note). 
Coleridge,  on  Rabelais'  writings, 

186. 

College  of  Navarre,  1  CO,  223  (note). 
"Colophonian  Poet,"  109  (note). 
Colophos,  109  (note). 
Commission  of  General  Assembly, 

72,  79  (and  note  1),  81. 
Constantinople,  77  (note  1). 
Cotgrave,  French  Dictionary  t 191. 
Cottrel,  James,  149  (note). 
Court  of  Session,  Decisions  of,  146. 
Covenant  signed,  47  (note  3). 
Covenanting  Movement,  31. 
Coventry,  86. 
Craig,  John,  42  (note). 
Craigfintray,  5,  19  (note),  60, 101 

(note  2). 
Cratynter,  132. 
Craven,  Earl  of,  116. 

Rev.  J.  B.,  57  (note). 

Crawford,  Earl  of,  146. 
Cricbton,  James  (the  Admirable), 

157,  158  (note  2). 
Age  on  entering  St  Andrews,  0. 
Sketch  of,   159  ;  Appendix  ii. 

215. 
Cromartie      (Crwmbawchty      or 

Crumbathy),  3,  70. 
Castle,  account  of,  17  (and 

note  1),  18. 
Library,  29. 
Put  in  state  of  defence,  70,  71 

(note  1). 
Siege  of,  139. 

estate,  proprietors  of,  103. 

Lady  Dowager  of,  120. 

parish,  62  (note  1). 

Cromwell,   Oliver,    8,    32  (note), 

84,  86,  96. 


Culliuudden,  62  (note  1),  63,  71 
(note  1). 

Culloden,  19  (note). 

Cumberland's,  Duke  of,  head 
quarters,  19. 

Curators,  5  (note). 

DANAUB'  daughters,  133. 

Dante,  166. 

Quoted,  161  (note). 

Darisleta,  144  (note). 

Darwin,  Charles,  131  (note). 

David  Copperfield,  quoted,  51 
(note  2),  59  (note),  62  (note). 

Debora,  Judge  and  Prophetess, 
135. 

Dclgatie,  Laird  of,  plunders  Bal- 
quholly,  39. 

Delos,  119  (note). 

Demosthenes,  162  (note). 

Dickson,  David,  Professor  of  Di 
vinity,  Glasgow,  82. 
At  Aberdeen,  36. 

Dictionary     of    National     Bio 
graphy,  quoted,  82  (note),  101 
v  (note). 

Diosa,  daughter  of  Alcibiadcs, 
136. 

Dis,  Father  of  Wealth,  198. 

Don  river,  126  (note  1). 

Don  Quixote,  104  (and  note  2). 

Donne,  Age  on  going  to  Ox 
ford,  9. 

Dorset,  Earl  of,  116. 

Douglas,  Robert,  Moderator  of 
Commission  of  General  As 
sembly,  81  (and  note  2). 

Dove,  Dr,  114  (note). 

Duchat,  Notes  on  Rabelais,  206. 

Duff,  Garden  Alexander,  39,  102 
(note  3). 

Isabel  Annie,  102  (note  3). 

Dunbar,  Battle  of,  83,  87. 

Dunlugas  in  Alvah,  47  (note  1). 

EDWARD,  King,  138. 
Egypt,  English  peer  in,  27. 
Elgin,  4  (note),  70,  95. 
Elibank,    Patrick,     Lord,     buys 

Cromartie  estate,  103. 
Eliock,  Perthshire,  159. 


244 


INDEX 


Elphinstone,  Alexander,  Lord,  6, 

13  (and  note  3). 

Lady  Christian,  6,  7  (note). 

Englishman  abroad,  22. 
Entelechia,  Queen,  158  (note). 
Episcopacy  in  Scotland,  32,  102 

(note  2). 
Erasmus,  145. 
Eromena,  144  (note). 
Errol,  Earl  of,  146. 
Esormon,  Prince  of  Acliaia,  131. 
Euclid,  124,  142. 

FALKIRK,  84. 

Famongomadan,  144  (note). 

Farquhar,  Sir  Robert,  of  Mounie, 
and  Cromartie  creditors,  60. 

Fergus,  King  of  Scots,  136,  145. 

Findlay,  Andrew,  43. 

Findrassie.     (See  Lesley,  Robert.) 

Firth  of  Cromartie,  62  (note  1). 

of  Forth,  38. 

Fisherie,    Barony  of,    4,    8   (and 
note  1),  19  (note). 

Fleetwood,  96. 

Florence,  28. 

Folengo,T. ,  Macaronea,  205  (note). 

Fontenay  -  le  -  Comte,     188,     204 
(note). 

Forbes,  Alexander,  15,  41  (note  2). 

Arthur,  of  Blacktown,  40. 

Dr  John,  37  (note  2). 

Forestalling,  15  (note  2). 

Fortrose  Castle  garrisoned,  76. 

Fountainhall,       Decisions,      146 
(note) 

Fraser,  (Colonel)  Hugh,  of  Bella- 
drum,  and  Rising  in  North,  70. 

(Sir)  James,  71  (note  1). 

Lord,  garrisons  Towie- Bar 
clay  Castle,  39. 

Sir  William  : 

Earls  of  Cromartie,  quoted,   3 

(note  2). 

The  Lords  Elphinstone,  quoted, 
7  (note),  13  (note  3). 

G.  P.,  128. 

Gardenstoun  Papers,  7  (note). 
Gargantua,  190,  193. 
Gathelus,  145. 


Gaurin  (Gowrau),  Earl  of,  116. 
General  Assembly  Commission  lie- 
cords,   72  (note),    74   (note), 

75  (note),  78  (note),  79  (note 

2),  80  (note). 
Genoa,  28. 
Gight,  Laird  of,  40. 
Gladmon,  Captain,  88. 
Glasgow,  General  Assembly  in,  35. 
Glenkindie,  7  (note). 
Glover,  George,  portraits  of   Sir 

Thomas  Urquhart,  107. 
Gonima,  144  (note). 
Gonzaga,  Vincenzio  de,  164. 
Goodwin,  Captain,  94. 
Gordon,  James,   History  of  Scots 

Affairs,  35  (notes),  41  (note 

2),  132  (note) 
(Sir)  James,  of  Lesmoir,    7 

(note). 

John,  101  (note  3). 

Granada,  27. 

Granger,  Biographical  Dictionary, 

107  (note  2),  112  (note  1),  206 

(note  1). 

Grimm,  Household  Tales,  180. 
Guild,  Dr  William,  13  (note  1), 

19  (note). 
Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  account 

of,  12. 

Gulliver's  Travels,  144  (note  2). 
Gustavus  Adolphus,  81  (note  2). 
Guthrie,  James,  82. 

HALKET,  General,  77  (note  2),  81 

(note). 

Hatton  Castle.    (See  Balquholly.) 
Hamilton,  Marquis  of,  111,  115. 

At  Berwick,  44. 
Harrison,  85. 
Hawkins,    Sir    John,     232,    233 

(notes). 

Life  of  Johnson,  206  (note). 
Hazlitt,  quoted,  167  (note). 
Heine,  Das  Buck  Le  Grand,  182 

(note). 

Henderson  at  Aberdeen,  36. 
Henry  n.,  187. 
Henry,  Prince,  8. 
Heraclitus  the  Obscure,  119  (note), 

201. 


INDEX 


245 


Herbert  of  Cherbury,  Lord,  Auto 
biography,  25  (note  1). 

Hercules  Lybius,  133. 

Herd,  David,  101  (note). 

Highland  soldiers  in   Inverness, 
76,  79. 

Hippocrene,  109. 

History  of  Clan    Mackenzie,    70 
(note). 

History  of  Scotland.     (See  under 
Burton,  J.  H.) 

History  of  Scots  A/airs.   (See  Gor 
don,  James.) 

Holland,  Earl  of,  116. 

Holies,  Gervase,  50  (note  2). 

John,  Earl  of  Clare,  51  (and 

note  1). 

Homer,  Birthplace  of,  109. 
Works,  166. 

Hope,  Anastasius,  quoted,  77(note). 

Horace,  Odes, .quoted,  134 (note  1). 

Hough  ton,    in    Nottingham,    51 
(note  1). 

ffudibras,  Alexander  Ross  men 
tioned  in,  126. 

Huntly,  Second  Marquis  of,  116. 
Covenanters  and,  33. 
Family    name     (Gordon),     41 

(note  2). 
Taken  prisoner,  38. 

Third    Marquis    of,    takes 

Ruthven  Castle,  77. 

Hypennnestra,  133,  134. 

INNES,  Alexander,  43  (note). 
Inverkeithing,  84. 
Inverness,  2,  32. 

Capture  of,  68,  70,  81. 

Fortifications  destroyed,  76. 

Highland  soldiers  at,  76,  78. 

Sasines,  101  (note  3). 
Irving,  Dr  : 

Account  of  SirThoinasUrquhart 
leaving  Scotland,  43. 

Lives  of  Scottish    Writers,    44 

(note),  149  (note). 
John,  of  Bruklay,  7  (note). 

J.  A.,  124. 
James  in. : 
Act  of,  54. 


James  in. — continued. 

Grant  of  Motehill  of  Cromartic 

to  William  Urquhart,  17. 
James  vi.,  7,  147  (note). 
Japhet,  131. 
Jericho,  55. 
Joan  of  Arc,  187. 
Johnson,  Dr,  on— 

Crichton    in    Adventurer,    159 
(note  1). 

Traveller  in  Egypt,  27. 
Johnston  and  Mr  Bedell,  175. 
Arthur,  112. 

Latin  Poems,  57  (note). 
Jonson,  Ben,  Catiline,  8. 
Jovius,  Paulus,  145. 
Julius  Caesar,  27. 

KER,  General,  77  (note  2). 

Kinbeakie,    Stone  lintel  at,   137 
(note). 

King- Ed  ward,  Aberdeenshire,  4, 
8  (note  2),  19  (note). 

King's  College :  Officers  and  Grad 
uates,  10  (note). 

King's  Covenant,  Account  of,  42 
(note  1). 

Kippis,  Dr,  158  (note  2). 
On    Urquhart's    pedigree,    144 
(note  2). 

Kirkhill,  76. 

Kirkmichael,  62  (note  1),  63. 

LAMB,   Charles,   132  (note),  167 

(note). 

Lambert,  85. 
Laud,  Archbishop,  32. 
Leake,  William,  116. 
Leigh  ton,  Archbishop,  66  (note  1). 
Lemlair,  70. 

Lesley,  Lieut. -General  David,  32 
(note). 

March  to  England,  84. 

Message  of  encouragement  to, 

Takes  Castle  of  Chanonry,  76. 

Norman,  55  (and  note  1). 

Robert,    of    Findrassie,    59 

(note),  71  (note  1). 
Conduct  towards  Sir  Thomas 
Urquhart,  55,  95. 


246 


INDEX 


Lesley,  Robert — contd. 

Mortgage  on  Cromartie  estate, 

46. 
Dr    William,    Sir    Thomas 

Urquhart's  account  of,  12  (and 

note  2),  37  (note  2). 
Letters  of  Junius,  103  (note  3). 
Lives  of  Eminent  Men  of  Aberdeen, 

quoted,  126  (note  1). 
Lives  of  Scottish    Writers.     (See 

under  Irving,  Dr.) 
Logarithms,  123  (and  note). 
Lowndes,  Bibliographer's  Manual, 

101  (note). 

Lucian,  100  (note),  189. 
Lumphanan,  3  (note  2). 
Lunan,  Alexander,  11  (note). 
Luther,  Martin,  187. 
Lynceus,  134. 

MACAULAY,  174  (note). 

History  of  England,  quoted,  23. 
Macbeth's  titles,  3. 
Macduff,  3  (note  2). 
Mackenzie,  Alexander,  70  (note). 

(Sir)  George,  102. 

George,  sells  estate  to  Capt. 

W.  Urquhart,  103. 

(Sir)  Kenneth,  103. 

Thomas,  of  Pluscardine. 

Enters  Inverness,  76. 

Proclaimed  rebel  and  traitor,  71. 

Rising  in  North  and,  69,  70,  76. 
Mackintosh,  C.  Fraser.  (See  Anti 
quarian  Notes. ) 

Macmillans  of  Knapdale,  135  (n.). 
Madanfabul,  144  (note). 
Madasima,  144  (note). 
Madrid,  27.    ' 

M'Farlane,    Genealogical  Collec 
tions,  16  (note  1). 
Maitland,  on  date  of  Sir  Thomas 

Urquhart's  birth,  6. 
Mantua,  163. 

Mantua,  Duke  of,  164,  215  seqq. 
Mantuanus,  Baptista,  166. 
Marischal  College,  11  (note). 
Marischal,  Earl,  36,  146. 

Enters  Aberdeen,  43. 
Martin,  Sir  Theodore,  on — 

Trissotetras  119  (note). 


Martin,  Sir  Theodore— contd. 
Unpublished   Epigrams  of  Sir 

Thomas  Urquhart,  116. 
Urquhart's  account  of  his  mis 
fortunes,  61. 
Death,  97. 
Translation    of    Rabelais, 

192. 

Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  104  (note  1). 
Maubert,  Place,  161  (note). 
Meldrum  arms,  139  (note). 
Melville,  Andrew,   assists  to  re 
model  University  education, 
10,  11  (note). 
Mercury,  198. 
Messina,  27. 
Micawber,  Wilkins.     (See  David 

Copper 'field. ) 

Middleton,  General,  32  (note). 
Joins  Mackenzie's  force,  76. 

Earl  of,  102  (note  2). 

Miller,  Hugh,  102  (note  2). 
Description  of  Cromartie  Castle, 

18. 

On  siege  of  Cromartie  Castle,  140. 
On  stone  lintel  at  Kinbeakie, 

138. 
OnUrquhart's inventive  powers, 

180. 
Reference    to     Sir    Alexander 

Urquhart,  101  (note  3). 
(See  also  Scenes  and  Legends  of 

North  of  Scotland.) 
Milton,  John,  8,  30,  91. 

Hymn  on  Nativity,  quoted,  201 

(note  2). 

Paradise  Lost,  quoted,  201  (n.  2). 
Sonnet  to  Cromwell,  quoted,  86. 
Miol,  145. 
Mitchell,    Thomas,    minister    of 

Turriff,  41  (note  2),  42. 
Molinea,  133. 
Monboddo,  Lord,  on  dual  number, 

182. 
Montaigne,    age    on    completing 

collegiate  course,  9. 
Montrose,  Earl  of,  36,  38,  78,  80 

(note  2). 

Moral  Tales,  113  (note). 
Moray,  3,  4  (note). 
Moray  Firth,  32,  62  (note  1). 


INDEX 


247 


Morley,    Universal  Library,   185 

(note  2). 
Morrison,  Dictionary  of  Decisions, 

146  (note). 
Motteux,  Pierre  A.,  97,  184,  203 

(note  2). 

Completes    Urquli art's    Trans 
lation  of  Rabelais,  192,  206 

(and  note  1). 
On  Urquhart's  Translation  of 

Rabelais,  98. 
Mouat  (de  Monte  Alto)  family  in 

Cromartie,  4  (and  note  1). 
William,  takes  part  of  King 

Robert  Bruce,  138. 
Mounie,  60. 

Mucholles,  Lord,  41  (note  2). 
Munro,   John,    of   Lemlair,    and 

rising  in  North,  70. 
Colonel  Robert,   Mission  to 

Marquis  of  Huntly,  34. 

NAIRN,  70. 

Napier,  John,  of  Merchiston,  119, 

122  (and  note  2),  124. 
Naples,  28. 
Narfesia,       Sovereign      of     the 

Amazons,  132. 

National  Covenant,  quoted,  31. 
Newcastle,  Earl  of,  116. 
Nicholas    Nickleby,    quoted,    11 

(note). 

Nicolia,  136. 
Nimrod,  131. 
Niort,  204  (note). 
Nisbet,  on  Urquhart's  property,  2. 
System  of  Heraldry,  3  (note  1). 
Noah,  131,  146. 
Nodes  Ambrosianw  (Blackwood), 

version  of  Urquhart's  death, 

101  (note). 
"  Nonconformist       Conscience," 

187. 

Northumberland,  Earl  of,  116. 
Nottingham,  86. 

OGILVIE,  Lord,  joins  Mackenzie's 

force,  76. 
Old  Machar,  10. 
Orkneys,  80  (note  2). 
Orpah,  131. 


Overtoil,  96. 
Ovid,  195  (note). 

Metamorphosis,  133. 
Ozell,  edition  of  Rabelais,  206. 

PADUA,  163. 

Pantagruel,  158  (note),  161,  190. 

(See      also      Urquhart,     Sir 

Thomas,       Translation      of 

Rabelais. ) 
Panthea,  daughter  of  Deucalion 

andPyrrha,  133. 
Panurge,  158  (note),   197.     (See 

also  Urquhart,  Sir  Thomas, 

Translation  of  Rabelais.) 
Pape,  Charles,  Minister  of  Culli- 

cudden,  63. 
Paris,  28. 

Parnassus,  Mount,  44,  109. 
Pegasus,  109. 
Pembroke,  Earl  of,  116. 
Pentasilea,  Queen  of  the  Amazons, 

135. 

Penuel,  131. 
Pericles,  149  (note). 
Persius,  8  (note  2) ;  quoted,  162. 
Perth,  84. 
Petrarch,  166. 
Petrie,  James,  8  (note  2). 
Pharaoh  Amenophis,  133. 
Philemon  (Philomenes),  death  of, 

100  (note). 

Pillars  of  Hercules,  124. 
Pistol,  Ancient,  2,  109  (note). 
Pitkerrie,  103. 
Plato,  124,  202  (and  note). 
Pliny,  52  (note  2). 
Pluscardine.       (See    Mackenzie, 

Thomas.) 

Plutus,  52,  198  (note). 
Pococke's  Tour,  17  (note  2),  103 

(note  1). 

Pope,  Alexander — 
Dunciad,  206  (note  2). 
On  Rabelais,  186. 
Portia,  22,  25. 
Portugal  founded,  145. 
Pothina,  niece  of  Lycurgus,  136. 
Prott,   David,   killed  at   Towie- 

Barclay,  40. 
Providence,  Rhode  Island,  90. 


248 


INDEX 


Pulteney,  Sir  William,  103  (note  2). 
Pythagoras,  124,  202. 

QUEEN  Elizabeth,  120. 

Mary,  of  England,  102. 

Mary,  of  Scotland,  104  (note 

1),  168. 
Queensferry,  84. 

RABAN,  printer,  Aberdeen,  57  (n. ). 
Rabelais,  107  (note  2),  119  (note), 

185  (and  note  2),  192  (note), 

235  (note). 

Rabelais,  Fra^ois,  sketch  of,  187. 
Oargantua  and  Pantagruel,I89. 
(See  Urquhart,  Sir  Thomas, 

Translation  of  Rabelais. ) 
Raleigh,  Sir  Walter,  120. 

History  of  the  World.  8. 
Raphael,  187. 
Reay,    Lord,    joins    Mackenzie's 

force,  76,  78  (note). 
Records  of  Court  of  Justiciary, 

16  (note  2). 

Redgauntlet,  quoted,  102  (note  1). 
Resolis,  62  (note  1). 
Riddell,  J.,  Scotch  Peerage  Law, 

55  (note). 

Rising  of  Cavaliers  in  North,  69. 
Robertson,     William,    of    Kind- 

easse,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's 

account  of,  94. 

Rolland,  Catharine,  13  (note  1). 
Rome,  28. 
Ross,  Alexander  (1),  minister  in 

Aberdeen,  37  (note  2). 

Alexander  (2),  126  (note  1). 

Recommends  Trissotetras,  126. 
Verses,  126,  127  (note). 

George,   of  Pitkerrie,  buys 

Cromartie  estate,  17,  103. 

(Sir)   Hugh,     owns   Crom 
artie,  4. 

(Major)  Walter  Charteris,  of 

Cromartie,  103  (note  3). 

William,  Earl  of,  4. 

Rothes,  Earls  of,  55  (note). 

Rothiemay,  Banffshire,  35  (note 
1),  43  (note). 

Row,  Historic  of  Kirk  of  Scotland, 
42  (note). 


Royalists  escape  to  England,   43 

(note  1). 

Ruskin,  John,  173  (note). 
Rutherford,  Samuel,  Principal  of 

St  Andrews,  82. 
Ruthven  Castle  taken  by  Marquis 

of  Huntly,  77. 

ST  ANDREWS,  82. 

St  Hilarion,  204  (note). 

St    Jerome,     Vita    Sancti     Hil- 

arionis,  204  (note). 
St  Ronan's  Well,  quoted,  186. 
Salton,  Lord,  141. 
Saragossa,  27. 

Scenes  and  Legends  of  North  of 
Scotland,  quoted,  18, 102  (note 
2),  139  (note),  141  (note). 
Scota,     daughter     of     Pharaoh, 

145. 

Scotch  army  marches  into  Eng 
land,  84. 

Scotch  Peerage  Law.     (See  Rid 
dell,  J.). 

Scotchman  abroad,  24. 
Scotland : 

Episcopacy  in,  32,  102  (note  2). 
Four  armies  in,  32  (note  1). 
Mythical  history  of,  145. 
University  education  in,  9.    (See 

also  Aberdeen  University.) 
Scrogie,   Dr  Alexander,  37  (note 

2),  43  (note). 

Seaforth,  George,  Earl  of,  69. 
Seaton,  Dr,  in  Paris,  28. 

John,  11  (note). 

William,  11  (note). 

Sir  Thomas  Urquhart's  account 

of,  13. 

Seton,    Alexander,    of  Meldrum, 
102  (note  3), 

arms,  139  (note). 

Elizabeth,  102  (note  3). 

Shafton,  Sir  Piercie,  124. 
Shakespeare,  William : 
Henry  IV.,  165  (note). 
Merchant  of  Venice,  25. 
Midsummer     Night's    Dream, 

174  (note). 

Twelfth  Night,  122  (note). 
Winter's  Tale,  8. 


INDEX 


249 


Shrphard,  Jack,  51  (note). 
Shrewsbury,  86. 
Sibbald,  Dr  James,  37  (note  2). 
Smith,    Sidney,     "preaching    to 
death  by  wild  curates,"  66. 

W.     F.,     Translation     of 

Rabelais,    158   (note   1),   99 
(note  1),  191. 

Socrates,  119  (note),  124. 
Sodom  and  Gomorrha,  133. 
Solvatius,  King,  137. 
Somerled,  Lord  of  the  Isles,  136 

(note  1). 

South,  Sermons,  199  (note). 
South  cote,  Joanna,  179  (note). 
Southey,    Dr    Dove,    114  (note), 

178  (note). 
Spalding,  mentions  Sir  Thomas 

Urquhart,  38. 
Memorials,     quoted,      40,     43 

(note). 
Spartianus,  ^Elins,  Life  of  Geta, 

205  (note). 
Spenser,  120. 
Spilsbury,  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart 

stays  with,  86,  153. 
Stacker,  James,  41  (note  2). 
Steele,  Richard,  50  (note  2). 
Stirling,  84. 
Strachan,  General,    77   (note  2), 

81  (note). 

Strafford,  Earl  of,  116. 
Stralsund,  69. 
Stratford-on-Avon,  86. 
Strathbogie,  34. 
Strathearn,     Earls     of,     family 

name,  135  (note). 
Sutherland,     Earl     of,      action 

against    Earls  of  Crawford, 

Errol,  and  Marischal,  146. 

James,  "Tutor  of  Duflus," 

56. 

TAMERLANE,  67. 

Tarbat,  Viscount,  First  Earl  of 

Cromartie,  103. 
Termuth,    daughter  of   Pharaoh 

Amenophis,  133. 
Thaumast,  158  (note). 
T/ie  Lords  Elphinstone,   quoted, 

7  (note),  13  (note  3). 


The  Tables  and  Aberdeen,  35,  37. 
Thelema,  Abbey  of,  193  seqq. 
Thelemites,  195  seqq. 
Through      the      Looking  -  Glass, 

quoted,  114  (note). 
Thucydides,  149  (note). 
Thymelica,  daughter  of  Bacchus, 

135. 

Toledo,  27. 
Torespay,  77  (note). 
Tor  Wood,  84. 

Tomlins,  Richard,  176  (note). 
Towie- Barclay  Castle,  38  (note  2). 
laird  of,  plunders  Balquholly, 

39. 
Tristram    Shandy,    quoted,    47 

(note  3). 

Trot  of  Turriff,  41  (and  note  2). 
Turriff,  38. 

Inhabitants    subscribe    King's 

Covenant,  42. 

"Tutor,"  Meaning  of,  5  (note  1). 
Tycheros,  131. 
Tytler,  Patrick  F.  : 
Life  of  the  Admirable  Crichton, 

159,  165,  190. 
On  Urquhart' s  Translation  of 

Rabelais,  190. 

UNIVERSITY  of  Aberdeen,   New 
Constitution,  10,  11  (note). 

Urquhart,  Adam  of,  owns  Crom 
artie,  4. 

Sir  Alexander,  16. 

Petition  for  compensation   for 

losses,  61. 

Petition     for     Sheriffship     of 
Cromartie,  98,  100. 

Annas,  7  (note). 

arms,    132,    133,    137  (and 

note  1). 

(Major)    Beauchamp    Col- 

clough,  102  (note  3). 

Cainotomos,  135. 

Euplocamos,  134. 

family,  descent  of,  130  seqq. 

George,  7  (note). 

Helen,  7  (note). 

Henry,  7  (note). 

—  Hypsegoras,  133. 
Colonel  James,  102  (note  3). 


250 


INDEX 


Urquhart,  Jane,  7  (note). 

John,  7  (note). 

Sir  John,  of  Craigfintray,  101 

(note  2). 
Hereditary  Sheriff  of  Cromartie, 

60. 
Death,  102  (note  2). 

John,  of  Craigfintray,  "the 

Tutor  of  Cromartie,"  5  (and 
note   1),  6  (and  note  1),  19 
(note),  102  (note  3). 

Jonathan,  102. 

Margaret,  7  (note). 

Mellessen,  136. 

Molin,  133. 

Names      of       Chiefs      and 

Primitive  Fathers,  Appendix 

i.  211. 
Names  of  Mothers  of  Chiefs, 

Appendix  i.  213. 

(de   Vrquhartt),    origin   of 

name,      4     (note     2),      132 
(note  1). 

— -  Pamprosodos,  133. 

Phrenedon,  133. 

Propetes,  133. 

Rodrigo,  135. 

SIR    THOMAS     (Urchard, 

Urquhardus,  Wrqhward,Wr- 
whart),  132  (note). 

Account  of  Aberdeen  and  emi 
nent  men,  12. 
Account  of  Admirable  Crichton, 

157. 
Account  of  impoverished  estates, 

45. 

Ancestry,  2. 
At  Worcester,  86,  129. 
Birth,  6. 

Birthplace  unknown,  8. 
Book-hunting,  29. 
Characteristics,    53,    104    (and 

notes   1,    2),    105,   130,    144 

(note  2). 

Conduct  of  creditors,  94. 
Death,  97,  99  (note  1). 
Description     of     his     father's 

character,  14. 
Enters  University  of  Aberdeen, 

9  (and  note  1). 
Escapes  to  England,  43. 


Urquhart,  Sir  Thomas — contd. 
Foreign  Travel,  22,  25,  27. 
Knighted,  44. 
Lesley  and,  55. 
Liberated  on  parole,  89. 
Literary  achievements,  2,  148. 
Lives   at  Cromartie  —  financial 

difficulties,  51. 
Loses    ancestral  domains    and 

jurisdiction,  60. 
MS.     of    unpublished     Poems 

? noted,  5  (note  2) ;  described, 
16. 

MSS.  lost  after  Worcester,  88, 
129,  154. 

On  G.    Anderson's  preaching, 
63,  66. 

Papers  seized,  93. 

Portraits,  107. 

Praise  of  "  the  Tutor  of  Crom 
artie,"  5  (and  note  2). 

Prepares  MSS.  for  publication, 
89. 

Prisoner  in  the  Tower,  88. 

Proclaimed  rebel  and  traitor,  71. 

Relations    with    Ministers    of 
Church,  61. 

Religious  belief,  67. 

Reminiscence  of  his  youth,  20. 

Rental,  51. 

Reply    to    Commissioners'    re 
monstrances,  72. 

Resides    in    London,    50    (and 
note  2). 

Returns  home,  30. 

Rising  in  North  and,  69. 

Schemes  and  inventions,  53. 

Speed  in  composition,  117,  151. 

Succeeds  to  estates,  47. 

"Supplication"  for  pardon,  81. 

Takes  up  arms  for  Stuarts,  38, 
69,  84, 

Vanity,  24  (note  3). 

Works  :— 

EK2KTBAAATPON:    or, 
Discovery  of  a  most  ex 
quisite  Jewel,  92. 
Account  of,  148  segq.  (and 

note  1). 

Description   of  Admirable 
Crichton,  157  seqq. 


INDEX 


251 


Urquhart,  Sir  Thomas — contd. 
Works — continued 

In   contemporary   politics, 

168. 
On  fame  of  Scots  in  battle, 

157. 
Quoted,  67,  153,  165,  168, 

170,  172,  174. 
Epigrams :  Divine  and  Moral, 

44. 

Account  of,  111  scqq. 
Dedication,  111,  115. 
Quoted,  60  (note),  113, 114. 
MS.,  quoted,  109  (note). 
Logopandecleision;  or,  An  In 
troduction  to  the   Uni 
versal  Language : 
Account  of,  175  seqq. 
Published,  96. 
Quoted,  48,  57,  62  (note  2), 

90. 

IIANTOXPONOXANON: 
Peculiar  Promptuary  of 
Time,  92. 

Account  of,  128  seqq. 
Translation   of  Rabelais,    2, 

96,  97,  161,  205. 
Account  of,  184,  190  seqq. 
Exploits  of  Pan tagrucl,  161 

(note  2). 
Genealogy  of  Pantagrucl, 

144. 

Interpolations,  203. 
Panurge,  Sketch  of,  197. 
Sketch  of  Abbey  of  Thel- 

ema,  193. 

Various  editions,  206. 
Trissotetras,  92,  114. 

Account  of,  117  (and  note  1 ). 
Unpublished  Epigrams,  *  De 
dications  of,  116. 

Thomas,  marries  Helen  Aber- 

nethie,  their  family,  141. 

Sir  Thomas,  senior — 

Action  against  his  sons,  16. 
Becomes  caution  for  Alexander 

Forbes,  15. 

Believes  in  long  pedigree,  147. 
Death,  47  (and  note  3). 
"Desk  "or  Pew  in  Ban  IF  Church, 
19  (and  note  1). 


Urquhart,  SirThos.,  sen. — contd. 
Kj.iscopalian,  30,  33,  35. 
Marriage-contract,  7(andnotel ). 
Pecuniary  difficulties,  13,  15,45. 
Residence  in    Banff,    18   (and 

note  2). 
Sketch  of,  5,  6. 

(Captain)      William,       of 

Meldrum,     buys     Cromartie 
estate,  103. 

William,  receives   grant  of 

Motehill  of  Cromartie,  17. 
Urquharts  of  Meldrum,  102(note  3). 

VALERIUS  MAXIMUS,  100  (note). 
Venice,  28,  163. 
Virgil,  166,  201  (note  1). 
Vocompos,  arms  of,  137. 
Voltaire,  189. 

WALLACE,  Professor  of  Mathe 
matics,  Edinburgh,  on  Tris 
sotetras,  119. 

William,  and  William  Mouat, 

139. 

Wardlaw  MS.,  76,  78  (note). 

Warrington  Bridge,  85. 

Westminster  Abbey,  145. 

Whibley,  Charles,  New  Review, 
quoted,  112. 

Williams,  Roger,  Missionary  to 
Indians,  90,  91  (note  1). 

Williamson,  Robert,  Minister  of 
Kirkmichael,  63. 

Windsor  Castle,  Sir  Thomas  Ur 
quhart  removed  to,  89. 

Wodrow,  quoted,  81  (note  2),  102 
(note  2). 

Worcester,  86. 
Battle  of,  87. 

Marquis  of,   Century  of  the 

Names     and     Scantling    of 
.  .  .  Inventions,  181  (note  2). 

Worldly  Wiseman,  34. 

Wyntown's  Cronykil,  quoted,  3 
(note  2). 

YARES  of  Udoll,  56. 
York,  S6. 

Thomas,  50  (note  2). 

Young,  James,  118  (note). 


BY     THE     SAME     AUTHOR. 


Second  Thousand.     In  Fcap.  8vo,  174  pp.  Cloth,  25.  6d. 


A  Shetland  Minister  of  the 
i8th  Cent^lry. 

Being  Passages  in  the  Life  of  the  Rev.  John  Mill. 


NOTICES  OF  THE  PRESS. 

"We  have  read  this  little  book  with  real  pleasure,  and  we  wish  it 
well." — Saturday  Review. 

"John  Mill  was  a  character  such  as  Robert  Louis  Stevenson  would 
have  rendered  immortal,  and  that  Mr.  Willcock's  well-written  sketch 
portrays  with  skill."— Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

"A  very  remarkable  life-history." — New  Age. 

"A  curious  phase  of  Scottish  life  and  character." — Standard. 

"A  most  readable  little  book." — Athenaum. 

"It  is  delightful  to  receive  such  a  pretty  book.  ...  It  depicts  a 
striking  and  interesting  character  and  phase  of  life." — British  Weekly. 

"  A  readable  and  interesting  life-story." — Literary  World. 

"The  whole  volume  is  very  amusing  reading." — St.  Martiti's-le- 
Grand. 

"This  is  in  every  way  a  charming  book.  Its  get-up  is  tastefully 
quaint,  and  the  subject  matter  fresh  and  interesting." — Scottish  Notes 
and  Queries. 

"  A  delightful  little  volume.  ...  A  book  of  no  ordinary  interest." — 
Presbyterian. 

"The  picture  of  a  man  of  remarkable  vigour  and  individuality  of 
character." — Scotsman. 

"A  really  readable  little  book,  which  should  find  a  considerably 
wider  public  than  that  of  the  Shetland  Islands." — Glasgow  Herald. 

"  Mill  was  a  man  of  mark  in  his  day,  and  his  life-story  is  simply  and 
worthily  told  in  this  little  volume." — Aberdeen  Free  Press. 

"Glimpses  of  old-world  life  in  these  remote  islands." — Scottish 
Pictorial. 

"A  perspicuous  and  complete  sketch." — Dundee  Advertiser. 

"A  little  volume  which  is  full  of  charm  and  interest." — John  O' Groat 
Journal. 


A  Shetland  Minister  of  the  i%th   Century — continued. 

' '  The  work  is  one  of  high  literary  ability,  is  of  more  than  ordinary 
value  for  the  light  it  throws  on  the  religious  and  moral  condition  of  the 
times  it  covers,  and  is  specially  interesting  from  the  uniqueness  of  the 
character  of  Mr.  Mill. "— North  British  Daily  Mail. 

"A  curious  and  interesting  picture  01  old  Shetland  life." — Elgin 
Courant. 

"  Mr.  Mill's  idiosyncrasies  furnish  an  unfailing  source  of  amuse 
ment." — United  Presbyterian  Magazine. 

' '  The  whole  work  is  excellent,  and,  we  cannot  doubt,  will  be  welcomed 
in  a  wider  area  than  the  northern  islands  in  which  Mr.  Mill  spent  his 
life. " — Banffshire  Journal. 

"A  very  interesting  biography,  which  has  already  and  deservedly 
attracted  a  good  deal  of  attention." — Northern  Ensign. 

"We  commend  the  perusal  of  the  volume  to  all  those  in  any  way 
interested  in  Scotland  and  her  past." — Liverpool  Daily  Post. 

"We  can  recommend  the  book  as  interesting  to  many  more  than 
Shetland  readers." — Life  and  Work. 

"One  can  see  what  a  romance  Stevenson  could  have  constructed  out 
of  Mill's  diary,  which  seems  incredibly  old-fashioned  and  primitive." — 
Sketch. 

"A  most  interesting  and  readable  volume,  containing  many  quaint 
and  curious  pictures  of  Shetland  life  and  manners  during  last  century." 
— Orkney  Herald. 

"  Mr.  Willcock  has  done  well  to  provide  this  record  of  a  man  so 
memorable." — United  Presbyterian  Record. 

"There  is  a  great  deal  that  is  interesting  in  this  book.  .  .  .  Mr. 
Willcock  has  done  his  work  well,  and  we  feel  indebted  to  him  for  making 
us  acquainted  with  a  character  which  ought  not  to  be  forgotten." — Free 
Chicrch  Monthly. 

"Mr.  Mill  stands  out  as  quite  a  remarkable  man.  Though  the 
volume  will  have  a  special  interest  to  the  people  of  the  Shetland  Isles, 
it  will  be  read  with  much  interest  on  the  mainland." — Perthshire 
Advertiser. 

"A  succinct  and  readable  account  of  Mill's  life.  .  .  .  Nothing 
essential  has  been  omitted,  and  nothing  unnecessary  has  been  retained. 
.  .  .  The  volume  furnishes  interesting  reading  from  beginning  to  end." 
—Shetland  News. 

"The  book  is  eminently  readable,  and  will  well  repay  perusal.  .  .  . 
A  vein  of  quiet  humour,  mingled  with  delicate  satire,  crops  up  every 
here  and  there  in  its  pages." — Shetland  Times. 


To  be  had  from 

OLIPHANT,  ANDERSON  &  FERRIER, 

ST.    MARY    STREET,    EDINBURGH; 
21    PATERNOSTER   SQUARE,   LONDON,    E.G. 


OLIPHANT  ANDERSON  &  FERRIER'S 
"FAMOUS  SCOTS"  SERIES. 

Post  8uo,  canvas  binding,  Is.  6d.;  extra  gilt  binding,  gilt  top,  uncut,  2s.  6d. 

Thomas    Carlyle.      By  HECTOR  C.  MACPHERSON. 

"  One  of  the  best  books  on  Carlyle  yet  written."— Literary  World. 

Allan    Ramsay.      ByOLiPHANT  SMEATON. 

"  Full  of  sound  knowledge  and  judicious  criticism."— Scotsman. 

Hugh  Miller.      By  W.  KEITH  LEASK. 

"  Leaves  on  us  a  very  vivid  impression." — Daily  News. 

John  KnOX.      By  A.  TAYLOR  INNES. 

"  There  is  vision  in  this  book  as  well  as  knowledge." — Speaker. 

Robert    Burns.      By  GABRIEL  SETOUN. 

"  A  very  valuable  and  opportune  addition  to  a  useful  series." — Bookman. 

The    BalladiStS.      By  JOHN  GEDDIE. 

"  One  of  the  most  delightful  and  eloquent  appreciations  of  the  ballad  literature  of 
Scotland  that  has  ever  seen  the  light."— New  Age. 

Richard    Cameron.      By  Professor  HERKLESS. 

"  Interesting  study  of  Cameron  and  his  times." — National  Observer. 

Sir  James  Y.  Simpson.    By  EVE ,  BLANTYRE  SIMPSON. 

"  It  is  indeed  long  since  we  have  read  such  a  charmingly-written  biography  as 
this  little  Life  of  the  most  typical  and  '  Famous  Scot '  that  his  countrymen  have 
been  proud  of  since  the  time  of  Sir  Walter.  .  .  .  There  is  not  a  dull,  irrelevant, 
or  superfluous  page  in  all  Miss  Simpson's  booklet,  and  she  has  performed  the 
biographer's  chief  duty — that  of  selection— with  consummate  skill  and  judgment." 
—Daily  Chronicle. 

Thomas    Chalmers.     By  Professor  W.  GARDEN  BLAIKIE. 

"The  most  notable  feature  of  Professor  Blaikie's  book— and  none  could  be  more 
commendable — is  its  perfect  balance  and  proportion.  In  other  words,  justice  is 
done  equally  to  the  private  and  to  the  public  life  of  Chalmers,  if  possible  greater 
justice  than  has  been  done  by  Mrs.  Oliphant." — Spectator. 

James    Boswell.      By  W.  KEITH  LEASK. 

"  One  of  the  finest  and  most  convincing  passages  that  have  recently  appeared  in 
the  field  of  British  Biography." — Morning  Leader. 

Tobias    Smollett.      By  OLIPHANT  SMEATON. 

"  Mr.  Smeaton  has  produced  a  very  readable  and  vivid  biography." — Academy. 

Fletcher  of  Saltoun.     By  G.  w.  T.  OMOND. 

"  Unmistakably  the  most  interesting  and  complete  story  of  the  life  of  Fletcher 
of  Saltoun  that  has  yet  appeared." — Leeds  Mercury. 

The  "  BlackwOOd  "  Group.     By  Sir  GEORGE  DOUGLAS. 

"  Sir  George  Douglas,  in  addition  to  summarising  their  biographies,  criticises  their 
works  with  excellent  and  well-weighed  appreciation." — Literary  World. 

Norman    Mac  I  COd.      By  JOHN  WELLWOOD. 

"  Its  general  picturesqueness  is  effective,  while  the  criticism  is  eminently  liberal 
and  sound."— Scots  Pictorial. 

Sir  Walter  Scott.     By  GEORGE  SAINTSBURY. 

"  Mr.  Saintsbury's  miniature  is  a  gem  of  its  kind. — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

Kirkcaldy  of  Grange.     By  LOUIS  A.  BARBE. 

"  A  conscientious  and  thorough  piece  of  work,  showing  wide  and  accurate 
knowledge." — Glasgow  Herald. 

Robert    FergUSSOn.      By  A.  B.  GROSART,  D.D.,  LL.D. 

"  It  is  a  creditable,  useful,  and  painstaking  book,  a  genuine  contribution  to 
Scottish  literary  history."— British  Weekly. 

James    Thomson.      By  WILLIAM  BAYNE. 

"  The  story  of  Thomson's  claim  to  the  disputed  authorhip  of '  Rule  Britannia 
is  sustained  by  his  countryman  with  spirit  and  in  our  judgment  with  success."— 
Literature. 


OLIPHANT  ANDERSON  &  FERRIER'S 
"FAMOUS  SCOTS"  SERIES. 

M  lingO    Park.      By  T.  BANKS  MACLACHLAN. 

"  Not  only  a  charming  life-story,  if  at  times  a  pathetic  one,  but  a  vivid  chapter  in 
the  romance  of  Africa."— Leeds  Merctiry. 

David    Hume.      By  HENRY  CALDERWOOD,  LL.D. 

"  Fulfils  admirably  well  the  purpose  of  the  writer,  which  was  that  of  presenting  in 
clear,  fair,  and  concise  lines  Hume  and  his  philosophy  to  the  mind  of  his  countrymen 
and  of  the  world." — Scotsman. 

William    Dunbar.     By  OLIPHANT  SMEATON. 

"A  graphic  and  informed  account  not  only  of  the  man  and  his  works,  but  of  his 
immediate  environment  and  of  the  times  in  which  he  lived." — Bailie. 

Sir  William  Wallace.     By  Professor  MURISON. 

"  Mr.  Murispn  is  to  be  heartily  congratulated  on  this  little  book.  After  much 
hard  and  discriminate  labour,  he  has  pieced  together  by  far  the  best,  one  might  say 
the  only  rational  and  coherent,  account  of  Wallace  that  exists." — Speaker. 

Robert   LouiS  Stevenson.     By  MARGARET  M.  BLACK. 

"Certainly  one  of  the  most  charming  biographies  we  have  ever  come  across. 
The  writer  has  style,  sympathy,  distinction,  and  understanding.  We  were  loth  to 
put  the  book  aside.  Its  one  fault  is  that  it  is  too  short." — Outlook. 

Thomas  Reid.     By  Professor  CAMPBELL  ERASER. 

"  Supplies  what  must  be  allowed  to  be  a  distinct  want  in  our  literature,  in  the 
shape  of  a  brief,  popular,  and  accessible  biography  of  the  founder  of  the  so-called 
Scottish  School  of  Philosophy,  written  with  notable  perspicuity  and  sympathy  by 
one  who  has  made  a  special  study  of  the  problems  that  engaged  the  mind  of  Reid." 
— Scotsman. 

PoIIOk  and  AytOUn.     By  ROSALINE  MASSON. 

"Miss  Masson  tells  the  story  of  the  lives  of  her  two  subjects  in  a  bright  and 
readable  way.  Her  criticisms  are  sound  and  judicious,  and  altogether  the  little 
volume  is  a  very  acceptable  addition  to  the  series." — North  British  Daily  Mail. 

Adam    Smith.      By  HECTOR  C.  MACPHERSON. 

"  I  have  learned  much  from  your  sketch  of  Adam  Smith's  life  and  work.  It 
presents  the  essential  facts  in  a  lucid  and  interesting  way." — Mr.  HERBERT 
SPENCER  to  the  Author. 

Andrew    Melville.      By  WILLIAM  MORISON. 

"The  story  is  well  told,  and  it  takes  one  through  a  somewhat  obscure  period 
with  which  it  is  well  to  be  acquainted.  No  better  guide  could  be  found  than  Mr. 
Morison." — Spectator. 

James   Frederick  Ferrier.     By  E.  s.  HALDANE. 

"  Ferrier  the  man,  and  even  Ferrier  the  professor,  Miss  Haldane  brings  near  to 
us,  an  attractive  and  interesting  figure." — Scotsman. 

"  This  biography  of  him  will  be  highly  esteemed  because  of  the  grace  and  vigour 
with  which  Miss  Haldane  has  done  her  work.  To  the  '  Famous  Scots'  series  of 
volumes  there  have  been  many  excellent  contributions,  but  not  one  of  them  is  more 
interesting  than  this  latest  addition." — Dundee  Courier. 

King"    Robert    the    Bruce.      By  Professor  MURISON. 

"  Professor  Murison  has  given  us  a  book  for  which  not  only  Scots,  but  every  man 
who  can  appreciate  a  record  of  great  days  worthily  told,  will  be  grateful." — Morning 
L  coder. 

"  The  story  of  Bruce  is  brilliantly  told  in  clear  and  flexible  language,  which 
draws  the  reader  on  with  the  interest  of  a  novel.  Professor  Murison  is  a  most 
impartial  and  thoroughly  reliable  critic,  and  may  be  followed  with  confidence  by  all 
who  desire  a  truthful  and  unprejudiced  picture  of  this  greatest  of  the  Scots." — 
A  berdeen  Journal. 

James    Hogg.      By  Sir  GEORGE  DOUGLAS.     With  Sketches 
of  Tannahill,  Motherwell,  and  Thorn. 


OLIPHANT     ANDERSON     &     FERRIER, 

30  ST.    MARY   STREET,    EDINBURGH  J 
21    PATERNOSTER    SQUARE,    LONDON,    B.C. 


-*- 2- 


3736 
U6Z9 


Willcock,  John 

Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  of 
Cromartie 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


