Antonio Elio “Cipher” and his Polyphonic-Syllabic Cipher
George Lasry
The DECRYPT Project
george.lasry@gmail.com
Marcello Simonetta
The Medici Archive Project
marcello.simonetta@gmail.com
Norbert Biermann
Universität der Künste Berlin
mail@norbertbiermann.de
Abstract 
Antonio Elio (Helius) (1506–1576) was a Roman 
Catholic prelate who served as Bishop of Capodistria
and Pola and Titular Patriarch of Jerusalem. Also a 
prolific cryptographer in the service of Pope Paul III, 
he is credited for the invention of polyphonic ciphers. 
In this article, we provide an overview of his career 
and work in cryptography and describe an ingenious 
polyphonic-syllabic cipher he designed. Although 
several matching plaintext-ciphertext segments were 
available, reconstructing the cipher key required a 
significant and unusual amount of time, underscoring
the cipher’s high level of security. Ciphertext-only 
cryptanalysis for such a cipher would be extremely 
difficult and nearly impossible, even with modern 
computing, without prior knowledge of the principles 
of its complex design.
1. Biography
In April 1535, Bernardo Boccarini, the secretary 
to the papal nuncio in France, Rodolfo Pio da 
Carpi, wrote to a colleague a facetious letter in 
which he complained about the fatigue of his own 
profession and, while sketching the portrait of the 
“perfect secretary,” he asked him to send nice 
words to “Antonio” so that he would not perceive 
all the curses (“cancari”) he had in store against 
him for having created his own set of ciphers that 
made him sweat so much.1 By then, this nearly 
twenty-year-old man had already created a 
reputation for himself so that he was universally 
known as “Antonio delle Zifre.”
Antonio was born in Capodistria2 in the first 
decade of the 16th century in a noble family.3 He 
gave early signs of his brilliance and was 
recommended to his compatriot Aurelio 
Vergerio, the resident cryptographer (“a 
1 Bernardo Boccarini to Trifon Benci, Rouen, 4 April 
1535 (Lettere facete, D. Atanagi ed., 1561, I, 349). 2 Koper, in today's Slovenia.
secretis”) in Clement VII’s curia. After Aurelio’s 
tragic death in 1532, Antonio took over his job 
and started his own career as a prelate and 
diplomat. His first known letter of May 1535 was 
addressed to Aurelio’s brother, Pier Paolo 
Vergerio, then a papal nuncio in Vienna at the 
court of Ferdinand I Habsburg, and by 1536,
bishop of Capodistria. Over the next few years, 
the relationship between the two competing curial 
officers became sour over some unpaid debts, and 
eventually, their breakup became very public and 
violent.
By 1549, Vergerio left Italy and his bishopric, 
turning on the Protestant side, while Elio became 
bishop of Pola4 in 1548. This shift reflected the 
trust that he had earned working loyally for the 
Farnese family under Pope Paul III. After the 
pope’s death, for a few months, Antonio 
entertained the idea of moving to Florence at the 
service of Duke Cosimo I de’ Medici, but he 
decided to stay loyal to the Farnese, even when 
the new pope, Julius III del Monte, waged war 
against Parma. Elio remained in the papal curia 
also under Paul IV Carafa and the following 
pontiffs, who always highly valued his special 
services.
One particularly appreciated aspect of Elio’s 
skills was his ability to break enemies’ codes. For 
instance, we learn from Medici correspondence
that the Carafas systematically intercepted all 
outgoing diplomatic dispatches and submitted the 
ciphered samples to Elio. Bongianni 
Gianfigliazzi, the Florentine ambassador in 
Rome, wrote to his duke in June 1558 that one 
informant told him that “the aforementioned 
monsignor had deciphered many letters of 
3 For an introductory biography, see L. Byatt, 
https://www.treccani.it/enciclopedia/antonio￾elio_(Dizionario-Biografico)/ 4 Pula, Croatia.
Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Historical Cryptology, pages 80-89
Poznan, Poland, 16-18 June, 2025 ´
ambassadors, and in this genre it is an awesome 
thing that he does, since he saw him sometimes 
be handed a cipher, shut himself in a room alone, 
and in a short time break it. This achievement 
appears miraculous.”5
However, it is unclear whether anyone managed 
to break Elio’s ciphers. Antonio invented a new 
kind of encoding that, even when known, still 
requires a high degree of concentration and 
imagination to be fully decoded.
Antonio Elio, during his long service in the papal 
curia (1532-1572), laid the ground for the 
establishment of a professional cipher service, 
and his work significantly influenced further 
generations of cipher secretaries. He trained 
Giovanni Battista Argenti before he became the 
pope’s cipher secretary (Meister 1906, p.55), and 
in his treatise on cryptography, Matteo Argenti, 
Giovanni's nephew and successor, recognizes 
Elio’s contribution (Meister 1906, p.50, p.161).
2. Antonio Elio’s innovative cipher - the 
Challenge
We found a document partially in cipher that 
exemplifies Antonio Elio’s innovative 
contributions to cryptography. This is a batch of 
letters sent by Filiberto Ferrerio, Bishop of Ivrea 
and Apostolic Nuncio in France, between 1537 
and 1540. The letters we consider were written 
from Paris in late October 1540, and they all bear 
the unmistakable cryptographic marks of Elio’s 
work for the Farnese chancery. 
5 “detto monsignor di quelle delli Imbasciatori ne ha 
deciferate assai, et che in questo genere è cosa 
grande quello che fa che l’ha visto qualche volta 
havere una cifra, et riserarsi in camera da per sè, et in 
This document from the Vatican Archives 
(AA.Arm. XVIII. 6532) contains several 
segments of interlinear deciphered text. As part 
of the analysis of this letter and the cipher 
employed to encode it, we needed to reconstruct 
the original key. As shown in Figure 1, the 
enciphered parts consist of a mix of graphical 
cipher symbols with Latin letters. Our initial 
assumption was that the cipher was homophonic, 
with each alphabet letter represented by one or 
more cipher symbols and other cipher symbols 
representing elements of a nomenclature, such as 
words or proper names. We identified 
approximately 40 distinct cipher symbols, which 
usually hints at a simple cipher with a small 
number of homophones per letter of the alphabet. 
Some symbols have dots on top, and we also 
needed to determine their role in the enciphering 
and deciphering process.
Based on our experience extracting a cipher key 
from matching ciphertext-plaintext symbols, we 
expected that this analysis would take no more 
than an hour or two. However, it took two full 
days of intensive work to make initial inroads into 
the cipher and begin to understand its principles. 
Numerous additional hours were required to 
identify most of the elements of the cipher key. 
Before proceeding to our detailed analysis of the 
cipher and its principles in Section 4, we invite 
the curious reader to experiment and attempt to 
recover the key from the samples in Figures 1, 2, 
and 3 below. The ciphered passages are 
underlined.
poco tempo ritrovarla et la par’ cosa miracolosa.” 
(Bongianni Gianfigliazzi to duke Cosimo, Rome, 10 
June 1558 (Archivio di Stato di Firenze, Mediceo del 
Principato, f. 3278, 90)
81
Figure 1 - First part
Figure 2 - Second part
82
Figure 3 - Third part
83
We provide here a transcription of the interlinear 
decrypted text:6
First part:
Sua Santità averia tenuto quello / che Sua 
Maiestà havesse ditto in / di non / pensava / 
sperava che Sua Santità non mancaria / di qua 
non li sia stato reso il canbio / Nostro Signore 
non vi mandasse/ Sua Maiestà … a Sua Santità se 
vi
Second part:
se sia deliberata di non consumare il matrimonio 
con lo illustrissimo signore /
Ottavio, et che per questo Nostro Signore si 
risolve di aspettare per tutto / el mese che viene, 
poi non volendo mutar verso, delibera de /
intendere alla dissolutione del matrimonio / sono 
lettere … Sua Santità vuole fare dieci o dodeci / 
cardinali
Third part:
sapeva che erano centomilia scuti contanti / 
rendermeli più suspetto di / quello ch’io li sono 
…
havesse mandato anco lei alla discoperta / 
valenti homini insieme
… 
qualche banchetto per ruinarmi con poco honore 
de miei / patroni [se lo permetteranno] / il 
periculo de la mia licentia / li animi de quelli che 
poco amano et Nostro Signore et / Vostra 
Signoria reverendissima / patisco tutta questa / 
persecutione
…
artifitiosamente per / mostrare che hanno 
rattuccata qualche pratica della pace per fare / 
in questo mezo il fatto loro
3. Antonio Elio’s Work on Cryptography
The invention of polyphonic ciphers has been
attributed to Antonio Elio (Sacco, 1958, p. 15). In 
the 16th Century, papal cipher secretaries widely 
used those ciphers (Meister, 1906; Lasry et al.,
2020). Those were employed sporadically 
6 Note that in this transcript, we have made some 
adjustments to the interlinear decryption to match the 
actual encrypted text better and that the line breaks 
elsewhere (Lasry, 2023). In Figure 4, we show the 
earliest known published polyphonic cipher, used 
by Cardinal Farnese. It is highly likely that 
Antonio Elio, his cipher secretary, was behind the 
design of this cipher. Dozens of similar 
polyphonic papal ciphers from 1545 to 1583 are 
documented in (Meister, 1906). Other examples 
of Elio’s ciphers are illustrated in (Lestocquoy 
1966, pp. 42-45).
With polyphonic ciphers, a cipher symbol (e.g., a 
certain digit) may have multiple meanings, 
usually two possible meanings. First, some letters 
of the Latin alphabet (typically h and z) are 
removed and ignored, and only the remaining 17 
or 18 letters of the alphabet must be encoded. For 
that purpose, only 9 of the 10 digits are often 
used, and the 10th is assigned to be a null. 
Figure 4 – Example of polyphonic cipher used by 
Cardinal Farnese – 1545 (Meister, 1906, p. 222)
In the example shown in Figure 4, only the letters 
a,b,c,d,e,f,g,i,l,m,n,o,p,r,s,t, and u can be 
encoded. For example, the digit 5 is used to 
encode both the letters “a” and “c,” and the digit 
2 is used for the letters “e” and “b.” The digit 4 
represents a null. Note that “et” (“and,” in Italian, 
shorthanded with “&”) is encoded with the digit 
6, which also encodes the letter “s.” Additional 
words or proper names are encoded using two￾digit numbers (e.g., 18 = “chi”). In this cipher 
example, one of these numbers may also 
do not necessarily correspond to those of the 
ciphertext.
84
represent a special symbol or a digit with a dot 
above it. 
As a result, the key of a polyphonic cipher is 
usually shorter and more compact than the key of 
a homophonic cipher. The polyphonic key can be 
memorized easily if it does not include a large 
nomenclature for words or names. Furthermore, 
as most entities are encoded with a single digit, 
ciphertexts tend to be shorter than ciphertexts 
with a homophonic digit cipher, where most 
entries are encoded with two-digit or three-digit 
codes.
While innovative, with more compact keys and 
ciphertexts of shorter lengths, polyphonic ciphers 
have several drawbacks. Firstly, polyphonic 
ciphers, such as the example above, are not 
difficult to break. For more details on a modern 
technique for the cryptanalysis of polyphonic 
ciphers, see (Lasry et al., 2020). Secondly, the 
work of the decipherer, even of a secretary who 
knows the key, may not be trivial. Because there 
is ambiguity in deciphering most digits, multiple 
options exist to decipher a segment of ciphertext, 
some of which may be plausible, and 
decipherment, even if the key is known, is not 
deterministic. Cipher secretaries in the 16th 
Century were expected to determine which 
decipherment options were correct based on 
context and their experience. To remove 
ambiguity in deciphering, diacritics such as dots 
were sometimes added (above or below the 
current digit or the preceding one) to indicate to 
the decipherer which of the two options should be 
chosen. Examples of deterministic and non￾deterministic polyphonic ciphers are given in 
(Meister, 1906) and (Lasry et al., 2020). 
4. Antonio Elio’s Innovative Cipher - our 
Analysis 
In this section, we present our analysis of the 
cipher introduced in Section 2. Following days of 
intensive teamwork testing numerous 
hypotheses, we were able to understand how the 
cipher works, recover most of the key, and 
decipher those parts for which there was no 
matching plaintext. The cipher features several 
characteristics that make it unique, innovative, 
and hard, if not impossible, to break. 
● Syllabic: Most of the enciphered text 
consists of symbols that encode 
consonant-vowel syllables, such as “ca” 
or “ni.” A few other symbols encode 
other types of syllables or letter 
combinations, or short words, such as 
“gno”, “nd”, or “che”.
● Polyphonic: Each symbol used to 
encode a syllable has a dual meaning. For 
example, the symbol used to encode 
“de” also encodes the syllable “do”. The 
second choice (“do”) is indicated by 
adding a dot above the previous cipher 
symbol. Without the dot on the previous 
cipher symbol, represents “de”. 
Similarly, represents “di” if a dot is 
above the previous symbol and “da” if 
there is no such dot. In theory, 
decipherment is deterministic. However, 
those dots are not consistently inserted; 
in other cases, they might not be visible.
As a result, deciphering those symbols is 
often non-deterministic.
● Compound symbols: Using two digits 
or more (e.g., 23, 123) to encode a 
specific alphabet letter was customary 
with digit ciphers. Such compound 
cipher symbols were rare with non-digit 
ciphers, which employ graphical 
symbols or letters to encode plaintext 
entities. In the present cipher, compound 
symbols (pairs of graphical or letter 
symbols) encode some plaintext 
elements, making cryptanalysis 
significantly more challenging, as any 
symbol may be either a stand-alone 
symbol or part of a pair of symbols used 
in conjunction. For example, 
represents “r” and represents both 
“n” and “&”, while and alone 
represent “qua” and “que”. As a result, 
deciphering segments with such dual-use 
symbols may not be deterministic. 
85
Each attribute adds to the cipher’s complexity, 
but their combination is unique and unseen in 
other contemporary ciphers. Generally, 
consonant-vowel syllables and short words are 
encoded using single symbols. Compound 
symbols (using pairs of letters of the Latin 
alphabet) are used to encode individual letters of 
the alphabet (e.g., “a”, “r”) or pairs of consonants 
such as “nt” or “cr”. As with most contemporary 
Italian ciphers, the letter “h”, and any doubled 
letter are omitted before encryption. For example, 
“hoggi” is first reduced to “ogi” before being 
encrypted.
In Figure 5, we show the reconstructed key, 
where a dot (if present) indicates that the previous 
symbol had a dot on top. In Figure 6, we show a 
decipherment example, highlighting the 
correspondence between the cipher symbols and 
the elements of the deciphered plaintext. Note: In 
the colored boxes, a dot on the left indicated that 
the previous symbol had a dot on top (or was 
supposed to have one). 
At the time we were about to finalize the paper, 
we discovered another ciphered document sent by 
the apostolic nuncio in Spain, Giovanni 
Guidiccioni, to Pope Paul III and the Farnese 
Curia, from 1535 to 1537, held in the Institute of 
History in Petersburg. Interestingly, recovering 
the key, based on matching plaintext sequences, 
of the cipher employed to encode this document 
was also quite challenging. The recovered key for 
this cipher is shown in Figure 7. This cipher has
several features in common with the cipher from 
1540, such as encoding syllables and using
polyphonic symbols and compound symbols. It is 
also more complex than the cipher from 1540, as 
it is also a homophonic cipher, unlike the 1540 
cipher, which has only one symbol per letter of 
the alphabet. Furthermore, the 1535-1537 cipher 
does not employ diacritics to disambiguate 
polyphones. This cipher further exemplifies the 
sophistication of cryptographic techniques 
employed during Elio’s service at the papal curia.
5. Conclusion
The present work illustrates Antonio Elio’s 
creative and original approach as a 
cryptographer. His work also exemplifies the 
advantage of expertise in both code-making and 
codebreaking, as only a deep understanding of 
potential weaknesses in codes can lead to the 
design of secure ciphers that would withstand 
cryptanalysis even today. 
Funding
The work of one of the authors has been 
supported by the Swedish Research Council, 
grant 2018-06074, DECRYPT – Decryption of 
Historical Manuscripts.
References
Byatt, L., 1993. “Antonio Elio”, in Dizionario 
Biografico degli Italiani, vol. 42, Rome, Instituto 
dell’Enciclopedia Italiana.
Meister, A., 1906. Die Geheimschrift im Dienste der 
Päpstlichen Kurie von Ihren Anfängen bis zum 
Ende des XVI. Jahrhunderts, vol. 11. Paderborn: F. 
Schoningh.
Lasry, G., B. Megyesi, and N. Kopal, 2020. 
“Deciphering Papal Ciphers from the 16th to the 
18th Century,” Cryptologia, 2020, pp. 479–540.
Lasry, G., 2023. “Armand de Bourbon’s Poly￾Homophonic Cipher – 1649,” in Proceedings of the 
6th International Conference on Historical 
Cryptology, 2023, pp. 105–112.
Lestocquoy, J., 1966. Correspondance des nonces en 
France. Dandino, Della Torre et Trivultio (1546-
1551), Roma-Paris, Gregoriana- Boccard.
Sacco, L., 1958. Un primato italiano: la crittografia 
nei secoli XV e XVI. Instituto storico e di cultura 
dell'arma del Genio.
86
Figure 5 - Reconstructed key - 1540 cipher
87
Figure 6 - Sample decipherment
88
Figure 7 – Reconstructed key for a similar cipher from 1535-1537
89