DECODE R8578 = BL Cotton MS Vespasian C IV f. 284 (old 261) r-v. Catalogue no. 106.
Girolamo Ghinucci, bishop of Worcester, and Edward Lee to Cardinal Wolsey, Valladolid, 16 October 1528.
Clear English, secretary hand, no cipher. Read from the DECODE images, 21 Sept 2026. Expanded and lightly
modernised in spelling; [?] marks an uncertain reading, [...] an illegible word.

[f. 284r]
Please it your grace, we have not hitherto advertised the same what spede our merchants have had
sueing for restitution of their shippes and goods dispoyled by the Emperor's subjects, because that
hitherto that hath passed and depended with such prisions [?] as hath been hitherto, so that we
could not know what end their suit should have. To John Radcliff, which came
hither with your grace's most honourable letter dated the [xviij?] of April, commanding us to further
[him] for recovery of a ship and goods in Bayon in Galizia, because we could not in that
further help him we gave our letter to the Emperor's [council?], also supplying his Majesty's grace
... for all the King's subjects. But the said Radcliff, not finding the Emperor at
Madrid, and understanding that the order of all causes was left to the queen and the president with
[the rest] of the council, he made supplication to her and the said council, of whom he
obtained a right good provision, albeit by untrue suggestion of the contrary part
that the King's subjects had taken divers Spanish ships the said provision was countermanded [?],
so that now he is yet in the court making suit, a thing which we have again
[furthered by] our letter to the Emperor's Majesty for the first warrant [?] ...  We had also other
[?] letters from your grace dated the second of June for ij ships of Dartmouth, and a letter
from Don Iñigo [de Mendoza] to the Emperor for the same causes, but the parties never came to us, but
as we heard, agreed with the parties that took the ship or the rest.  A[nother] ... one
... hath obtained provision for his ship taken, but the robbers be as yet
not able to answer the cost.  And by such light as we have by the suit and speed of a
young merchant, that which [these] iij months hath sued for ij ships taken from him, the other
suitors shall little recover.  For your grace shall understand that this young merchant would
in no wise adventure to come into Spain, but that first he obtained of Don Iñigo
such safe conduct as he could have, and letters for the same purpose to the Emperor, declaring
that he had given such safe conduct, desiring his Majesty to confirm the same.  The young
man presented Don Iñigo's letter; he had many fair promises of the Emperor that he would
see that he should be contented; albeit, fatigated with delays, at last he said to the Emperor that he
would depart, alleging loss of time and his great charge and hindrance, and that
he could no longer tarry.  The Emperor would in no wise suffer him so to depart, but
commanded him to resort to John Almayne, of whom for his costs by the Emperor's
commandment he had ... ducats, with promise that he should forthwith be dispatched.
Yet came days, and he nothing had of any dispatch, wherefore he went to
[f. 284v]
the Emperor again. He answered very well that he would content him, but he might in no wise
take the ships from his vassals which took them by good right.  Again he was sent
to John Almayne, who demanded of him what was the value of his whole
loss; he answered ij thousand ducats.  "Well," said he, "will you be content that the Emperor shall
have the ships, and for your part to take ij thousand ducats, and that that [besides] you shall have
for his labour and charge [so much] as he did?"  The Emperor's commandment [was] one thousand
ducats.  He answered that the Emperor should order him as it pleased him.  After that
he was sent to a [Fleming?] of [...] that he should make an end.  He told the
Emperor that the ships were not so much worth as he praised them.  Whereupon
they offered him a thousand and v^c ducats, [with] loss of the other.  He, considering that
the Emperor would bring him very fair to be dispatched, still the time drew forth
and he at no end; at last he had counsel to say to the Emperor that he would depart
and no longer tarry.  He that gave him counsel said, "I know well the Emperor will
not suffer you so to depart, saying no[t a] word; and if you do not so, I know well
you shall linger still."  He did so as he was counselled; the Emperor, knowing well enough
that he would take his leave of John Almayne, of whom he had great hopes, suffered
him to depart from him without any answer.  When he came to John Almayne, he
said that the Emperor offered him the choice of one of iij things: whether he would
take one of his ships again and let the takers have the other; or whether he
would that both the ships and goods should be sold, and he to have the one half, the
takers the other; or else to stand to justice.  He chose the second, whereupon
he hath the Emperor's writing in good and available form, and now departeth toward
England with it.  Wherefore it is to be thought that they shall have worse speed that
come without Don Iñigo's safe conduct.  For in the said writing the Emperor declareth
no other cause why he giveth such commandment to restore to the merchant the one
half but only Don Iñigo's safe conduct, making no mention therein of the good
entreating of his subjects in England.  When we shall have more of the
success of these things, we shall with all diligence advertise your grace, whom
our Lord preserve [and] have in his keeping.  At Valladolid the xvj of October 1528.
          Your grace's most humble servants,
                         Hier. Eps Wigornien.
                         Edouardus Leus
