Bergenroth, Calendar of State Papers, Spain, vol. 2 (1866), via british-history.ac.uk, fetched 2026-09-21

CSP Spain vol. 2 no. 549
8 May. M. Re. Ac. d. Hist. Salazar. A. 28. ff. 40-44. 549. Alonso Sanchez, Imperial Ambassador in Venice, to the Emperor. His negotiations with the Republic have been somewhat interrupted by the illness of Georgio Cornaro, who is one of the commissioners and a good Imperialist. The Doge, who was ninety years of age, died on the 7th, and it was necessary to wait for the election of another Doge. That was another cause of delay. On the 8th he and the ambassador of the King of England went to the Signory, and said they knew that the Doge had died, but as in Venice affairs of state are not interrupted by such an event, they begged them to give their definite answer about the alliance (between Venice, the Emperor, and the King of England). They answered that they would send them their commissioners. Fears that ... (fn. 1) Knows very well that until a new Doge is elected nothing will be done. Fears that the Venetians, under the pretext that they must first elect a new Doge, will delay their answer until they know whether the French will invade Italy, and until the Infante has sent his answer. The Pope has exhorted the Republic to conclude peace with him, and the English ambassador has done all he can to bring the affair to a speedy conclusion. Has had letters from the Infante. Has replied to them. Does not know what decision the Infante will make. Does not think that the exiles will pay the 18,000 ducats in one instalment, as they have promised. The Venetians answered the French in general words about their aid in case a French army should invade Italy. The French were not satisfied with the answer. Cardinal of Auch, &c.—Venice, the 8th of May 1523. Addressed : "To his Sacred, Imperial, and Catholic Majesty the Emperor and King, our Lord." Indorsed : "To the King. 1523. Venice. Alonso Sanchez. The 8th of May. Answered." Spanish. Autograph in cipher. Contemporary deciphering. pp . 6.

CSP Spain vol. 2 no. 552
20 May. M. Re. Ac. d. Hist. Salazar. A. 28. ff. 83-85. 552. Alonso Sanchez, Imperial Ambassador in Venice, to the Emperor. The Venetians have elected a new Doge, Andrea Gritti, who is the most ardent partisan of France in Venice. Thinks, nevertheless, that the negotiations with the Signory are so far advanced that the Republic would conclude the treaty of alliance (with the Emperor and the King of England) if the Infante would only send his power.—Venice, the 20th of May 1523. Addressed : "To his Sacred, Imperial, and Catholic Majesty the Emperor and King, our Lord." Indorsed : "To the King. 1523. Venice. From Alonso Sanchez, the 20th of May. Answered." Spanish. Autograph in cipher. Contemporary deciphering. p . 1.

CSP Spain vol. 2 no. 554
5 June. M. Re. Ac. d. Hist. Salazar. A. 28. f. 157. 554. Alonso Sanchez, Imperial Ambassador in Venice, to the Emperor. Has at last received letters from the Infante, who makes some difficulties about ratifying the treaty with the Venetians. The Duke of Sessa has sent a courier to the Infante with letters from the Pope.—Venice, the 5th of June. Addressed : "To his Sacred, Imperial, and Catholic Majesty the Emperor and King, &c." Indorsed : "To the King. 1523. Alonso Sanchez. Venice, The 5th of June. Answered." Spanish. Autograph in cipher. Contemporary deciphering. pp . 7.

CSP Spain vol. 2 no. 558
13 June. M. Re. Ac. d. Hist. Salazar. A. 28. ff. 224-228. 558. Alonso Sanchez, Imperial Ambassador in Venice, to the Emperor. The demands of the Infante place him in great difficulties. The Venetians refuse to continue the negotiations, although he (Alonso Sanchez), the nuncio, and the ambassador of the King of England have done all that is possible to persuade them to make peace with him (the Emperor). The Signory have sent to tell him that they still wish to conclude a league (with the Emperor and the King of England), but that the Infante must send his power and be a party to the treaty. They say they will entirely justify their behaviour to the Pope, to him (the Emperor), and to the King of England. Hopes the Prothonotary (Caracciolo) will soon arrive. Does not insist that the peace with Venice shall be expressly declared to be an eternal peace. It is said that the French will soon be in Italy, as neither he (the Emperor) nor the King of England occupy them much in the north—Venice, the 13th of June 1523. Indorsed : "To the King. 1523. Venice. Alonso Sanchez. The 13th of June. Answered." Spanish. Autograph in cipher. Contemporary deciphering. pp . 3.
