csp_pp604-615.html y in cipher, deciphered. P . 1. Dec. 9. 1471. Somer to Cecil. 1. Wrote to him from Dover of his embarking. Arrived at Calais that day, where are five companies of footmen evilly furnished. The fortification of the citadel goes forward apace. A cross wall is made from the Water Gate to the Bullein Gate; and at each end of the wall is a great bastion, answered by a flank to each other, and a ditch about fifty feet broad. Takes the wall to be about ten or twelve feet thick, and judged about 120 labourers. Their storehouse within the citadel goes forward; he takes it to be 140 feet square. Saw but one small man-of-war in the haven. 2. Throckmorton is sent back to St. Germain. Yet they would fain have somewhat done, for every day since Sunday (the great day of talk), either Mauvissiere or Des Champes comes to Smith, by way of visit, and ever to have Sir Nicholas set at liberty to treat, and yet to promise not to depart without the King's [Page 614] leave, generally without limitation of time. But they return as well satisfied as they come. 3. What he commanded him to declare to Sir Nicholas, he has learned from some of this Council that the French Ambassador, De Foix, advertised the same, and much more, hither; and besides that has so written to L'Aubespine. The Ambassador's secretary has further said to them and the Queen Mother, from his master, that rather than the Queen would either continue this war or begin afresh, she would desire peace upon her knees, and that she wished for peace with water in her eyes. And that this is the cause not only of their refusal for Sir Nicholas to treat at liberty, but also that they will be less treatable in the treaty. The same Secretary said to the writer in a passion, that if the Queen had war one year longer she would sue for peace. This Secretary goes hence this day, and will make his master believe that the King offered Sir Nicholas his liberty, but that they stood upon the niceness of words. 4. At this talk with the King and his Council, not one was present of the house of Châtillon, nor the Constable, who was troubled with the colic, but is well again. The Admiral and M. D'Andelot lodge within the Court. They come to the affairs and council when they are called, as does also the Cardinal of Châtillion. They are narrowly watched, and they receive no letters that are not first seen by the Queen Mother. None of the house of Guise are lodged in the Court, and come very seldom to Court, saving the Cardinal of Guise. There have been hereabouts all this while 1,000 footmen, mostly arquebusiers. The same are now brought to 500, and lie within half a mile of the Louvre, in a village called Chailly. Has talked with Sir Nicholas about Stuart's matter by Cecil's command, and has enclosed his answer.—Paris, 9 Dec. 1563. Signed . Orig. Portions in cipher, deciphered. Add. Endd. by Cecil. Pp . 4. Dec. 9. 1472. Alexander Du Bois to —. His last letter was on the 3rd. Clough tries to excuse his own negligence by throwing the blame on him. Is certain that he always has his letters within six days. Thirty Spanish galleys were about to enter Marseilles, but when those of the town prepared to resist them they sailed away. The Parisians have begun again some slight disturbances. Stuart is angry because he is not written to. The writer is however content, as letters bring danger. Stuart told him that the King and the Queen Mother go into Lorraine, where will be the Dukes of Ferrara, Savoy and Brunswick; afterwards the Court goes to Lyons, and then to Narbonne
=====
