Original, 


to my Lord admyrall and you, uppon hys arryvall at the cowrt. 
Indorſed, 1111 Februarii 1559: 


To THE RIGHT HONNOURABLE SIX WILLIAM CECILL KNIGHT, THE 
QUEENE'S MAJESTIE'S PRINCIPALL SECRETARY, 


R SECRETARY, this bearer Thomas Keys, whome I have namid in 


ving ben heere in this courte about his maſter's affaires, and now retourn- 
inge into Scotland, deſireth to paſſe through Englande ; and for that pour- 
poſe hathe requeſtid me to recommende him unto yow, for th' obteyn- 
inge of his paſſeport: which for dyvers reſpects, I thought, I cowde not 
refuſe to do; and ſo require yow to ſhew him your good favour therin 
accordinglye. | 

Wareras I wrote in my laſt lettres of the fourth of this preſent, that I 
was then readye to departe out of this towne towards the courte: I have 
thought meete for dyvers good cauſes, and for the Queen's Majeſtie's ſer- 


10 


20 


my former lettres Thomas Kyre, ſervaunt to th Earle of Huntley, ha- 


30 


10 


20 


30 


— 


10 


20 


30 


A. D. 1566. Q. E LIZ ABE T E. 


vice, to flay here two or three dayes longer ; as yow ſhall further under- 
ſtande, when I ſhall have better meanes therunto. I alſo advertiſid at 
that tyme My Lords of the counſell and other, that it was told to me that 


morninge for a trothe, that the viſdame de Chartres was departed to God. 


But I underſtande finds, that he is not yet dead, ſomewhat recoverid, but 
not without great danger. I heere, that th' Embaſſadours of th' Em- 
pyre, of whome I wrote before, have ben at the courte, and ſpoken with 
the King about their legacion. Who hath made them anſwer: firſt, as 
for the generall cownſell to be kepte, (wherof they alſo movid him) that 
he was yet yonge; and that in reſpect therof he will be contented to be 
ordrid by the rope and other great potentates, to whome he doth re- 
ferre the determination and orderinge of that matter. And as for reſti- 
tution of the free townes that he holdithe, he requirid reſpite of ſix monethes 
to make them anſwer theruppon. So that upon theſe anſwers they have 
taken their leave, as I heere, the ſeconde of this monethe, and ſo comme 
awaye. 

T HEAR ſtill fd Aumale's going, as ] have written; and now ] hear 
alſo, that he goeth ſhortly to Mets: and whether it be to defend that; or 
the better, under that coulour, to prepare himſelf and bis company againſt 
the time of his long ſpoken of vcyaige, I know not. T hear alſo, that the 
Marques d Elbeuf's going into Scotland is ſtay d: (whether it will proove 
ſo or no, I thinke yow ſhall be better advertiſed from that coaſt, then I 
can learne it heere; «whereof I looke to bear more, ſhortly too) and alſo, that 
La Broſſe commith ſhortly out of Scotland, and paſſeth through England. 
Theſe men (I underſtande) are ſomwhat perplex upon ſome points of Proteſ- 
tant's comming: for what it is, I cannot yet learne. IT hear alſo, that the 
cardinall of Lorraine ſaid, that th Earl of Huntley deſervid rather to 
be chaſtiſid as a rebell, than payed his pencion, and entretained as a friend; 
and that he that is not with him is againſt him. 

Mods 1E UR d' Aubigny hath (as I am enfourmid) gyven over his com- 
panye of fiftye men at armes. The cauſe therof, as I heere, was, that he 
demandid to have had th' Earle of Arrain's companye, being scottiſhmen; 
and faide, that yf he had not that, he wolde gyve over his ane; for that 


he wold not have the leading of Frenchmen ; wheruppon the puke of 


Guiſe tooke him at his wourde: and fo departid, diſcharged therof, in 
greate angre; his company beinge appointid ſtreight to the conte d' Eu, 
the puke of Nevers eldiſt ſonne; and th' Earle of Arrain's companye to 
the prince of Jenville, eldiſt ſonne to the puke of Guile, Sins which tyme 
I heere, that the faid d' Aubigny hath ben ſent for to the courte agayne, 


323 


324 Q EDFETARET EE ab. 1560, 


and much made of; and is thought, that he ſhall have his companye a- 
gayne. Baron de la Garde, I heere, is gon to Marſeilles, and there is 
fallen ſicke. They ſpeake till of galleys for our ſeas againſt this next ſum- 
mer. The king is departid from Blois; and wil be at Vendoſme, (ſeven 
leagues thence) as I heere, theſe eight or ten dayes. 

IT hath ben tolde me fins my comminge to this towne, that 27 zs de- 
terminid, that ſoun after my arrivall at the court, I and mine ſhall be ſe- 
queſtrid. Whether it be true or no, I know not: but if it proove true, 
then /hall I have no meanes to write to any body, or otherwiſe deviſe how 
to ſend you worde thereof, but by the King of Spain's Ambaſſador ; where- 10 
of I am not ſure neither: for being in that taking, J. ſhall be ſo ftraitly 
looked to, that neither I, nor none of my men, ſhall have any conference with 
him or any of bis; as, I underſtande, Mr Wotton was handelid at two ſe- 
veral times of breach. And therefore if you have any word from me there- 
of by meanes of the ſaid Ambaſſadour, it ſhall be an adventure : if not from 
me, and that he will do ſo much as to let you know it by ſome good meanes ; 
(wherof I will move him at my firſt coming to the court) then the Queen's 
Majeſtie ſhall be the more beholding to bim; and he ſhall well deſerve thanks 
at her Highnes handes, and to be otherwiſe confiderid far his good inclinaci- 

on towards England; which he hath well ſhewed ſince he came to ſerve here. 20 
And therfore I muſt needs require yow to have an eye to thoſe Ambaſſa- 
dors and hoſtaiges with you. 

Uron myne audience of the Frenche king, I thinke I ſhall have occa- 
fion to depeche to yow ; and ſo maye yow heere from me ſhortly, if I 
be not reſtrainid : but if you do not, and that wind and wether hindre not 
the paſſaige; then may you imagin ſome ſuch thing to be happenid to me. 
You had never a better time to have to do with theſe men, then you have at 
this preſent ; not only to bring them to better tearmes, but alſo to provide 
now, that hereafter we ſhall have litle cauſe to feare them. I hear, that 
chevalier de Sevre is none of the conſtables band, nor nothing his; for paſ- 30 
fing by his honſe at this time, as he came towards you, he ſaw him not: and 
yet aas it he that firſt brought him to be of any doing. 

AND Sir, conſidering in what cace things now ar; and therfore for 
that yow can well conſider, how much it importethe, that you heere from 
me, and moſt of all, that I heere often from yow : I pray you, let me crave 
of the queene's Majeſtie and you, that her nighnes ſtick not at the ſpend- 
ing a litle money now in ſending to and fro; that things maye therby be 
the fuller underſtanden how they ſhall paſſe from tyme to tyme : wherin 
her nighnes ſhall fynde great ſervice, which cannot but ſerve her to good 


pourpoſe, 40 


10 


20 


* PEN 1 km... « a>. AS 


A. D. 1560. Q ELIZABETH. | 325 


£ 


pourpoſe. And thus I take my leave of yow, wiſhing yo healthe and 
proſperite, From Paris, the viii of February 1 559. 


Yours aſſuridly to commaunde 


MMkecla L, 
—2 


J underſtande, that this ſaid bearer is in very good eſtimation and cre- 
dict about bis maſter the Earl of Huntley, and ſomewhat knoweth his maiſ- 
ters humour. In talking with him he hath told me, and aſſurid me, that 
