

To THE RIGHT HONNOURABLE MY VERIE GOOD LORDES, THE LORDES 
AND OTHERS OF THE QUEENE S MAJESTIE'S PRYVYE COUNSELL. 


Sir Nicholas I Tmaye pleaſe your good Lordſhippes t underſtand, that the xv111 
_—_— of this preſent I ſent to the courte for audience; the king being then 
Lordes of at Morell, viii leagues from this towne. And the meſſaige being done to 
he Coune®* the cardinall of Lorrayne (the xing and puke of Guiſe beinge abrode a 
3 huntinge) he made anſwer, that I might come when I wolde: but for 
15438 that the king taryed not there longe, and from thence wolde go to Ven- 
Parzsz, doſme, where he wold not remayne above a daye, and thence to Chaſ- 
oe teau Renart, there to abide but three or fowre dayes, and ſo ſtaye no tyme 
— at any place till he came to Amboiſe; he ſaide, that, theeſe being no pla- 
ces of receipt, I cowde have none audyence, till the xing came to Am- 
boiſe; where, he ſaide, he wolde be about vii 1 dayes hence. By this 
your Honnours can well gather, that they have no great fancy to hear 
me, nor to my coming to the court, though they have long defired to have me 
in their contrey: that they ſhift me off for audience, under coulour of no 
place meete to receive me, till the King come to Amboiſe. And yet am I well 
enfourmed, that Vendoſme is a good towne ; and fo is Chaſteau Renart a ve- 
ry good bourg : but ſuch coulours lack they none, when they are diſpoſed to da- 

hy with men: | 
Ar ur Jones being at the courte (for I ſent him to demaunde audience) 
Juch as wer of his familier acquaintance, as well French, Italien, as others, 
uſed themſelfes very firangely unto bim; and in ſted of frendly entretayne- 
ment, which he hath heertofore receyved at their handes, they now ſhrank 


10 


20 


30 


20 


A. D. 1560, Q. ELIZABETH. 


from him, and being ſaluted wold make no contenance again. Wherefore, 
my Lordes, I cannot but think, that this kinde of dealing pronoſtiketh ſome 
jalouſye they have conceived of the Queen's Majeſtie's doings to their litle 
commodity ; as indeede I have ben advertiſed, that they beginne marvelouſly 
to ſuſpect and miſtruſt now indede. Whether it be, for that they may have 
hearde ſomething out of England from their new Ambaſſadour, and others, 
that pleaſith them not : or whether, having reaſoned with themſelfes, they 
find their conſciences burdened; and ſo doubt, whether other will do to them 
as they wold not faile to do to others in like cace, I know not; and therfore 
10 10 leave it to better judgementis. | 
Bur to waye both with the delay of myne audience, and alſo ſtrange u- 
ſaige of my miniſters; I truſt, your Lordſhips can and will requite thoſe 
Ambaſſadors with the like: and ſo for like bread, like broth. And this is 
the verye waye to deale with theſe folke, and thereby bringe them to know 
themſelfes, and make theim well perceve the greatneſſe of their neighbours, 
of 1hom they erſt made but ſmall accompt ; which is to be hopid they ſhall 
not only confeſſe to themſelfes, but alſo feele, if it pleaſe the Queen's Majeſ- 
tre to procede as ſhe hath begonne. 
Mr Lords, for that it importeth much for me, and the Queene's Ma- 
20 jeſtie's ſervice chieflye, (as your Honnours can well conſider) to heere of- 
ten out of England; Hecially in this doubtfull tyme : I beſeeche your Lord- 
ſhippes, that I maye ſo do. Wherby underſtanding how things go at 
home from tyme to tyme, I ſhall be the better able to order my /elf and 
other ſervices, greatly to the advancement of England's ſervice and affaires 
on this fide. The neglecting wherof wer of to great importance; and /6 
likewiſe, hearing nothing from thence, ſervice will be greatly hindred, and 
T perplexed dyvers wayes; as I begynne alreadye, havinge not ones heard 
out of England ſins my comminge from thence, 
For other advertiſements from hence I referre your Lordſhippes to 
zo my lettres to the Queene's Majeſtie, And ſo pray God long to preſerve 
the ſame in healthe, honour, and felicite. From Blois, the xx of February 


1559- 


20 

