BL Harley MS 7003 ff. 314r-315r (DECODE R7768 = f.314r + f.314v; R7769 = f.314v + f.315r; f.314v is imaged on both).
A fair copy in one hand, docketed "mr Cowleys Hand" (DECODE read it as "Conleys"). Code groups are in [ ].
Transcribed from the DECODE images on 21 Sept 2026. Contractions expanded (yt = that, wch = which, yr = your).

=== Letter 1. Paris, Decemb. 28. 1652 (f.314r-v) ===
I have received yours of the 21th of Decemb. and have not much at this time to return you in answer to it. I am
glad to find that the unlucky and unseasonable sending of Monsieur Bourdeaux into England does not yet produce such
ill effects in Holland as wee had reason to fear, and which are yet too likely to happen. I am very much of your
opinion that a totall victorie of the Dutch fleet over the English (as it was at first reported to us) might have
been very dangerous to us, and hope that it is by Gods providence better disposed for our Maisters advantage in the
manner which it passed, with some encouragment to the Hollanders, and noe cause of despaire of successe in the
prosecution of the warre on the other side. Wee hear nothing of the reception of Mons.r Bourdeaux, nor what effect
that Envoy is like to have. The Cardinal is not yet come hither; his stay cannot I believe proceed out of any
apprehensions of his safety here, for the Town is yet in a perfect disposition to quiet & obedience, and the
imprisonment of the Cardinal de Rets (which many people thought capable of begetting new disorders. Next week the
King intends to goe himselfe in person to the Parlament, & there to verify several Arrests which if they receive noe
difficulty, will bring him in seven or eight millions of Livr: and it is believed that there will bee noe opposition
to it. The Army is now setting down before Ste Menehoud; they had lately a quarter of 200 or 300 men beaten up by
the Prince, but have sent out such a party to follow & wait upon him, as will keep him from disturbing them any
more, however I believe the Cardinal will not stay for the taking of that Town which is likely yet to cost them a
months time. This is all the news of this place. I wish I could send you any Account of the present estate
of [228: 196: 188:] (for it is undoubtedly of great importance if you can procure any assistance to be sent thither
against next spring, and therefore you are earnestly desired to labour hard in that proposition) but wee know
nothing here that you will not be informed of by [102: 43: 97: 133: 52: 180:] and concerning [57: 102: 58: 20: 30:]
dispatch back (who was the person that came lately from [248: 88: 46: 47: 96: 52: 7: 57:]) Mr Chanchellour has given
an Account of it to Secretary Nicolas. I doe not at all doubt but that your necessities must needs be very pressing,
& am very sorry they are like to be releived in soe unaequall a measure from hence. but by the next I shall
certainly send you a part of the money for which I engaged myselfe to you and the rest suddainly after. I have
constantly written to you all the french news that I knew, if you have heard of more, they are either false reports,
or things that came not here to my knowledge. at present I have noe more to trouble you withall.
[docket, other hand:] mr Cowleys Hand

=== Letter 2. Paris, May. 3. 1653 (f.314v-315r) ===
I have received yours of the 24th of Apr: to which there is little to be said, or indeed to any thing of our
publique affairs, till we see the event of the late overtures of a Treaty betwixt England and Holland. though I
confess for my own part I am not convinced by your Letter in the point of the Kings journey into Holland, which I
not only believe that hee ought to have made long since, but continue in the same mind even now in the conjuncture,
nor can imagine that the not succeeding after having attempted this almost onley way for his recovery, can bee
[soe] inconvenient or dishonourable for him as it will bee not to have attempted at all. But the time now for it is
like to be past soe suddainly, that I cannot expect to see it put in execution, and therefore doe onely deliver my
opinion for my justification hereafter (without any hope that it should now be followed) when the contrary councell
shall be generally condemned, as I doubt not it will bee, when it is too late, and that the Hollanders themselves
will then be the first men who will perswade the world that their inclinations were soe good to the King and his
cause, that he might have engaged them in his quarrell, if hee had endeavoured it by his personall appearance &
diligences amongst them. But whatsoever the truth of this matter is, It is now (I fear) become remedilesse. The
French Court is removed for some few days to Fountainbleau, whither I shall go tomorrow morning. I am told this day
a news by the Count de Brienne, which if it be true, will set us into play again in the World; it is, that the
Bourdelois have resolved to declare themselves a Republique, that they have desired the protection of the English,
& that they have promised it, & are preparing for their succour, I wish I could assure you of the truth of this;
thus farre it is certain that the Bourdelois have lately sent a person into England. There would bee in this case
but one thing to bee apprehended, that the English would never embarque themselves in such a business without
being assured before of their agreement with Holland, but that which I yet apprehend most of it, is, that it is not
true. Touching the proposition you make for your sonne, it receives noe difficulty either with the King or Queen,
and she intends to write to you (I think by this post, however, at farthest by the next) to assure you of it. This
is all I have to say at present, I am --
You may doe well to write a word to Mr [203:]

=== f.315r lower half: start of a different letter, not part of either record's cipher ===
My Lo: I have received your Lo.ps letter of the 11 of January, & must send your Lo.dp my humble thanks for it ...
(writer at the Hague, waiting on the Dutch-English treaty "for soe I am commaunded to doe from Paris"; continues
on f.315v, not imaged). No code groups on the imaged part.
