MEMOIRS 


OP 


PRINCE    RUPERT, 

AND  THE  CAVALIERS. 


VOL.  III. 


'X 

MEMOIRS 


OF 


PRINCE     RUPERT, 

, 

AND    THE    CAYALIERS. 

f  nclutimg  t^etr  Itibate 


NOW    FIRST    PUBLISHED    FROM    THE    ORIGINAL    MANUSCRIPTS. 

BY 

ELIOT    WARBURTON, 

AUTHOR    OF   "THE    CRESCENT    AND    THE    CROSS." 

IN   THREE  VOLUMES. 
VOL.  III. 


LONDON: 
RICHARD    BENTLEY,  '. 


in  (^ttrmarg  to  Jger 

M.DCCC.XLIX. 


Dp 

ifp-7 


LONDON  : 

Primed  by  S.  &  J.  HENTLEY  and  HENRY  FLF.Y, 
Bangov  House,  Shoe  Lane, 


CONTENTS 

TO 

THE    THIRD    VOLUME. 


CHAPTER  I. 
THE  TREATY  ;  THE  LAST  FIGHT. 

PAGE 

THE  KING'S  "HAPPY  PROGRESS."  —  TREATY  OF  UXBRIDGE. —  LEICESTER 

SIEGE.  —  BATTLE  OF  NASEBY.  —  SURRENDER  OF  BRISTOL.  —  QUARREL  AT 
NEWARK.  —  ALL  IS  OVER.  —  THE  CAVALIERS  ARE  SUPPRESSED.  —  RUPERT 
LEAVES  ENGLAND  ........  1 


CHAPTER  II. 
RUPERT  AT  SEA. 

SURRENDER  OF  OXFORD.  —  FRENCH  CAMPAIGN.  —  RUPERT  BECOMES  AN 
ADMIRAL  ;  HIS  CRUISE  TO  IRELAND  ;  TO  THE  MEDITERRANEAN  ;  TO  THE 
WEST  INDIES. — RETURN  TO  FRANCE  .....  233 


CHAPTER  III. 
THE  KING'S  DEATH ;  ITS  CONSEQUENCES. 

THE    KING    AT    NEWPORT,    AT    HURST    CASTLE,   IN    LONDON.  —  HIS    TRIAL 
AND   HIS   END  ........    391 

VOL,    III.  b 


VI  CONTENTS. 

i 
CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  LAST. 

PAGE 

RUPERT    IN    PRANCE  :     TURNS    TO    PHILOSOPHY.  —  THE    RESTORATION.  — 
SEA-FIGHTS. — DEATH   OP   PRINCE   RUPERT    .  .417 


APPENDIX. 

A.  MARQUIS   OP   WORCESTER   (LORD   GLAMORGAN'S)    LETTER  .  .515 

B.  PITT'S  RELATION  .  .  .  .  .  .  .531 

C.  VOYAGE   TO   THE   RIVER   GAMBIA  .....      538 

D.  PRINCE  RUPERT'S  LOG       ......          540 

E.  LIST  OP  PRINCE  RUPERT'S  ENGRAVINGS  ....     546 

F.  JAMES  THE  SECOND'S  LETTER        .....          549 

G.  CROMWELL   IN   IRELAND  .  .  .  .  .  .551 

H.  PRINCE  RUPERT'S  LETTER  TO  SIR  JOHN  GRENVILLE  .  .          552 

I.  IRISH  PLANTATION  PAPERS   ......   553 

K.  ORDER  OP  PRINCE  RUPERT'S  FUNERAL    ....      555 

L.  PRINCE  RUPERT'S  EXECUTOR'S  ACCOUNT  .  ...  .    558 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

PORTRAIT  OP  JAMES  GRAHAM,  MARQUIS  OP  MONTROSE  .  to  face  flie  title. 

PLAN  OP  THE  BATTLE  OP  NASEBY              .            .  .            .            104 

PORTRAIT  OP  SIR  CHARLES  LUCAS        ...  .      40G 


MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE 


OF 


PRINCE  EUPEET 


AND 


THE    CAVALIEES 


CHAPTER  I. 
THE  TREATY ;    THE  LAST  FIGHT. 

THE    KING'S    "  HAPPY     PROGRESS." TREATY     OF    UXBRIDGE. LEICESTER 

SIEGE. BATTLE    OF    NASEBY. SURRENDER   OF    BRISTOL. QUARREL    AT 

NEWARK. ALL    IS    OVER. THE   CAVALIERS    ARE    SUPPRESSED.— RUPERT 

LEAVES    ENGLAND. 


"  I  look  upon  the  way  of  treaties,  as.  a  retiring  from  fighting 
like  beasts,  to  arguing  like  men,  whose  strength  should  be  more 
in  their  understandings  than  their  limbs."  CHARLES  I. 

.  Icon  Basilicon. 
One  body  jars, 

And  with  itself  does  fight, 
War  meets  with  wars, 

And  might  resisteth  might  j 
And  both  sides  say  they  love  the  king, 
And  peace  will  bring, 
Yet  since  these  fatal  broils  begun, 
Strange  riddle  !  both  have  conquer'd,  neither  won. 

Old  Song. 

THE  first  report  concerning  the  battle  of  Marston 
Moor  reached  the  King  on  the  5th  of  July  at 
Evesham.  The  messenger  had  left  the  field  while 

VOL.  III.  B 


2  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JULY, 

victory  inclined  to  the  Royalists,  and  it  was  not 
until  the  12th  that  the  terrible  truth  was  ascer- 
tained. The  destruction  of  his  Northern  army  con- 
firmed the  King  in  his  determination  to  follow 
Essex  to  the  South,  and  thus  the  expedition  to 
Exeter  was  undertaken,  as  narrated  in  the  last 
chapter.1  The  mere  data  of  his  Majesty's  progress 


1  Lord  Digby's  letters  always  deserve  perusal ;  I  have  almost 
a  continued  narrative  from  him  and  others,  running  contempo- 
raneously with  Sir  Edward  Walker's  very  much  amplified  history 
from  which  the  summary  in  the  text  is  taken. 

LORD    DIGBY    TO    PRINCE    RUPERT. 
MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

Since  my  last  unto  you  from  Bath,  wherein  I  stated  unto 
your  Highness  the  condition  of  our  affairs  here,  and  of  our  resolu- 
tions forward,  we  have  marched  on  as  fast  as  conveniently  we  could 
towards  a  conjunction  with  Prince  Maurice's  army,  whereof  we 
are  now  within  a  day's  march,  and  no  enemy  between  to  hinder 
us  ;  for  Essex  hearing  of  our  approach,  while  Prince  Maurice  lay 
at  Kirton,and  he  about  Tiverton,  thought  with  a  swift  march  in  the 
night  to  have  surprised  him,  or  clapped  betwixt  him  and  Exeter, 
of  which  he  missed  but  very  little.  But  the  Prince,  by  good 
intelligence,  got  an  hour  before  him  in  his  retreat  to  Exeter,  by 
which  miss  Essex  was  cast  westward  of  us  both  ;  and  being  not 
able  to  hinder  our  joining  is  now  retreated  towards  Plymouth, 
where,  I  believe,  he  intends  to  strengthen  himself  with  the  gar- 
rison, and  with  mariners  out  of  the  fleet  which  lies  there,  and  to 
give  us  battle  upon  the  best  advantage  he  can  :  but  we  see  not 
how  he  can  well  subsist  when  we  shall  come  near  him,  with  Corn- 
wall behind  him,  where  we  have  forces  enough  to  keep  the  passes 
into  that  country.  In  a  word,  sir,  we  are  likely  (by  God's  bless- 
ing) to  have  a  very  fair  opportunity  against  him,  for  which  we 
owe  many  thanks  to  Waller  for  dallying  still  about  Oxford.  Our 
great  care  at  this  time  is  for  your  Highness,  which  we  cannot 
express  better  than  by  taking  all  the  care  we  can  to  supply 
your  Highness  with  powder,  both  from  Bristol  and  from  Ireland, 
whither  we  have  sent  on  purpose  several  messengers,  and  we  are 
not  out  of  hopes  but  by  this  time  your  Highness  may  have  had 
the  iruit  of  their  solicitation. 

We  are  very  glad  here  to  understand  that  Goring  is  come  so 


1644.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.  3 

will  be  here  sufficient,  and  is  not  uninteresting  from 
its  precision  and  particulars.1 


near  as  Bristol,  the  business  he  came  for,  shall  be  gone  through  with, 
the  superseding  of  Wilmot ;  but,  till  we  have  spoken  with  him, 
I  cannot  certainly  tell  your  Highness  in  what  particular  manner, 
as  soon  as  it  is  done  your  Highness  shall  receive  an  express ;  in 
the  meantime,  and  ever,  I  beseech  your  Highness  to  believe 
that  I  am  Your  Highness's 

Most  faithful  humble  servant, 
Exeter,  July  27th,  1644.  GEORGE  DlGBY. 

1  July,  1644. 

Nights  Miles 

Monday,  the  1st,  to  Dedington ;  the  Parsonage  .       1       2 

Tuesday,  the  2nd,  to  Morton  Hinmarch ;  the  White 

Hart  .....  ••  ./.  1  12 

Wednesday,  the  3rd,  to  Evisham ;  Alderman  Martin's  .       910 

Friday,  the  12th,  to  Coverley ;  the  Earl  of  Down's  by 

Brad  way  and  Sudley  .  .  .  .116 

Saturday,  the  13th,  to  Sapperton;  Sir  Henry  Poole's, 

near  Cirencester  .  .  .  .  .17 

Sunday,  the  14th,  to  Bodmyngton  [Badminton]  ;  the 
Lord  Herbert's  of  Ragland  [the  house  of  Lord  Vis- 
count Somerset's  daughter  and  heiress,  Sir  Edward 
Walker  says]  .  .  <  J  '  .  1  14 

Monday,  the  15th,  to  Bath ;  Sir  Thomas  Bridges,  the 

governor's  .  .  .  .  .  2  11 

Wednesday,  the  17th,*  to  Mells ;  Sir  John  Homer's,  the 
King's  by  attainder  [Sir  John  had  fought  in  Waller's 
ranks  at  Lansdown  and  Roundway  Down]  .  .28 

Friday,  the  19th,  to  Bruton ;  Sir  Charles  Bartley's    .  .       2     10 

Saturday,  the  20th,  to  Ilchester;  Mr.  Dawes's  house    .       4     12 

Wednesday,  the  24th,  to  Charde  ;  Mr.  Barcroft's,  a  mer- 
chant of  London  .  .  .  .112 

Thursday,  the  25th,  to  Hunington ;  Dr.  Marwood's,  a 

physician  .  .  .  .  .  1  12 

Friday,  the  26th,  to  Exeter  :  Bedford  House,  Sir  John 

Bartley's,  the  governor  .  .  .  1  15 

Saturday,  the  27th,  to  Crediton — dinner  :  to  Bradinch ; 

Mr.  Seuter's — supper  .  .  .  1  16 


*  On  this  day  the  remote  and  quiet  Island  of  Lundy,  in  the 
Bristol  Channel,  was  summoned  by  the  Parliament,  and  bravely 
defended  for  the  King. — Rupert's  Correspondence. 

B  2 


4  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

This  period,  up  to  the  end  of  August,  was  only 
signalised  by  the  following  event:  Sir  Francis  Ded- 

Nights  Miles 

Sunday,  the  28th,  to  Crediton  ;  Mr.  Tucker's  house      .       1       8 
Monday,  the  29th,  to  Bow;    Mr.  Philips's — a  mean 

quarter        ...-••  1° 

Tuesday,  the  30th,  to  Oakhampton  ;  at  Mr.  Rotenbury's 
Wednesday,  the  last,  to  Lifton ;  the  Parsonage-house    .       1       8 

August,  1644. 

Thursday,  the  1st,  to  Trecarel ;  Mr.  Manington's  house 

in  Cornwall  .  .  •  •  .19 

Friday,  the  2nd,  to  Liskard ;  Mr.  Jeane,  a  commis- 
sioner's house  .  .  .  .  .68 

Thursday,  the  8th,  to  Boconnock ;  the  Lord  Mohun's, 
but  called  from  thence  to  make  ready  at  Mr.  Glin's 
of  Glinford ;  affrighted  from  thence  by  the  militia. 
His  Majesty  lay  in  the  field  all  night  in  his  coach  on 
Boconnock  Down,  a  heathy  place  .  .  .15 

Friday,  the  9th,  to  Boconnock  again,  where  his  Majesty 

quartered  .  .  .  .  .  .  21  5 

Saturday,  the  last  day,  to  Lestithiall,  thence  toward 
Foy ;  his  Majesty  lay  in  the  field,  his  meat  and  drink 
dressed  at  Mr.  Hixt's ;  the  militia  disarmed ;  Essex 
fled  the  field ;  the  articles  confirmed  .  .25 

And  here  his  Majesty's  clemency  was  most  eminent ; 
when  having  all  the  infantry  at  his  mercy,  he  not 
only  pardoned  the  soldiers  in  general,  but  admitted 
the  chief  officers  to  kiss  his  hand  :  only  refused  that 
favour  to  Major-Gen eral  Skippon,  as  being  too  great 
an  enemy  to  his  Majesty's  honour  and  safety  .  2  5 

September,  1644. 

Monday,  the  2nd,  to  Boconnock ;  the  Lord  Mohun's  again       2       5 
Wednesday,  the  4th,  to  Liskard ;  Mr.  Jeane's  .  .17 

Thursday,  the  5th,  to  Tavistock ;  the  Lady  Glanvil's    .       5     15 
Tuesday,  the  10th,  to  Widey,  near  Plymouth ;  Yeoman 

Heale's  house  .  .  .  .  .410 

Saturday,  the  14th,  to  Tavistock ;  the  Lady  Glanvil's  .       310 
Monday,  the  16th,  to  Oakhampton;  Mr.  Rottenbury's       1     12 
Tuesday,  the  17th,  to  Exeter ;  Bedford  House,  the  go- 
vernor's house  at  Crediton    .  .  .  .       6     20 
Monday,  the  23rd,  to  Chard  ;  Mr.  Barcroft's  :  at  Honi- 
ton,  dinner              ....          -.  v  •   7     27 


1644.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.  5 

ington,    supported    by    Lord    Hopton,    took    the 
"  Woodhouse,"  near  Frome,  and  hanged  fourteen  of 


Nights  MUes 

Monday,  the  last  day,  to  South  Parrat ;  Mr.  Gibs's — 

dinner  in  the  field    .  .  .  .  .18 

October,  1644. 

Tuesday,  the  1st,  to  Mayden  Newton  ;  Mr.  Osborne's  ; 

dinner  in  the  field  .  .  .  .  .18 

Wednesday,  the   2nd,  to   Sherborn   Lodge,   the  Lord 

Digby's ;  dinner  in  the  field  .  .         ,,  ^     6     12 

Tuesday,  the  8th,  to  Stalbridge ;  the  Earl  of  Cork's ; 

dined  there  .  •  .  .  .  .15 

Wednesday,  the  9th,  to  Stirmister  Newton  ;  Mr.  Reeves ; 

dinner  in  the  field  .  .  .  .  .13 

Thursday,  the  10th,  to  Brianstone,  near  Blandford ; 

Mrs.  Rogers's  .  .  .  .  .47 

Monday,  the  14th,  to  Cranborn  Lodge,  the  Earl  of  Sa- 
lisbury's; dinner  in  the  field  .  .  1     10 

Tuesday,  the  15th,  to  Salisbury;  Dr.  Sadler's,  chancel- 
lor; dinner  in  a  little  lodge  .  .  .       3     10 

Friday,  the  18th,  to  Andover;  the  White  Hart;  din- 
ner in  the  field         .  .  .  .         "  "^   '  1     15 

Saturday,  the   19th,  to  Whitechurch;  Mr.  Brooke's; 

dinner  in  the  field    .  .  .  .  .27 

Monday,  the  21st,  to  King's  Cleer;  Mr.  Tower's;  din- 
ner at  Whitechurch  .  .  .  .15 
His  Majesty's  march  from  the  West  in  October. 

October,  1644. 

Tuesday,  the  22nd,  to  Newbery  ;  Mr.  Dunce's ;  dinner 

at  King's  Cleer         .  .  .  .  .56 

Sunday,  tne  27th,  a  great  and  second  battle  betwixt  his 
Majesty's  army  and  the  Parliament's,  by  the  same 
hands  his  Majesty  had  disarmed  and  shewn  mercy  to 
at  Lestithiall;  wherein  his  Majesty  had  much  the 
better  of  the  day,  and  yet  was  advised  to  desert  the 
field ;  whereby,  &c.,  his  Majesty  marched  to  meet 
Prince  Rupert  at  Bath.  Prince  Maurice,  General 
Goring,  and  most  of  his  Majesty's  household,  about 
nine  o'clock  that  Sunday  night,  marched  from  De- 
nyngton  Castle  to  Wallingford,  and  the  next  day, 
Monday,  the  28th,  came  all  to  Oxford,  waiting  for 
his  Majesty  .  .  .  .  .  1  25 


6  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

its  defenders  for  having  broken  their  oaths  as  for- 
mer prisoners.  Waller  had  been  roaming  about 
Oxford  with  his  rapidly  decreasing  forces,  in  a  very 
inoffensive  manner.  Essex  had  also  been  almost 
passive  at  Tiverton,  in  Devonshire,  though  Barnsta- 
ple  had  revolted  to  him,  and  Taunton  Castle  had 
been  taken.  The  Queen  had  departed  for  France 
on  the  14th,  and  Prince  Maurice  had  exerted  him- 
self to  cover  her  departure.  Sir  Richard  Grenville 
was  still  besieging  Plymouth,1  whose  command  of 
the  sea  rendered  it  secure.  Wareham  had  been  first 
gallantly  defended  against  Essex,  but  was  volun- 
tarily surrendered  by  Colonel  O'Brien  on  the  24th : 
the  Colonel  taking  ship  with  his  whole  regiment  for 
Ireland  to  assist  his  brother  Lord  Inchiquin  in  his 
revolt.  After  his  impolitic  reception  at  Oxford, 
this  nobleman  had  betaken  himself  to  his  own 
county,  and  there  had  seized  Cork  and  Kinsale  for 
the  Parliament.  On  the  27th,  the  King  reviewed 
Prince  Maurice's  army,  consisting  of  four  thousand 
five  hundred  well  armed  foot,  in  Crediton  Meadows. 
This  force  was  sent  forward  as  an  advanced  guard 
after  Essex,  the  King  following  at  the  distance  of 
one  day's  march.  The  Lord-General  had  been  led 
into  Cornwall,  that  cul  de  sac  of  England,  by  the 

1  "  This  town  (Plymouth)  is  well  provided  with  victual,  which  is 
brought  in  by  sea,  beef  being  sold  here  for  tyd.  the  lb., ;  cheese, 
meal,  hops,  coal,  &c.  cheaper  there  than  at  London  ;  their  chiefest 
want  consisting  of  money  and  river-water,  which  for  some  uses  is 
better  than  well-water,  of  which  they  have  plenty." — The  Weekly 
Account,  July  30,  1644. 


1644.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.  7 

persuasion  of  Lord  Roberts,  who  had  property  there 
which  he  desired  to  revisit  in  security.  Sir  Richard 
Grenville,  driven  from  the  siege  of  Plymouth,  re- 
tired before  the  Roundhead  army  as  far  as  Truro. 
Essex  lay  at  Liskeard,  Lord  Roberts  at  Bodmin. 
On  the  1st  of  August,  the  King  passed  his  army 
over  the  Tamar  by  Lamerton,  and  addressed  his 
troops,  commanding  and  conjuring  them  to  abstain 
from  plunder.  On  the  3rd,  his  Majesty  rested  in 
Liskeard,  the  Roundheads  retiring  before  him  to 
Lestwithiel.  Here  it  was,  when  Essex  and  his  army 
were  in  extremities,  that  the  King  made  an  urgent 
offer  of  accommodation  to  the  Lord-General,  desir- 
ing that  he  would  assist  in  procuring  a  peace  on  the 
broadest  and  most  constitutional  basis.  The  reply 
of  Essex  was  verbal  and  very  brief;  it  was  trans- 
mitted by  his  nephew,  Lord  Beauchamp,  and  to  this 
effect: — "That  he,  the  Lord-General,  would  dis- 
charge his  duty,  and  would  advise  the  King  to  re- 
turn to  his  Parliament.1  Soon  afterwards  the  officers 


1  Sir  Edward  Walker's  Historical  Discourse,  p.  57.  The  fol- 
lowing letter  relates  to  this,  and  to  Prince  Rupert's  well-founded 
suspicion  that  Digby  was  endeavouring  to  undermine  his  credit 
with  the  King  : — 

SIB, 

Since  Mr.  Goodwin  parted  from  us  I  have  received  one  letter 
from  your  Highness,  but  that  is  of  so  old  a  date  that  you  can 
expect  nothing  from  it.  That  which  has  lately  happened,  that 
was  here  least  expected,  was  the  making  my  Lord  Wilmot  pri- 
soner and  giving  Goring  the  command  of  the  horse.  Many  of 
the  officers  of  the  horse  delivered  the  King  a  petition,  and  civilly 
desired  him  to  let  them  know  the  reason  of  his  imprisonment : 
the  King  has  promised  them  he  will  do  it,  and  I  believe  so  good 


8  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [AUG. 

of  the  army,  strange  to  say,  took  the  initiative  in 
addressing  Essex  again  on  the  subject  of  a  peace.  This 
was  done  in  the  form  of  a  letter,  signed  by  Prince 
Maurice,  with  an  assurance  that  Prince  Rupert  de- 
sired to  have  his  signature  also  affixed  to  the  docu- 


a  one,  that  I  think  they  will  be  all  satisfied.  Essex  has  abso- 
lutely refused  all  manner  of  treaty,  both  with  the  King  and  his 
army.  For  that  particular  which  concerns  your  Highness,  he 
says  if  he  would  hearken  to  anything  it  should  be  to  that,  but  the 
times  are  not  now  fit  for  it :  what  has  passed  concerning  this  has 
been  known  to  no  person  living  but  the  King.  We  are  here  nine 
thousand  foot  and  four  thousand  horse.  Essex,  for  anything  we 
yet  see,  will  not  fight  with  us,  and  how  we  shall  be  able  to  force 
him  in  his  quarters  is  that  which  we  do  not  yet  find,  and  it  is 
likely  we  may  want  victuals  before  him.  The  King  has  sent  a 
new  command  to  Bristol,  which  I  believe  will  be  obeyed,  for  a 
hundred  barrels  of  powder  for  your  Highness,  and  Gerrard  is  to 
convoy  it ;  but  you  must  not  fail  so  soon  as  you  can  to  send  to 
him,  for  fear  he  should  not  be  hasty  in  obeying  the  King's  com- 
mand. Captain  Cobb  came  hither  two  days  since,  but  I  do  not 
find  it  possible  at  this  time  for  the  King  to  spare  Goring.  It  is 
my  opinion,  whatever  the  King's  success  is  against  Essex,  he  will 
not  be  able  to  make  many  of  the  Cornish  march  out  of  this 
county ;  and  I  believe  nothing  so  necessary  for  his  affairs  as  to 
join  with  your  Highness.  Your  Highness's 

Most  faithful,  humble  servant, 

[Without  signature.     I  believe  RICHMOND  AND  LENNOX. 

it  is  from  the  Duke  of] 

P.S. — Captain  Cobb  has  desired  me  to  let  you  know  he  has 
satisfied  the  King  concerning  all  the  passages  of  your  business  in 
the  North,  and  I  know  he  does  not  nor  ever  did  believe  you 
faulty  in  anything  has  fallen  out  there.  The  King  is  resolved 
not  to  dispose  of  anything  you  wrote  to  him  about  Sir  Marma- 
duke  Langdale,  but  leaves  it  absolutely  to  you  to  dispose  on  as 
you  please.  The  King  has  sent  to  Garrat  to  command  those  two 
counties  men  had  till  he  shall  receive  further  orders  from  you,  or 
else  there  could  nothing  pass  from  Bristol  to  your  Highness.  It 
is  given  out  here  that  your  commanders  are  unsatisfied,  because 
you  hear  only  private  counsels,  and  never  hear  their  opinions 
concerning  your  business. 


1644.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.  9 

ment,  the  Earl  of  Brentford,  as  General,1  and  all 
the  superior  officers  of  the  King's  army.  At  the 
same  time  Wilmot  sent  a  private  message  to  Lord 
Essex,  which  determined  the  King  no  longer  to 
leave  him  in  command. 

Lord  Goring  at  length  reached  the  King's  camp, 
on  the  7th  of  August,  at  Liskeard.2  On  the  follow- 
ing morning,  when  the  army  was  prepared  to  march, 
Lord  Wilmot  was  arrested  at  the  head  of  his 
cavalry  by  Sir  Edward  Sydenham,  knight-marshal. 


1  Mr.  Hallam  (Const.  Hist.  i.  583),  ingeniously  suggests  that 
Prince  Maurice  and  General  Bradford  signed  this  letter  by  the 
King's  desire,  in  order  to  take  off  from  it  the  appearance  of  its 
having  been  the  work  of  a  faction  in  the  army,  and  arguing  the 
influence  of  Wilmot  and  Percy.     I  find  nothing  to  contradict 
that  supposition. 

2  At  this  date  I  find  the  subjoined  trace  of  the  Prince  at 
Chester,  3rd  of  August,  1644.     The  measures  referred  to  in  the 
following  orders,  with  others  of  the  same  nature,  began  to  estrange 
the  Welsh  counties  from  the  Royal  cause,  especially  as  the  execu- 
tion of  such  orders  were  of  necessity  left  to  subordinates  : — 

I  do  hereby  require  and  authorise  you,  or  any  three  of  you, 
whereof  either  the  governor,  lieutenant-governor,  or  high-sheriff 
of  the  county,  for  the  time  being,  to  be  one,  by  all  means,  and 
with  all  convenient  speed,  to  inquire  what  monies  have  of  late 
years  been  sessed  and  levied  within  your  county,  either  for  the 
providing  of  arms  or  powder,  repair  of  bridges,  shire-money,  poll- 
money,  subsidies,  coat-  and  conduct-money,  press-money,  provi- 
sion of  clothes,  beeves,  and  mutton,  taxed  and  levied  for  his 
Majesty's  service  in  the  beginning  of  these  present  wars,  or  what 
other  sums  soever.  And  to  make  a  strict  and  impartial  exami- 
nation, as  well  by  oath  as  otherwise,  what  monies  levied  for  the 
public  uses  above-mentioned  remain  yet  unexpended,  and  in 
whose  hands.  And  in  case  it  appear  that  any  part  of  the  said 
sums  remain  yet  unlevied,  you  are  forthwith  to  cause  the  same  to 
be  collected  ;  and  that,  together  with  those  moneys  already  col- 
lected, to  be  paid  into  the  hands  of  the  high-sheriffs,  to  be  em- 
ployed in  the  public  services  according  to  such  orders  and  direc- 
tions as  the  said  high-sheriffs  or  the  governor  shall  receive  from  me 


10  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

A  dangerous  commotion  ensued,  which  was  only 
quelled  by  the  King.  He  rode  to  the  head  of  each 
regiment,  and  assured  them  that  Lord  Wilmot's 
arrest  was  only  temporary;  that,  for  the  present, 
he  had  appointed  Lord  Goring  to  succeed  him,  as 
Lieutenant-General  of  horse;  and  that  it  was  at 
Prince  Rupert's  special  request  he  had  done  so.1 

On  the  same  day  the  Royal  army  was  led  up  to 
the  enemy  on  Brodoke  Down,  whence,  after  making 
a  useless  demonstration,  they  retired  to  Glinsworth. 
On  the  llth,  Sir  Richard  Grenville's  forces,  amount- 


in  that  behalf.     Hereof  you  are  not  to  fail,  and  for  so  doing  this 
shall  be  your  warrant. 

Given  at  Chester,  under  my  hand  and  seal  of  arms,  the 
3rd  of  August,  1644. 

RUPERT. 

To  Sir  Jo.  Mennes,  Knt.  Governor  of  North  Wales ; 
Dudley  Wyatt,  Esq.,  Lieut. -Governor  of  North 
Wales ;  John  Morgan,  Esq.,  High  Sheriff  of  the 
county  of  Merioneth  ;  Wm.  Price,  Hugh  Nanny, 
Humphrey  Hughes,  Owen  Salisbury,  and  William 
Owen,  Governor  of  Harleck,  Esquires.* 

1  This,  no  doubt,  was  done  by  Digby's  instigation,  who  was 
the  greatest  enemy  that  Wilmot  had,  except  himself.  Digby 
must  have  hugged  himself  on  the  contrivance  of  making  his  other 
great  enemy,  Rupert,  appear  to  be  the  mover  in  this  transaction. 
Wilmot  was  effectually  gotten  rid  of,  notwithstanding  the  angry 
remonstrance  of  the  officers,  whom  his  evil  example  had  cor- 
rupted. He  was  obliged  to  retire  into  France.  He  was  created 
Earl  of  Rochester  by  Charles  II.,  whom  he  assisted  in  his  escape 
after  the  battle  of  Worcester.  He  was  the  head  of  the  profligate 
school  of  Cavaliers,  whom  his  wit  fascinated.  Goring  was  jea- 
lous of  his  popularity,  which  was  enhanced  by  his  attendance  to 
military  duties :  these  he  never  neglected  for  debauchery,  as 
Goring  often  did. 

*  From  the  Owen  Papers,  in  the  collection  of  W.  Ormsby 
Gore,  Esq.,  M.P. 


1644.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS,  11 

ing  to  two  thousand  four  hundred  horse  and  foot, 
joined  the  Royal  army,  and  the  King  then  proceeded 
to  the  moat  to  block  up  Essex  in  the  little  town  of 
Foy,  near  Lestwithiel. 

At  this  conjuncture,  Lord  Digby  writes  the  fol- 
lowing important  letter  to  the  Prince ;  the  first 
paragraphs  merely  give  details  of  the  campaign : 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

SINCE  my  last  unto  your  Highness,  we  have  been 
constantly  in  pursuit  of  Essex.  At  length  we  have  lodged 
him  at  a  little  town  called  Lestwithiel,  in  the  heart  of  Corn- 
wall, upon  the  river  that  goes  down  to  Fowey.  The  King's, 
and  the  greater  part  of  Prince  Maurice's  army,  lie  en- 
camped by  Boconnock,  within  a  mile  and  a-half  of  him, 
being  upon  the  point  of  ten  thousand  strong  in  foot.  Sir 
Richard  Grenville's  army,  consisting  of  near  three  thou- 
sand foot,  with  some  addition  from  Prince  Maurice's,  lies 
within  the  same  distance,  at  Repryn  Bridge.  Our  horse, 
which  are  in  all  about  four  thousand,  lie  quartered  round 
— the  best  they  can  with  safety — to  cut  off  all  provisions 
from  the  rebels,  who,  since  our  possessing  a  fort  that 
commands  the  Harbour  of  Fowey,  are  like  suddenly  to  be 
distressed  ;  which  is  the  only  way  to  master  them,  it  being 
impossible  to  force  them  where  they  lie.  This  is  the 
state  of  our  business  here,  whereof  (if  we  be  vigilant  to 
avoid  affronts)  I  doubt  not  but  to  give  your  Highness 
speedily  a  very  cheerful  account.  Essex  entertains  his 
men  with  hopes  of  Brown's  or  Waller's  coming  to  relieve 
them.  But  they  have  neither  the  power,  for  ought  we 
can  hear,  nor  the  will  to  do  it.  We  have  left  no  way  un- 
attempted  to  gain  Essex  and  his  army  to  join  in  a  common 
cause,  of  seeking  to  procure  the  peace  of  the  kingdom,  as 
your  Highness  will  perceive  by  those  letters  and  instruc- 
tions which  this  bearer,  Colonel  Cobb,  hath  to  shew  unto 


12  MEMOIRS   AND    CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

your  Highness.  But  the  Earl  is  certainly  possessed  with 
such  a  frenzy,  as  nothing  can  cure  but  that  ruin  which 
certainly  he  is  destined  unto,  which  side  soever  prevail. 

We  have  lately  ventured  here,  upon  extreme  remedies 
unto  the  danger  that  threatened  us.  Among  ourselves 
Wilmot,  upon  Wednesday  was  se'nnight,  was  arrested 
prisoner  at  the  head  of  the  army,  and  Goring  declared 
General  of  the  horse.  His  Majesty,  intending  to  make 
Rupert  Generalissimo,  as  soon  as  he  shall  find  means  to 
satisfy  the  old  general,  that  it  may  be  no  disgrace  to  him. 
In  which  action  I  must  not  omit  to  let  your  Highness 
know  that  Tom  Elliott  did  eminent  service.  There  have 
been  since  consultations  and  murmurings  among  his  party, 
but  the  issue  of  them  was  only  this  inclosed  modest 
Petition,  which  produced  the  answer  and  declaration  of 
the  causes  of  his  commitment,  which  I  herewithall  send 
your  Highness,  and  so  the  business  rests.  My  Lord 
Percy,  also,  is  withdrawing  himself,  upon  good  advice, 
and  my  Lord  Hop  ton  possessed  of  his  charge.  I  make  no 
doubt  but  all  the  ill-humours  in  our  army  will  be  allayed, 
now  that  the  two  poles,  upon  which  they  moved,  are  taken 
away. 

Our  great  care  is  for  your  Highness ;  first,  how  to 
supply  your  wants  of  ammunition  ;  and  next,  what  to  pro- 
pose unto  you  by  way  of  advice,  in  order  to  the  King's 
affairs,  if  please  God  to  prosper  him  so  in  this  action  as 
to  be  able  to  draw  eastward  before  the  winter  approach. 
For  the  first,  all  is  done  that  can  be.  There  are  a  hundred 
barrels  of  powder  sent  from  Bristol,  through  Wales,  and 
recommended  to  Charles  Gerrard  to  have  them  conveyed 
so  fast  as  shall  be  necessary. 

We  are  likewise  put  in  hopes  out  of  Ireland,  that  our 
negotiation  there  for  powder  hath  succeeded.  Probably 
your  Highness  may  be  by  this  time  in  some  measure 
supplied  from  thence. 

For  the   other,   that  which  is  most   in  his    Majesty's 


1644.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE  CAVALIERS.  13 

wishes,  is,  that  since  there  is  within  those  parts  worthy  the 
employing  your  person  in,  you  would  think  of  leaving 
those  counties  in  the  best  condition  of  defence  you  can, 
and  to  draw  down  your  forces  towards  Gloucestershire  or 
Oxford,  if  you  think  good ;  there  to  be  ready  for  a  com- 
munication with  his  Majesty  at  his  return,  who  will  be 
able  to  bring  out  of  these  parts,  if  God  prosper  us  against 
Essex,  so  considerable  a  force  as  we  shall  not  be  out  of 
hopes  yet,  before  winter,  under  your  conduct,  to  settle 
our  winter  station  in  some  fresh  quarters  of  the  enemy. 
This  is  that  which  we  have  in  contemplation,  but  it  is 
wholly  submitted  to  your  Highness  to  do  as  in  your  judg- 
ment you  shall  think  fit. 

I  was  commanded  by  his  Majesty,  to  recommend  unto 
your  Highness  the  speedy  care  of  those  counties  which 
were  under  Mennes'  command,  unfortunately  slain.  But  I 
now  receive  advertisement  from  thence  that  you  have  already 
disposed  of  that  charge  to  Sir  William  Vavasour,  and  I 
find  the  gentlemen  of  that  country  well  satisfied  with  it. 

It  is  also  conceived  by  his  Majesty  that  it  would  much 
secure  Newcastle,  if  your  Highness  could  find  means  to 
place  Sir  Thomas  Glenham  Governor  there,  without 
hazarding  the  place  by  discontenting  the  Mayor  in  at- 
tempting to  put  him  by  it. 

For  what  concerns  myself  I  shall  not  trouble  your 
Highness  with  any  more  professions  ;  but  as  my  actions, 
if  rightly  understood,  might  hitherto  have  preserved  me 
in  your  favour,  so  they  shall  be  such  ever  hereafter,  how- 
ever received,  as  shall  convince  you  of  great  injustice  if 
you  do  not  avow  me  for, 

Your  Highness's  most  faithful  and 

most  affectionate  humble  Servant, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 

Boconnock,  Aug.  15,  1644. 

The  following  lively  and  amusing  letter  is  ad- 
dressed to  the  Governor  of  Dartmouth,  which  still 


14  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [AUG. 

held  bravely  out.  It  seems  to  have  been  written 
under  the  influence  of  the  "  dish  of  claret"  alluded 
to  therein. — 

SIR    E.    FORTESCUE    TO    COLONEL     SEYMOUR. 

MY  DEAREST  FRIEND, 

Presently,  upon  the  receipt  of  your  letter,  I  ad- 
dressed myself  to  His  Majesty,  and  made  known  to  him 
your  just,  fair,  and  most  necessary  desires.  His  reply  to 
me  was,  that  he  wished  the  thing  done,  but  now  he  could 
not  possibly  spare  any  horse  or  foot  for  the  redemption  of 
those  parts,  from  those  perjured  devils  that  are  now  in 
them.  But  with  this  I  did  not  rest  satisfied,  but,  with 
fury,  made  it  known  to  some  of  my  friends,  who,  with 
zeal  in  the  business,  again  assaulted  the  King  for  a  supply. 
But  his  answer  was  the  same  to  them  as  he  formerly  gave 
to  me.  After  which,  I  met  with  Sir  Thomas  Hele,  and 
then  we  joined  forces,  and  went  at  it  again.  But  the 
King  was  semper  idem  ;  and  yet  we  did  not  despair.  But, 
almost  disheartened,  at  last  we  delivered  all  to  the  Lord 
Hopton,  who  was  tender  of  it,  and  promised  to  do  his 
utmost  for  our  endeavours :  who,  after  much  discourse 
with  His  Majesty,  at  last  plainly  told  us  that  till  this 
argument  was  thoroughly  disputed  with  Essex,  no  man 
could  have  a  placet.  This  made  me  almost  mad,  and  then 
having  a  dish  of  claret,  I  hastily  chirped  your  health,  and 
another  to  the  fair  Lady  Governess,  and  then  again  to  the 
noble  Governor,  on  top  ;  and,  after  some  few  rounds,  as 
long  as  the  French  spirits  lasted,  in  a  merry  and  undeni- 
able humour,  I  went  to  Maurice,  of  whom  I  had  good 
words  and  promises,  which  again  was  assured  me  by  Wag- 
staff—one  that  loves  you.  And  I  am  confident  I  shall 
prevail  very  speedily  for  some  horse,  either  Sir  Thomas 
Hele's,  or  Sir  Henry  Gary's  regiment. 

Sir— Nothing  shall  be  neglected  by  me  in  which  I  may 


1044.]     PRINCE  RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.  15 

do  you  service.  Ralph  can  tell  you,  that  in  the  prosecu- 
tion of  it  I  was  near  a  mischange  on  a  rotten  bridge  near 
the  Court,  where  we  are ;  and  what  we  do  I  shall  leave  to 
honest  Ensign  Hemmerson's  relation.  This  is  the  last  act 
of  the  play.  God  grant  that  each  man  may  do  his  part 
well.  My  most  humble  and  ever-best  services  shall  attend 
you,  your  fair  Lady  and  yours.  This  is  the  unalterable 
resolution  of 

Your  ever  constant  and  most  faithful  Servant, 

E.  FORTESCUE. 

From  the  army  near  the  rebels  in  Lestwithiel, 
23rd  August,  1644.1 

My  service  to  Major  Fitzjames,  Cranfield,  Turner,  cum 
multis  aliis,  etc. 

This  Cornish  campaign  is  one  of  the  most  unin- 
telligible transactions  of  the  war.  We  are  at  a  loss 
which  to  wonder  most  at, — the  recklessness  of  the 
Royal  generals  or  of  Essex.  The  latter  ultimately 
escaped,  with  Lord  Roberts,  Sir  John  Merrick,  and 
some  others,  passing  in  a  small  boat  close  under 
Pernon  Fort,  then  held  by  the:  careless  Cavaliers ; 
his  horse  escaped  right  through  the  Royal  foot  and 
Goring's  horse,  without  the  loss  of  a  man ;  and  the 
infantry,  without  cavalry,  leaders,  or  provisions, 
were  allowed  to  march  away  free,  on  giving  up 
their  artillery  and  ammunition  :  so  anxious  were 
the  Royalists  to  secure  even  the  shadow  of  a 
triumph.  The  King  was  not  sufficiently  scrupulous 
in  seeing  that  the  conditions  he  gave  were  honour- 
ably performed :  Skippon  and  bis  soldiers  were 

1  From  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Somerset's  MSS. 


16  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

grossly  and  cruelly  insulted  in  the  Royal  presence, 
by  his  own  secretary's  account.  It  is  said,  indeed, 
that  his  Majesty  endeavoured  to  prevent  this  out- 
rage, but  such  a  statement  only  proves  the  utter 
demoralization  of  the  army.  Goring  thus  writes  to 
Rupert  on  this  occasion :  he  found  his  new  dignity 
not  comfortable. 

LORD  GORING  TO  PRINCE  RUPERT. 

[Partly  in  cipher.] 

SIR, 

Your  Highness  will  receive  an  account  of  your 
business  from  the  King.  This  army  is  now  so  far  from 
your  hests,  and  so  much  engaged,  that  the  [illegible] 
which  I  solicited  for,  will  be  deferred  for  a  time ;  but  I 
am  confident  that  neither  the  distractions  of  this  army 
can  be  settled,  nor  we  get  any  great  advantage  upon  the 
Rebels,  until  Rupert  command  us.  And  I  am  happy  to 
find,  by  the  King,  that  he  desires  and  intends  nothing 
more  than  that ;  after  his  controversy  with  Essex  is  decided 
in  these  parts.  In  the  meantime,  nothing  in  this  world 
troubles  me  more  than  the  distance  I  am  at  from  your 
Highness's  immediate  command.  And  I  am  very  con- 
fident I  am  taken  from  a  place  where  I  would  have 
rendered  some  service  to  his  Majesty  and  to  your  High- 
ness, and  put  into  another  where  I  am  so  much  a  stranger, 
that  I  shall  not  be  very  useful  till  Rupert  be  with  us. 
And,  in  effect,  this  is  the  most  mutinous  army  that  ever  I 
saw;  not  only  horse,  but  foot:  though  I  believe  it  is 
rather  their  poverty  and  fear  than  any  general  dislike  of 
the  remove  of  officers. 

Sir,  —  I  most  humbly  beseech  you  to  continue  the 
honour  to  me  of  preserving  a  place  in  your  immediate 
service  for  me,  when  this  crisis  is  past,  there  being  nothing 
in  this  earth  I  more  passionately  desire  than  to  sacrifice 


1644.]        PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        17 

my  life  in  your  service,  and  near  your  person,  being  by  all 
manner  of  ties, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  faithful  Servant, 

GEORGE  GORING.* 


1  His  officers,  on  the  day  of  his  appointment  as  their  General 
of  Horse,  had  addressed  the  following  petition  to  the  King  : — 

TO    THE    KING'S    MOST    EXCELLENT    MAJESTY. 

THE    HUMBLE    PETITION    OF    THE    OFFICERS    OF    YOUR    MAJESTY'S 
OLD    HORSE 

Humbly  sheweth  that,  whereas  they  have  had  long  the 
honour  to  serve  your  Majesty  under  the  command  of  my  Lord 
Wilmot,  of  whose  just  and  loyal  intentions  they  conceived  them- 
selves to  have  had  some  demonstrations ;  but  now,  to  their  great 
amazement  almost  to  distraction,  find  him  fallen  into  your  Ma- 
jesty's displeasure  and  suspicion.  Although  they  intend  not  to 
arrogate  to  themselves  a  liberty  of  searching  into  your  Majesty's 
designs,  or  in  the  least  degree  disputing  your  commands,  yet  they 
most  humbly  beg  your  pardon,  if  they  believe  it  a  right  they  owe 
themselves  to  request  some  light  from  your  Majesty  concerning 
this  business,  that  we  may  not  have  reason  to  suspect  ourselves 
partakers  of  his  crime,  having  been,  by  your  Majesty's  order, 
executors  of  his  commands ;  and  we  hope  such  a  satisfaction  from 
your  Majesty  in  this  particular  as  may  encourage  your  petitioners 
to  go  on  with  the  same  zeal  to  your  service  as  they  have  hitherto 
expressed ;  in  the  hazard  of  their  lives  and  fortunes,  and  in 
their  prayers  for  your  prosperity,  which  shall  ever  be  continued 
from  your  Majesty's  most  humble  petitioners. 


Northampton. 
Hen.  Harris. 
Ric.  Power. 
Will.  Leigh. 
Jon.  Grove. 
W.  Slingesby. 
Le  Chevalier  de 

Reville. 
John  Clarke. 
Edw.  Nott. 
Will.  Chamberleyne. 
John  Webb. 
George  Massie. 
Robert  Knollys. 
Tho.  Wentworth. 

VOL.  III. 


Tho.  Weston. 
Browne. 
Kew.  Digby. 
Charles  Compton. 
Philip  Honey  wood. 
Mr.  Baskervile. 
Jo.  Metcalfe. 
Will.  Fenton. 
Tho.  Bowens. 
James  Stokes. 
Francis  Rainsford. 
Will.  Whitney. 
Roger  Parish. 
Adrian  Scrope. 
Paul  Smith. 


S.  Wenman. 
Ames.  Pollarde. 
J.  Hervey. 
Pat.  Barnewell. 
David  Scrymshawe. 
Ric.  Weston. 
Tho.  Fisher. 
Henry  Fitzwilliam. 
Myles  Lochard. 
Beneger  Ware. 
Jo.  Maring. 
John  Fleetwood- 
Erosh  Tillie. 
Henry  Browne. 
Gyles  Slany. 


18  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

Wilmot,  however,  was  well  avenged.  Goring 
was  deep  in  one  of  his  brutal  carousals,  when  it  was 
reported  to  him  that  Balfour's  horse  was  approach- 
ing ;  he  was  either  too  drunk  or  too  indolent  to 
move,  and  the  Roundheads  passing  on  over  Exmoor 
to  Dunster,  escaped  to  fight  at  Naseby.1 

The  King  moved  on  from  Lestwithiel  to  Liskeard, 
whence  he  writes  the  following  letter  to  the  Mar- 
quis of  Worcester,  enclosing  his  royal  promise  to 
bestow  the  Dukedom  of  Somerset  on  his  Lordship. 
But  Charles  was  ever  thwarted  in  his  desires ;  the 
angry  feeling  that  prevailed  towards  Roman  Catho- 
lics obliged  him  to  keep  this  reward  to  his  generous 
subject  in  reserve  :  he  did  not  live  to  bestow  the 
dignity,  and  ultimately  another  title  was  awarded  by 
his  son. 

THE  KING  TO  THE  MARQUIS  OF  WORCESTER. 

WORCESTER, 

Yours  and  your  son's  daily  endeavours  to  serve  me, 
makes  me  think  which  way  to  give  you  assurance  of  my 
gracious  acceptance.  And  therefore,  as  a  further  testi- 
mony, I  have  sent  you  the  enclosed,  only  known  to  him 
and  me,  and  fit — for  several  reasons  of  importance  to  you 
and  me — to  be  kept  private,  until  I  shall  esteem  the  time 

The  King  replied  very  soothingly,  premises  "  that  no  King  ever 
did  owe  more  to  gentlemen  and  officers  :"  he  asserts  that  Lord 
Wilmot,  for  the  last  three  months,  had  endeavoured  "  to  bring 
his  Majesty's  person  into  contempt,"  and  had  stated  that  his 
Majesty  intended  to  place  all  power  in  his  nephew's  hands,  which 
he  (Lord  Wilmot)  would  rather  join  the  Parliament  than  submit 
to.  That.  Lord  Wilmot  had  proposed  to  set  up  Prince  Charles 
as  King,  "and  had  held  traitorous  communication  with  Essex. 

1  Sir  Edward  Walker's  Hist.  Disc.  p.  117;  Clarendon's 
Rebellion,  iv.  546. 


1644.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.         19 

convenient,  -when,  as  God  shall  enable  me,  I  will  shew  my 
tender  care  of  you  and  yours ;  as,  by  a  match  propounded 
for  your  grandchild,  you  will  easily  judge.  The  par- 
ticulars I  leave  to  your  son,  Glamorgan's  relation,  which  I 
have  commanded  him  to  make  to  you  only  ;  and  you  may 
be  confident  that  I  so  much  esteem  your  merits,  and  your 
upholding  your  son  in  my  service  (wherein  no  subject  I 
have  equals  either  of  you),  as  that  I  cannot  think  anything 
too  much  that  lies  in  my  power  ;  though,  as  yet,  some 
considerations  hinder  me  from  doing  all  I  would  towards 
you  and  yours.  But,  by  your  son's  endeavours  [in  my 
service],  I  make  no  question  but  in  short  time  to  pass  them 
so  over,  as  that  I  shall  make  good  the  intentions  I  have,  to 
manifest  that  I  esteem  your  services  such  as  my  words 
cannot  express  them  ;  nor  I,  but  by  shewing  myself  at  all 
occasions,  and  in  all  things,  to  be  your  assured  friend, 

CHARLES  R. 

[Enclosure,  prepared  some  time  previously.] 

CHARLES  R. 

Our  will  and  pleasure  is  that  you  prepare  a  bill  for 
our  signature,  for  creating  our  right  trusty  and  entirely- 
beloved  cousin,  Henry,  Marquis  of  Worcester,  Duke  of 
Somerset,  to  him  and  the  heirs  male  of  his  body  issuing, 
with  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  thereunto  belonging, 
and  with  a  grant  of  an  annuity  of  fifty  pounds  yearly,  to 
be  paid  to  him  and  them  out  of  our  customs  of  Swansea, 
in  our  county  of  Glamorgan,  for  the  support  of  the  said 
dignity,  for  which  this  shall  be  your  sufficient  warrant. 
Given  at  our  Court  at  Oxford,  the  sixth  day  of  January, 
in  the  twentieth  year  of  our  reign* 

To  our  Attorney  or  Solicitor-General 
for  the  time  being. 

Lord  Glamorgan  is  now  going  to  Ireland. 
WORCESTER, 

I  am  so  sensible  of  the  great  affection  which  you  and 
your  son  have  expressed  unto  me,  by  eminent  services,  and 

o  2 


20  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [SEPT. 

of  the  means  he  may  have  of  doing  me  more  in  that  way 
wherein  he  is  now  engaging  himself,  that  I  cannot  choose, 
before  his  going,  but  express  unto  you,  in  a  very  par- 
ticular manner,  the  value  I  have  of  you  both,  and  to  assure 
you,  that  if  God  bless  me,  I  will  not  be  behind-hand  with 
either  of  you.  In  the  meantime,  finding  your  son  so  much 
more  desirous  that  there  should  be  placed  upon  you  some 
mark  of  my  favour,  rather  than  upon  himself,  I  have 
thought  fit  to  let  you  know  that  as  soon  as  I  shall  confer 
the  Order  of  the  Garter  upon  any,  you  shall  receive  it  as 
a  testimony  of  my  being, 

Your  assured  constant  friend, 

CHARLES  R. 

Liskeard,  Aug.  2,  1644. 

The  King  directed  his  inarch  towards  Oxford  on 
the  5th  of  September;  Plymouth  was  again  sur- 
rounded, but  in  vain ;  Barnstaple  was  retaken,  but 
obtained  honourable  terms ;  Taunton  was  left  block- 
aded, and  the  Royal  army  departed  from  Devonshire 
with  numbers  much  diminished,  and  in  cheerless 
plight  both  as  regarded  their  moral  and  physical 
condition.  The  King  reached  Lord  Paulet's  house, 
near  South  Perrot  on  the  30th  of  September,  and 
here  Prince  Rupert  joined  him.  It  was  agreed  in 
council  that  the  wreck  of  the  Northern  army,  viz., 
two  thousand  horse  under  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale, 
and  two  thousand  foot  under  Gerrard,  should  join 
his  Majesty  forthwith ;  that  the  garrison  of  Bristol 
should  be  recruited  and  the  town  strengthened. 

From  the  time  that  Prince  Rupert  left  York, 
misfortunes  continued  to  pour  in  upon  him.  Every 
express  brought  intelligence  of  new  disasters.  The 


1844.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        21 

forces  he  had  left  to  follow  his  more  rapid  march 
were  continually  set  upon  and  harassed  by  the 
enemy.  Concerning  these  disasters,  I  shall  only 
introduce  one  report  from  Will.  Legge. 

MY  MOST  DEAR  PRINCE, 

In  truth,  your  Highness's  departure  sent  me  back 
hither  a  sad  man,  and  the  news  I  met  with  gave  me  new 
cause  of  trouble.     My  Lord  Byron,  upon  your  authority, 
commanded  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale  so  far  that  he  was 
engaged  between  the  enemy  and  Liverpool ;  where  they 
advancing  upon  him  with  their  army,  he  had  no  means  of 
saving  his  horse,  but  by  retreating  over  Haleford,  and 
here  I  met  him  with  all  his  troops,  and  an  order  from  my 
Lord  Byron  to   quarter  at  Wrexham,  where  your  High- 
ness will  easily  judge  they  cannot  long  subsist.     In  this 
retreat  from  Ormskirk,  my  Lord  Byron,  with  Lord  Mol- 
ineux's    brigade,    being    fifteen  hundred  horse,  brought 
up  the  rear,  and  engaging  himself  upon  the  enemy,  when 
he  needed  not,  received  the  repulse,  his  men  running  and 
dispersing  themselves  ;  they  had  been  totally  cut  off,  did 
not  Langdale  wheel,  and  so  stopped  the  enemy,  and  after 
retreated  himself  without  the  least  disturbance.      But  of 
Molineux,  Tilsby,  and  the  Lord  Byron's  regiments,  the 
amount  is  very  short,  the  few  that  kept  together  being 
here  with  the  rest.     Thus  your  Highness  sees,  we  shall 
utterly  lose  the  men  we  have  in  the  North.     I  despair  of 
any  good  in  Lancashire ;  who,  to  divert   the   war   from 
themselves,  have  exposed  their  own  quarter   to   be  lost, 
we  to  be  ruined  in  our  quarters,  and  this  body  of  horse, 
who  might  well  have  subsisted  where  they  were,  to  be 
starved,  as   they  must  be  if    they  continue  here.       Sir 
Marmaduke  hath  written  to  your  Highness  how  he  thinks 
to  dispose   of  himself,   and  hath  been  at  me  for  advice-, 
which  I  dare  not  meddle  in.     I  beseech  God  of  Heaven 


22  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [AUG. 

to  bless  you,  and  I  shall  be  the  less  troubled  at  any  thing, 
for  I  am,  with  my  soul, 

Your  faithfullest  and  most  devoted  servant, 

WILL.  LEGGE. 

Chester,  Aug.  22,  1644. 

The  night  your  Highness  lay  at  Ruthen,  Marrows' 
horse  were  beaten,  and  that  regiment  dispersed. 

Sir  John  Byron  also  writes  of  this  action,  which, 
he  says,  took  place  "  on  the  spot  where  your  High- 
ness killed  the  buck  as  the  horse  were  drawing  out." 
At  this  time  the  strong  castle  of  Montgomery  was 
said  to  be  in  jeopardy  through  the  lukewarm  or 
wavering  affection  of  the  owner,  Lord  Herbert,  of 
Cherbury.  Prince  Rupert  requested  that  eccentric 
nobleman's  attendance  at  Shrewsbury,  but  he  ex- 
cused himself  in  the  following  brief  note  : — 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  MOST  EXCELLENT  HlGHNESS, 

I  shall  humbly  crave  to  tell  your  Highness,  that 
though  I  have  the  ambition  to  kiss  your  most  valorous 
and  princely  hands,  yet  because  I  am  newly  entered  into 
a  course  of  physic,  I  do  humbly  desire  to  be  excused  for 
the  present.  Beseeching  your  Highness,  nevertheless,  to 
hold  me  in  your  former  good  opinion  and  favour,  since  I 
am  your  Highness's  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

E.  HERBERT. 

Montgomery  Castle,  Aug.  23,  1644. 

And  a  few  days  afterwards  lie  surrendered  the 
castle  to  the  Roundheads.  On  the  29th  of  August, 
Sir  Marmaduke  was  again  beaten  at  Malpas,  and  at 
length  with  difficulty  brought  two  thousand  horse 
together  in  quarters  in  Monmouthshire. 


1044.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        23 

On  the  30th,  the  King  writes  this  reassuring  let- 
ter to  the  much  misdoubting  Prince : 

NEPHEW, 

I  send  you  herewith  the  possible  remedies  for  those 
difficulties  you  sent  me,  which  obstruct  your  advance  of 
monies;  whereby  I  am  confident  you  will  not  only  be 
contented,  but  likewise  satisfied  that  I  can  do  no  more  for 
your  supply  than  I  have  done  in  this :  and  you  will  find 
that  I  have  had  the  like  care  in  the  rest,  as  Digby  will 
particularly  inform  you,  whom  I  must  desire  you  (for  my 
service'  sake,  because  he  is  a  useful  servant)  so  far  to 
countenance  as  to  shew  him  a  possibility  to  recover  your 
favour,  if  he  shall  deserve  it,  which  I  hope  he  will ;  and  if 
not,  he  shall  repent  it  too  late.  Not  doubting  that  for  my 
sake  but  ye  will  make  this  and  a  greater  experiment ;  for  I 
assure  you  that,  as  to  me,  you  are  and  shall  be  capable  to 
oblige  any  of  my  servants — but  none  of  them  you,  or  of 
doing  you  the  least  prejudice.  And  here  I  must  protest 
to  you,  upon  the  faith  of  a  Christian  (the  reason  of  this 
protestation  I  refer  to  Robin  Legge)  that  concerning  your 
generosity  and  particular  fidelity  and  friendship  to  me,  I 
have  an  implicit  faith  in  you.  This  at  all  times  shall  be 
made  good  by 

Your  loving  uncle  and  most  faithful  friend, 

CHARLES  R. 

Boconnock,  Aug.  30  1644. 

P.S.  I  send  you  a  cypher  of  my  own  making,  desiring 
you  to  use  it  if  you  understand  it,  as  I  believe  you  will, 
though  Waller  [Sir  Edward]  who  transcribed  it,  cannot. 

On  the  7th  of  September,  I  find  the  subjoined 
letter  from  Secretary  Nicholas,  which  gives  intelli- 
gence of  the  Roundheads'  position  and  that  of  the 
Oxonian  troops  previous  to  the  second  battle  of 


24  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF       [SEPT. 

Newbury.1  The  secretary  alludes  to  the  arrival  of 
the  Elector  Palatine  in  London ;  and  I  find  a  long 
statement  of  his  crafty  Highness's  motives  in  visiting 
England,  as  addressed  to  both  Houses :  it  consists 
principally  in  eulogy  of  the  Parliament  and  depreca- 
tion of  his  brother's  service  of  the  King ;  in  denun- 
ciations against  "  Popish  schemes  hammered  out  on 
Jesuitical  anvils,'1  and  in  profession  of  his  own  godly 
regard  for  the  Protestant  religion.  We  next  hear 


1    MAY   IT   PLEASE   YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

Understanding  that  your  Highness  is  like  to  remain  some 
time  at  Bristol,  I  held  it  my  duty  to  tender  my  humble  service  to 
you,  and  to  give  you  an  account  of  such  particulars  here  as  con- 
cern his  Majesty's  service  and  present  affairs,  which  all  the  world 
must  acknowledge  to  have  been  principally  and  most  vigorously 
supported  by  your  arm  next  under  God.  Basing  hath  defended 
itself  hitherto,  and  holds  out  still  very  bravely. 

Banbury  is  still  close  begirt,  hath  killed  and  wounded  very 
great  numbers  of  the  rebels,  and  fears  not  all  their  power  for 
some  months.  The  works  in  this  town  are  now  made  very  defen- 
sible, so  as  nothing  the  rebels  can  attempt  upon  us  here  can  hurt 
us  if  we  be  vigilant.  We  want  horse,  which  render  the  rebels 
masters  of  Abingdon,  Reading,  Woodstock,  and  all  the  country 
about  us,  but  yet  we  have  here  good  markets.  If  we  had  one 
thousand  horse  and  five  hundred  dragoons  we  could  with  ease 
remove  or  cut  off  all  the  rebel's  forces  in  these  parts.  Sir  William 
Waller  is,  I  hear,  at  Farringdon,  or  thereabouts,  with  about  one 
thousand  foot  and  near  as  many  horse.  Massy  went  Tuesday  last 
out  of  Gloucester,  with  about  nine  hundred  horse  and  foot,  towards 
Bath,  and  was  to  have  more  forces  from  other  garrisons  of  the 
rebels  under  his  charge  to  join  with  him  ;  these  are  to  join  with 
Sir  William  Waller's  forces,  which  are  to  move  from  these  parts, 
and  to  march  all  into  the  West,  Waller  being  made  the  rebels' 
field-marshal-general  of  the  West.  Your  Highness's 

Most  humble  and  affectionate  servant, 

EDW.  NICHOLAS. 
Oxon,  Sept.  7,  1644. 

P-S. — I  am  now  certainly  assured  that  the  Prince  Elector  is 
come  to  London  and  lodged  at  Whitehall. 


1644.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.         25 

about    Lord    Herbert    of  Cherbury,    and   as    fol- 
lows : — 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

I  am  very  sorry  that  I  have  not  better  news  to  present 
you  withal.  Upon  the  delivery  of  the  Castle  of  Mont- 
gomery to  the  enemy  by  that  treacherous  Lord  of  Cher- 
bury  ;  for  the  regaining  of  it  and  your  Highness's  pow- 
der which  was  taken  at  Newton  and  brought  thither,  I 
drew  out  a  considerable  force  of  horse  and  foot,  who 
marched  thither,  where  they  beat  Sir  Thomas  Middleton, 
and  forced  both  his  horse  and  foot  into  the  castle,  and 
kept  them  in  ten  days ;  and  upon  intelligence  of  the  ene- 
my's drawing  thither  for  their  relief,  my  Lord  Byron 
came  thither  with  a  considerable  force,  upon  Tuesday 
last,  where  it  was  our  hap  to  be  beaten  yesterday, 
and  the  castle  relieved.  The  enemy's  forces  that  came  to 
relieve  the  castle  were  commanded  by  Sir  William  Brere- 
ton,  Sir  John  Meldrum,  and  Sir  William  Fairfax,  who  was 
there  slain.  I  rest 

Your  Highness's  most  obedient  servant, 

MIC.  ERNLY. 

Shrewsbury,  19th  Sept.  1644. 

Sir  Michael  writes  again  on  the  5th  of  October, 
that  Redd  Castle  is  besieged,  and  Lord  Powis  ill 
provided,  both  for  provision  and  ammunition.  Also 
that  "the  whole  country"  together  is  strangely 
weakened. 

Lord  Digby  next  writes  thus  soothingly.  He 
seems  to  have  somewhat  mollified  the  Prince,  but 
the  real  state  of  the  matter  will  soon  appear. 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

The  King  has  written  unto  you  so  fully  himself,  and  I 
have,  by  his  command,  supplied  what  he  omitted,  in  some 


26  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [OCT. 

particulars,  in  a  letter  to  Tom  Eliott,  tliat  there  is  no 
occasion  of  my  enlarging  your  Highness's  trouble  at  this 
present,  further  than  to  assure  you  of  the  great  comfort 
and  new  life,  as  it  were,  which  it  gives  to  those  who  have  the 
honour  to  be  trusted  by  your  Highness,  to  think  that  our 
army  shall  shortly  be  again  animated  by  your  spirit ;  and 
that  as  his  Majesty  hath  endeavoured  to  make  it  more 
worthy  of  you,  by  removing  those  from  it  against  whom 
your  Highness  had  too  just  a  prejudice,  so  you  are  also 
pleased  to  receive  the  disposition  to  favourable  thoughts 
of  those  who  have  been  unfortunately  misrepresented  to 
you  ;  in  which  my  unhappiness  shall  hereafter,  I  hope, 
serve  only  to  heighten  my  joy  and  satisfaction  of  being 
owned  by  you,  for  what  I  shall  ever  be,  with  all  aifection 
and  sincerity  imaginable, 

Your  Highness's  most  faithful  humble  servant, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 

Exeter,  Sept.  23,  1644. 

On  the  5th  of  October,  Rupert  left  the  King  for 
Bristol,  attended  thither  by  Lords  Hopton  and 
Digby ;  the  King  promising  not  to  fight  until  the 
Prince  returned  to  him  with  reinforcements  of 
Langdale's  and  Gerrard's  troops. 

On  the  llth  of  October,  however,  the  pressing 
necessities  of  his  four  gallant  garrisons,  Basing, 
Donnington,  Portland,  and  Banbury,  induced  the 
King  to  put  his  troops  in  motion.  He  writes  thus 
from  Blandford : — 

THE    KING    TO    PRINCE    RUPERT. 

[In  cipher.] 

NEPHEW, 

I  am  advertised  by  a  despatch  from  Secretary  Ni- 
cholas, that  the  Governors  of  Banbury,  Basing,  and  Don- 
nington Castle  must  accommodate,  in  case  they  be  not 


1644.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.          27 

relieved  within  a  few  days.  The  importance  of  which 
place,  and,  consequently,  [illegible]  hath  made  me  resolve 
to  begin  my  march  on  Tuesday  towards  Salisbury,  where 
Prince  Rupert  may  rely  upon  it,  the  King  of  England 
shall  be,  God  willing,  on  Wednesday  next,  where  I  will 
desire  Prince  Rupert  to  come  with  what  strength  of  horse 
and  foot  you  can,  and  the  two  demi-cannon,  many  of  my 
men  being  unarmed.  I  have  sent  to  Bristol  for  muskets, 
which  I  desire  Rupert  to  speed  to  me.  I  desire  to  hear 
daily  from  you,  and  particularly  when  you  will  be  with 
me,  and  which  way  you  will  march,  and  how  strong  you 
can  come  to 

Your  loving  Uncle,  and  most  faithful  friend, 

CHARLES  R. 
Blandford,  llth  Oct.  1644. 

His  Majesty's  first  movement  was  towards  Long- 
ford House  and  Wilton*  House  to  relieve  Portland ; 
and  then,  having  had  some  slight  success  against 
Waller  at  Andover,  he  was  persuaded  by  Goring, 
who  did  not  wish  to  have  Prince  Rupert,  to  advance 
towards  Newbury. 

At  this  time  Prince  Rupert  writes  to  Colonel 
Legge  as  follows :  his  letter  throws  a  curious  light 
on  bis  relation  to  Digby,  and  prepares  us  for  the 
explosion  which  soon  afterwards  took  place. 

DEAR  WILL., 

I  have  desired  Arthur  Trevor  to  acquaint  you  with 
all  our  news,  and  what  ammunition  you  may  expect.  You 
may  be  assured  that  nothing  shall  be  wanting  which  may 
be  otherwise,  to  assist  you  in  those  parts,  and  that  you 
may  have  a  true  testimony  of  it,  know  that  Lord  Byron 
is  coming  to  be  the  King's  Lieutenant-General  of  horse. 
Digby  and  [Rupert  cipher]  friends,  but  I  doubt  they 


28  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [OCT. 

trust  one  another  alike.  [Cipher  for  Digby]  makes  great 
professions  and  vows  to  Rupert;  but  it  will  do  no  good 
upon  him.  Great  factions  are  breeding  against  Rupert, 
under  a  pretence  of  peace :  he  being,  as  they  report,  the 
only  cause  of  war  in  this  kingdom.  This  party  is  found 
out,  but  no  particulars  proved  :  they  will  be,  and  then  the 
King  did  promise  to  punish,  or  there  will  be  no  staying  ; 
which  else  R.  is  resolved  to  do,  since  the  King's  friends 
are  in  no  very  good  condition,  and  he  hath  promised  me 
fair;  it  is  well  if  half  be  performed.  The  rebels  are  very 
weak  in  foot,  and  will  be  easily  dispersed  if  the  King  lose 
no  time  ;  in  a  few  days  I  shall  discover  more  of  all  this 
before-mentioned,  and  then  you  shall  have  a  more  per- 
fect relation  of  all.  Pray  remember  me  kindly  to  the 
Duke  [of  Richmond]  and  Russell,  and  assure  yourself 
that  I  am  your  faithful  friend,  RUPERT. 

Bristol,  16th  Oct.  1644. 

Pray,  make  sure  of  the  Bishop  of  York.1 

On  the  25th,  Banbury  was  ably  relieved  by  Lord 
Northampton,  assisted  by  Rupert's  force  from  the 
North ;  and  on  the  27th,  the  Royal  army  allowed 
itself  to  be  involved  in  the  second  battle  of  New- 
bury. 

This  was  one  of  the  worst  fought  battles  in  the 
whole  war,  which  is  saying  a  good  deal :  Sir  Edward 
Walker,  with  the  King's  assistance,  makes  the  best 
of  it  in  his  narration,  but  there  is  little  to  be  said 
for  our  Cavaliers,  and  less  for  their  King,  on  that 


1  This  was  a  very  necessary  caution,  for  I  find  that  this  in- 
triguing prelate  has  (in  Lord  Denbigh's  MS.  vol.  1.  p.  96)  been 
holding  Conway  Castle  for  himself,  in  defiance  of  Sir  John  Owen, 
the  King's  general. 


1644.]    PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.          29 

occasion.     That  little,  however,  is  here  written  by 
Lord  Digby  to  the  Prince. 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

I  have  received  yours  of  the  24th,  by  this  bearer,  and 
shall  here  return  your  Highness  an  answer  to  it,  as  soon 
as  I  have  stated  unto  you  our  present  condition.  In  my 
last  of  Friday  night  (for  yesterday  it  was  impossible  to 
send  to  you),  I  wrote  unto  you  that  the  rebels  had  drawn 
all  their  army  within  less  than  a  mile  of  us,  between  this 
place  and  Thacham,  with  an  intent,  by  all  we  could  per- 
ceive, to  fall  upon  us  on  that  side  the  next  morning.  I 
told  you,  likewise,  how  advantageously  for  our  defence  we 
had  seated  ourselves  between  the  two  rivers,  in  the  field 
under  the  command  of  Donnington  Castle.  In  the  morn- 
ing, according  to  our  expectations,  they  placed  their  bat- 
teries, and  began  to  shoot  at  our  passes,  and  drew  down 
their  army  towards  them,  as  if  they  meant  presently  to 
give  on,  but  whether  our  readiness  to  receive  them,  or 
their  own  uncertainty  of  counsels,  or  the  backwardness  of 
their  men,  made  them  forbear,  I  know  not,  but  they 
staid  all  day,  shooting  with  their  cannon,  and,  as  it  were, 
at  shall  I  or  shall  I  not,  with  their  men,  and  in  the  even- 
ing drew  off  their  main  body  round  to  a  heath  behind 
Donnington  Castle,  in  the  way  to  Hungerford,  where  they 
kept  their  rendezvous ;  leaving  some  cannon  and  some 
small  forces  on  that  side,  where  we  expected  they  would 
have  given  on.  Their  design  now  must  necessarily  be  to 
come  round  at  a  pass,  called  Bloxford,  two  miles  above 
Donnington,  and  either  to  assault  us  on  that  side,  or  to 
fasten  quarters  round  us,  in  hopes  to  block  us  up  and  dis- 
tress us  for  provisions.  If  they  intend  the  first,  I  make  no 
doubt  but  we  shall  be  in  as  good  a  posture  to  receive  them 
on  that  side  as  on  the  other,  for,  indeed,  we  had  yesterday 
occasion  to  see  that  they  are  very  dastardly,  and  will 
hardly  be  brought  on.  A  party  of  forty  of  our  horse  set 


30  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [OCT. 

nigh  one  thousand  of  theirs  a  running,  and  three  shot  of 
cannon  made  all  their  foot  run  away,  and  leave  their  co- 
lours behind  them,  where  if  we  could  have  got  over  the 
river,  thirty  horse  might  have  taken  as  many  colours, 
[ciphers].  I  hope  we  may  be  able  to  subsist  here,  putting 
the  enemy  to  much  more  hard  duty  than  we  [unintel- 
ligible.] 1,  90,  83,  86,  k4,  58,  31,  73,  85,  90,  5,  16,  67, 
4,  57,  82,  which  is  longer  than  I  believe  they  can  hold 
together  in  the  field,  in  case  the  weather  prove  ill.  If 
they  remove,  we  shall  be  able  to  take  our  advantages  upon 
them,  or  [illegible].  But  our  resolutions,  in  this  respect, 
must  depend  upon  the  rebels'  motions,  and  accidents  be- 
twixt this  and  the  time  of  your  approach  to  us,  which,  as 
I  believe,  it  cannot  be  hastened  before  your  appointed 
time,  so  we  firmly  hope  that  it  will  not  fail  nor  be  deferred 
beyond  that  time,  and  that  from  thence  you  will  make  all 
haste  possible.  Your  Highness  may  be  confident  that 
nothing  within  my  power  and  industry  shall  be  omitted 
towards  the  settlement  of  the  garrison  of  Bristol,  though 
we  meet  with  many  difficulties  in  it ;  nor  shall  I,  in  any  of 
your  commands,  fail  of  that  warmth  which  becomes 

Your  Highness's  most  affectionate  and  most  faithful 
humble  servant, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 

Newbury,  Oct.  27,  1644. 

Lord  Digby  does  not  speak  of  his  Majesty's  pre- 
cipitate retreat  to  Bath,  nor  of  the  double  traitor 
Urry,  who  gave  the  Roundheads  their  best  intelli- 
gence. All  this  time  the  Prince  had  been  delayed 
at  Bristol,  endeavouring  to  raise  a  sufficient  force  to 
move  to  the  King's  assistance.  He  had  despatched 
Langdale  and  Gerrard  on  the  23rd,  and  they  had 
assisted  at  the  relief  of  Banbury  Castle.  At  length 
the  Prince  was  enabled  to  march  with  a  few 


1644.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        31 

hundred  men,  but  when  he  reached  Marshfield,  he 
met  Lord  Digby's  messenger  with  the  above  letter, 
and  heard  that  the  King  was  at  Bath.  The  fol- 
lowing notes  extracted  from  his  own  Diary  will 
describe  the  rest : — 

Oct.  28,  1644. 

The  Prince  marched  to  Marsfield,  and  meets  one  Col. 
Tuke  Haldby,  who  told  him  the  King  would  speak  with 
him  in  Bath ;  and  that  he  had  been  beaten  at  Newbury, 
that  Prince  Maurice  was  with  the  King  in  the  battle,  and 
they  told  Prince  Rupert  that  it  was  feared  Prince  Maurice 
was  lost.  Goring's  brother  came  to  the  King  from 
Prince  Maurice  and  Goring,  and  told  him  all  was  lost, 
and  gave  him  counsel  to  go  away,  whereupon  he  went 
away.  The  Prince,  upon  this  intelligence,  said  his  bro- 
ther was  not  beaten.  And  so  it  proved,  for  he  had 
retreated  to  Donnington  Castle.  The  King's  going  out 
of  the  field  upon  this  false  information,  lost  that  day. 

Then  the  Prince  advised  to  march  away  for  Oxford,  to 
rally  the  forces,  and  there  they  met  with  Lord  Gerrard. 
And  then 

November  6,  1644. — The  Prince  was  declared  General 
[generalissimo]  of  the  Army,1  and  Master  of  the  Horse, 
and  then  they  marched  and  came  to  the  same  place,  at 
Newbury,  where  the  King  had  suffered  that  disaster  some 
ten  days  before.  Then  we  drew  up  before  the  enemy ; 
and  it  was  not  then  thought  fit  to  fight,  though  the  Prince 
was  for  it.  So  we  drew  off  all  our  cannon.  It  was  sus- 
pected, by  the  Lord  Colepepper  and  others,  that  the 


1  Prince  Rupert  consented  without  reluctance  to  supersede 
the  hesotted  Lord  Brentford ;  but  with  great  self-denial,  he  re- 
quested the  King,  for  political  reasons,  to  make  the  Prince  of 
Wales  general  of  England,  and  that  he  would  command  under 
h  irn . — Clarendon's  Rebellion. 


32  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [NOV. 

enemy  would  fall  upon  their  rear.  The  Prince  retained 
his  resolution,  and  drew  off  in  great  order,  when  a  great 
Lord,  that  was  a  young  soldier,  said  it  was  a  Country 
Dance.  But  the  experienced  Prince  drew  off  the  army 
without  losing  a  man. 

From  thence  they  came  to  Malmsbury,  and  then  by  the 
advice  of  the  Earl  of  Bristol,  they  would  not  let  the  Prince 
have  the  command  apart ;  and  it  was  given  to  the  Lord 
Bernard  Stewart,  brother  to  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  to 
the  great  displeasure  of  the  Prince.  But  by  the  per- 
suasion of  friends,  he  submitted,  though  he  was  resolved 
to  have  laid  down  his  command  upon  it. 

Then  succeeded  the  Treaty  of  Uxbridge,  in  which  time 
Prince  Maurice  was  sent  into  Wales. 

The  affair  at  Newbury  scarcely  deserves  the 
name  of  a  battle ;  the  King's  object  was  obtained 
without  loss ;  Donnington  Castle  was  relieved,  and 
the  King's  guns  carried  thence  in  safety.  The  King 
could  not  afford  to  risk  a  battle,  the  safety  of  his 
empire,  the  last  hope  of  his  kingdom  were  involved 
in  that  little  army.  It  seems  unaccountable,  how- 
ever, that  the  enemy,  commanded  by  Manchester 
and  Waller,  should  not  have  forced  on  an  engage- 
ment for  the  same  reason  that  the  King's  policy 
was  to  avoid  it.  Essex  is  said  to  have  taunted  his 
old  rival,  Waller,  with  his  forbearance ;  and  Crom- 
well inveighed  against  Manchester,  for  the  same 
reason ;  they  had  both  greater  reason  to  do  so  a  few 
days  later,  at  the  third  battle  of  Newbury. 

The  gallant  garrison  of  Basing  House  had  held 
out  bravely  under  Lord  Winchester,  through  much 
privation,  and  an  almost  continued  siege  ever  since 


1044.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.         33 

the  summer  of  1643.  When  the  Roundheads  angrily 
summoned  the  fortress,  vowing,  in  case  of  resist- 
ance, not  to  leave  one  stone  upon  another;  the 
commandant  replied,  "  I  will  not  bind  myself 
to  repair  the  walls  then,  but  I  will  still  keep  the 
ground  they  stood  upon."  This  magnificent  place, 
"  that  would  have  become  an  emperor  to  dwell 
in,"  as  Hugh  Peters  said,  remained  impregnable 
until  Cromwell's  evil  might  overpowered  it,  in 
October,  1645.  That  ruthless  man  put  its  heroic 
garrison  to  the  sword,  plundered  it  utterly,  and 
left  little  but  its  ruined  walls  to  bear  witness  to 
the  valour  of  the  defenders,  and  the  ferocity  of  its 
conquerors. 

Rupert  appeared  before  the  stout  old  walls  of 
Basing  House  on  the  1 1th  November,  and  exchanged 
compliments  with  its  garrison.  On  the  21st  the 
Prince  attempted  to  surprise  Abingdon,  but  was 
repulsed  ;  on  the  23rd  he  entered  Oxford  with  the 
King  who  was  enthusiastically  received  after  his 
long  absence. 

The  fortifications  had  been  carefully  strengthened 
since  his  Majesty's  departure  :  the  stores  had  been 
well  furnished  and  supplied,  and  all  things  seemed 
to  promise  rest  and  security  for  the  winter.  The 
Roundheads,  however,  lay  almost  in  leaguer  round 
the  town.  Abingdon  was  strongly  occupied  by 
them,  and  proved  to  be  a  thorn  in  the  side  of 
Oxford.  Sir  Arthur  Aston,  lately  the  Governor  of 
Oxford,  had  been  obliged  to  suffer  amputation  of 

VOL.  III.  D 


34  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [DEC. 

his  leg,  and  was  otherwise  so  ill,  that  Colonel  Gage 
was  appointed  to  succeed  him.  This  officer  was 
also  a  Roman  Catholic  and  a  gallant  man.  Sir 
Arthur  Aston  denounced  him  as  a  Jesuit  to  the 
King,  but  Charles  was  so  painfully  inured  to  calumny 
that  he  always  leant  to  the  side  of  the  accused. 
This  Colonel  Gage  proposed  to  erect  a  fort  at  Cul- 
ham  bridge,  to  check  the  enemy:  he  was  slain 
whilst  endeavouring,  under  Prince  Rupert 's  orders, 
to  break  down  the  bridge  in  order  to  keep  the 
enemy  from  the  workmen. 

This  was  the  last  military  transaction  of  the 
year.  Rupert  had  been  made  generalissimo  of  the 
armies  of  England  and  Master  of  the  Horse  in 
November.1  Goring  had  combined  with  Digby  in 
such  friendship  as  he  was  capable  of;  each  gave  the 
other  his  confidence,  as  far  as  he  knew  the  other 
was  already  acquainted  with  the  object  of  it ;  each 
believed  himself  able  to  outwit  the  other,  and  con- 
sidered his  services  essential  to  his  own  views :  they 
were  only  sincerely  combined  against  Rupert,  to 
whom  each  continued  to  write  letters  full  of  devo- 
tion and  affection.  At  this  time  there  are  three 
letters  from  the  Duke  of  Richmond  to  the  Prince, 
almost  unintelligible  from  ciphers,  which  were  fre- 
quently changed.  It  appears,  however,  that  "a 
profound  melancholy"  had  seized  upon  the  young 
general ;  that  he  was  well  aware  of  the  intrigues 

1  See  appendix  A. 


1644.]    PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.  35 

hourly  weaving  against  him,  and  that  the  sense  of  his 
losses  seems  to  have  weighed  heavily  on  a  spirit  that 
was  too  proud  to  communicate  its  sorrow.     He  had 
already  experienced  one  defeat  from  Digby ;  he  had 
applied  to  the  King  for  the  Colonelcy  of  the  life- 
guard, and  it  had  been  refused,  whilst  his  friends  at 
Oxford  transmitted  to  his  Highness  from  time  to 
time,  reports  of  the  many  accusations  made  against 
him,  and  their  real  or  implied  consequences.    Mean- 
while the  Prince  was  engaged  at  Bristol  in  raising 
new  levies,  in  re-organizing  his  old  troops,  and  in 
gathering  in  the  innumerable  supplies  required  for 
an  army.     The  difficulty  of  his  task  can  only  be 
appreciated  by  a  perusal  of  his  immense  correspond- 
ence.    From  every  part  of  England  that  acknow- 
ledged the  King's  authority  (or  was  unable  to  resist 
it),   were   obtained   supplies   of  the   most   various 
descriptions;    oakum  for   "match,"   brimstone   for 
powder,  leather  for  harness,  timber  for  gun-carriages, 
cloth  for  uniform,  horses,  arms,  forage,  bread,  cheese, 
beer,  and  above  all — money !     But  these  were  to 
be  wrung  out   of  the  hard  earnings  or  narrowed 
incomes  of  a  widely  dispersed  people :  and  for  this 
there  was  no    organization  but   such  as   Rupert's 
arrangements    rendered    effective.     All   this    fiscal 
and  difficult  business  as  regarded  Wales,  Chester, 
Shropshire,  and  the  adjoining  counties,  devolved  on 
Rupert,  in  addition  to  his  especial  duties  as  Com- 
mander-in-chief of  the  most  ungovernable,  ill-com- 
pacted   and   now  demoralized  army  that  ever  ap- 

D    2 


36  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [DEC. 

peared  in  England.1  In  acquiring  the  vices  of  the 
old  continental  soldiery,  these  Cavaliers  had  acquired 
but  little  of  their  discipline,  or  rather,  they  had  lost 
any  that  they  at  first  possessed.  This  was  an  in- 
evitable consequence  of  the  King's  peculiar  position : 
his  want  of  funds  to  pay  his  forces  regularly;  the 
necessity  he  felt  himself  under  of  conciliating  every 
officer  in  any  mariner  that  cost  nothing;  the  indi- 
vidual power  and  influence  of  most  of  his  superior 
officers;  their  jealousies  —  all  these  circumstances 
left  the  King  almost  as  much  without  power  to 
punish  as  to  reward.  If  such  were  the  case  with 
respect  to  the  King,  it  was  much  more  so  as  re- 


1  Nor  was  this  demoralization  by  any  means  confined  to  the 
Royalists,  though  what  Mr.  Hallam  happily  calls  an  "  ostentatious 
dissoluteness"  rendered  their  offences  more  palpable.  In  respect 
of  social  crimes,  however,  the  Puritan  party  was  not  one  whit 
behind  the  Cavaliers.  Take,  for  instance,  the  following  complaint 
of  a  Puritan  against  the  "  godly"  soldiery  ;  nothing  worse,  in  the 
way  of  rapacity,  is  recorded  of  the  Cavaliers  against  their  deadliest 
enemies : — 

TO  THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE  FERDINANDO  LORD  FAIRFAX, 

LORD-GENERAL  OF  THE  NORTH. 
MY  LORD, 

I  was  resolved  not  to  have  been  more  troublesome  to  your 
lordship  for  anything  concerning  myself;  but  now  I  see  myself 
lie  open  not  only  to  be  undone  by  plunder,  but  myself,  wife, 
children,  and  servants  subjected  to  the  violence  and  rapine  of 
disordered  soldiers,  before  and  in  the  presence  of  your  captains 
and  officers  who  commanded  them,  and  plunder  in  part  justified 
to  be  allowed  the  soldier  by  the  captain,  when  he  had  no  commis- 
sion to  enter  my  house ;  two  of  my  servants  sore  wounded  who 
did  nothing  to  them,  in  my  wife's  presence,  and  she  forced  to  flee 
to  her  chamber  for  rescue,  and  there  a  naked  sword  tendered  her 
by  a  young  ruffian,  who  called  for  her  and  told  her  he  came  for 
money,  and,  with  fearful  oaths,  that  money  he  would  have ;  and 


1644.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.  37 

garded  Prince  Rupert ;  yet  we  find  that  to  the  last 
he  acquired  and  maintained  over  all  his  officers,  an 
influence  paramount  to  all  except  that  of  their  own 
vices.  To  the  last  he  was  able  to  raise  troops  and 
supplies  out  of  the  most  exhausted  districts ;  to 
the  last  his  name  was  a  terror  to  the  enemy ;  and 
even  by  his  opponents,  he  was  treated  with  the 
courtesy  that  honour  and  integrity  inspire  and 
command. 

I  have  but  one  more  letter  to  introduce  into  this 
year's  correspondence;  it  is  from  Waller  to  the 
Prince,  on  occasion  of  an  exchange  of  prisoners. 
The  Roundhead  general  it  must  be  confessed,  writes 


calling  all  Romish  [women]  of  Babylon,  wherein,  I  thank  God, 
none  with  me  are  guilty.  He  had  his  desire  in  part,  for  he 
snatched  a  purse,  with  a  gold  ring  and  a  seal  in  it,  from  a  servant 
that  was  giving  some  to  quiet  him.  By  the  way,  I  beseech  your 
lordship  to  take  into  consideration,  that  the  sequestrator  gave 
this  commission  to  one  Captain  Swaine,  to  sequester  and  appraise 
all  my  cattle,  but  not  to  bring  them  away  ;  yet  he  not  only  drove 
them  away,  but  gave  divers  of  my  coach-horses  to  one  Captain 
Wood,  who  set  him  on  work  first  to  do  this,  and  who  the  last 
week  plundered  the  same  horses  and  two  others  notwithstanding. 
I  shewed  him  your  lordship's  proclamation  against  it.  I  made 
my  address  to  his  colonel,  a  very  civil  man,  and  he  caused  three 
coach-horses  and  a  mare  to  be  restored ;  but  the  other  coach- 
horse  and  a  pacing  nag  for  my  own  saddle  the  captain  keeps 
still ;  and  now,  by  Captain  Swaine's  means,  he  may  set  up  a 
coach,  for  he  hath  all  four ;  and  your  lordship  is  well  acquainted 
with  our  dirty  country,  that  I  need  not  acquaint  your  lordship 
that  my  wife  cannot  serve  God  at  church  with  the  congregation, 
but  in  frosty  weather. 

Your  lordship's  humble  servant, 

JOHN    WOLFSTENHOLME. 

Nastel,  Dec.  22,  1644.*        

*  Memorials  of  the  Civil  War,  p.  133. 


38  MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [NOV. 

better   than    most  of  our  Cavaliers,    and  in  quite 
as  good  a  spirit,  too,  after  his  fashion. 

IT    MAY    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

I  have  had  the  honour  to  receive  an  overture  from 
you  concerning  the  exchanges  of  Major-General  Tillier  for 
Captain  Greenfield,  and  of  Rowland  Head,  corporal,  for 
one  George  Rolfe  ;  as  likewise  an  offer  at  large  for  Sir 
Charles  Lucas.     The  first,  between  Major-General  Tillier 
and  Captain  Greenfield,  I  humbly  conceive  to  be  very  un- 
equal, in  regard  of  the  wide  disproportion  between  them  in 
point  of  quality ;  but  if  Colonel  "Weymes  might  be  accepted, 
either  for  him  or  Sir  Charles  Lucas,  I  should  labour  to 
procure  that  exchange.     So  soon  as  I  can  possibly  inform 
myself  where  Corporal  Head  is  in  custody,  I  shall  give 
your  Highness  an  account  of  his  enlargement ;  and  if  there 
be  anything  further  wherein  I  may  serve  you  (with  the 
reservation  of  a  clear  honour),  I  shall  count  it  for  the 
greatest  happiness  I  am  capable  of,  to  be  commanded  by 
the  title  of 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  Servant, 

WILLIAM  WALLER. 

Nov.  19,  1644. 

As  a  result  of  this  communication,  I  find  the 
following  passport  given  by  Rupert,  implying 
considerable  faith  in  the  Regulus  honour  of  the 
Roundhead. 

Having  given  Captain  Greenfield  his  liberty  for  ten 
days,  upon  his  parole,  and  then  to  render  himself  here,  at 
Oxford — To  free  him  to  London  till  ten  days,  unless  Major 
Potter  be  meantime  exchanged. 

|)  TJT>TJIT>  np    1 

Oxford,  26th  Nov.  1644. 

1  Tanner  Papers  Bodleian. 


1644.]      PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.  39 

I  am  tempted  to  insert  here,  as  apposite,  a  very 
characteristic  anecdote  of  this  time,  told  by  Sir 
Richard  Bulstrode.  It  shews  the  sprightly  nature 
of  the  subordinate  part  of  the  war,  and  proves  that 
even  the  Puritan  General  could  enter  into  the 
spirit  of  his  former  associates. 

"This  winter  General  Goring  was  quartered  at 
Bruton,  in  Somersetshire,  at  Sir  Charles  Berkeley's, 
an  enclosed  country,  where  the  villages  were  thick, 
and  great  store  of  forage  for  horse.  Sir  William 
Waller  was  then  quartered  at  Salisbury,  in  Wilt- 
shire, where  the  villages  are  thin,  standing  only  in 
the  valleys,  some  distance  from  each  other.  General 
Goring  taking  this  advantage,  sent  out  parties  al- 
most every  night,  to  beat  up  the  enemy's  quarters 
in  Wiltshire,  which  was  done  with  such  good  suc- 
cess, that  in  a  short  time  we  took  many  prisoners 
and  colours,  which  occasioned  Waller  to  write  this 
ensuing  letter  to  General  Goring. 

NOBLE  LORD, 

God's  blessing  be  on  your  heart.  You  are  the  jollyest 
neighbour  I  have  ever  met  with.  I  wish  for  nothing  more 
but  an  opportunity  to  let  you  know  I  would  not  be 
behind  in  this  kind  of  courtesy.  In  the  meantime,  if  your 
Lordship  please  to  release  such  prisoners  as  you  have  of 
mine,  for  the  like  number  and  quality  which  I  have  of 
yours,  I  shall  esteem  it  as  a  great  civility,  being 
Your  Lordship's  most  humble  and  obedient  Servant, 

WILLIAM  WALLER.1 

1   Sir  Richard  Bulstrode's  Memoirs,  p.  120. 


40  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [NOV. 

A  trumpeter  (a  humble  sort  of  herald  who  trans- 
acted such  messages  between  the  hostile  camps) 
arrived  with  this  letter  while  Goring  and  Sir  Rich- 
ard were  at  dinner :  "  He  had  been  often  with  us," 
says  the  worthy  knight,  "  and  was  a  pleasant  droll, 
this  trumpeter,"  so  they  told  him  to  wait  and  he 
should  have  his  answer  after  dinner.  Meanwhile, 
a  party  of  horse  return  from  a  foray  on  the  enemy, 
bringing  back  "five  colours  and  some  prisoners 
of  Colonel  Popham's  regiment/'  Whereupon  Sir 
William  Waller's  trumpeter  pressed  that  he  might 
be  sent  back  to  his  General,  else  probably  he  might 
find  his  General  a  "  prisoner  too."  This  transaction 
was  followed  by  a  general  exchange  of  prisoners. 

Waller  was  the  only  general  now  quite  free  to 
act  for  the  Parliament :  Manchester  and  Cromwell 
had  quarrelled  at  Newbury,  Cromwell  accused  his 
Lordship  of  temporising,1  and  above  all  of  giving 
utterance  to  a  dangerous  speech,  though  in  confi- 
dence, to  him,  Cromwell.  "  We  must  run  no  risks/1 
said  the  aristocrat,  "  for  if  we  lose  this  army,  the 
King  may  march  to  London  and  hang  us  all  as 
mere  rebels."  The  democrat  took  a  very  different 
view  of  the  matter :  "  We  shall  do  no  good,"  said  he, 
"  until  we  have  done  away  with  lords,"  ..."  and, 
as  to  the  King,  if  I  met  his  sacred  majesty  in  battle, 
I  would  pistol  him  as  soon  as  another.''2  This 

1  Ludlow,  i.  133. 

2  A  « thing  hardly  conceivable  to  the   Presbyterian   human 
mind.  -Carlyles  Cromwell,  i.  217  ;  Former's  Statesmen,  vol.  iv. 


1644.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.  41 

quarrel   created  a  serious   difficulty  to   the  Parlia- 
ment ;  the  more  so,  as  Essex  resigned  his  command, 
and  Lord  Warwick,  also,  alarmed  at  the  turn  affairs 
were  taking,   laid  down   his    office  as   Lord   High 
Admiral  soon  afterwards.     In  December  the  "  self- 
denying  ordinance"  was  brought    forward  in  the 
House  of  Commons  by  Mr.  Zouch  Tate,  and  soon 
passed    into  a  law.     With    this    ordinance,  which 
precluded  any  Member  of  Parliament  from  holding 
a  command  in  the  army,  was  let  in  a  liberty  of  con- 
science for  those  who  declined  to  take  the  Covenant, 
and  this  matter  very  much  offended  the  Scots.    The 
immediate  result  of  this  able  measure,  and  its  rider, 
was,   that    Essex   received    a   retiring    pension    of 
£10,000  a  year,1  and  was  rendered  negative  until 
his  death — two  years  after :  that  Manchester  was 
shelved  on  the  Committee ;  Fairfax  was  appointed 
Lieutenant-General,  and  Cromwell's  first  step  to- 
wards despotism  was  firmly  planted. 

The  next  mention  I  find  of  Prince  Rupert  occurs 
in  Evelyn,2  who  says  that — 

A  letter  being  read  to  the  Council  from  the  Earl  of 
Essex,  to  "  His  Highness  Prince  Rupert,  General  of  His 
Majesty's  Armies;"  the  Council  having  debated,  the 
King  desired  the  Prince  to  return  this  answer : — 

FOR  THE  EARL  OF  ESSEX. 
MY  LORD, 

I  am  commanded  by  his  Majesty  to  desire  of  your 
Lordship  a  safe-conduct  for  the  Duke  of  Richmond  and 

1  Hallam's  Const.  Hist.  1.  2  Vol.  v.  p.  217. 


42  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [DEC. 

the  Earl  of  Southampton,  with  their  attendants,  coaches 
and  horses,  and  other  accommodations  for  their  journey  to 
London;  during  their  stay;  and  in  their  return,  when 
they  shall  think  fit,  from  the  Lords  and  Commons  as- 
sembled in  the  Parliament  of  England,  at  Westminster, 
to  bring  to  the  Lords  and  Commons  of  England,  and  the 
Commons  of  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,  an  answer  to  the 
propositions  presented  to  his  Majesty  for  a  safe  and  well- 
grounded  peace.  Resting 

Your  Lordship's  Servant, 

RUPERT. 
Oxon,  5th  Dec.  1644. 

Which  answer  was  accordingly  sent  to  London  by  a 
trumpeter.  The  following  is  in  the  hand- writing  of  Sir 
Edward  Nicholas  : — 

That  the  King  and  myself,  of  all  the  Council  Board, 
were  the  only  persons  that  concurred  not  in  opinion  that 
it  was  fitting  to  call  those  sitting  at  Westminster  a  Parlia- 
ment. Prince  Rupert,  though  he  were  present,  did  not 
vote,  because  he  was  to  execute  what  should  be  resolved 
on  by  this  Council.  By  the  practice  of  this  Council,  if  the 
major  part  agree  to  any  order,  the  dissenting  councillors 
are  involved,  and  to  be  named  as  if  they  consented. 

E.  N. 

The  result  was  the  Treaty  of  Uxbridge,  begun  in 
that  town  on  the  29th  of  January,  1645.  In  the 
meantime,  however,  the  Parliamentary  leaders 
stained  their  cause  with  an  act  of  atrocity  that  the 
reddest  days  of  French  Republicanism  never  saw  ex- 
ceeded; the  condemnation  of  the  poor  old  Archbishop 
Laud,  to  be  hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered.  It  was 
held  to  be  a  great  favour  that  he  was  only  beheaded 


1644.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        43 

ultimately.1  They  dared  to  seek  the  authority  of 
the  Judges  for  this  murderous  and  wanton  deed, 
but  even  they,  however  timidly,2  professed  them- 
selves unable  to  assist  the  Parliament  in  legalizing 
such  atrocity.  To  Laud  himself  it  was  very  merci- 
ful to  take  him  from  the  penury,  and  loneliness, 
and  imprisonment,  in  which  they  had  long  left  his 
gray  hairs  to  whiten ;  to  promote  him  from  the  too 
just  imputations  of  arbitrariness  and  indiscretion 
under  which  he  had  long  lain,  to  a  noble  martyr- 
dom on  the  scaffold.  His  defence  was  magnanimous 
and  unanswerable  :  his  dying  speech  is  one  of  the 
noblest  and  most  touching  that  ever  preceded  a 
bloody  death,  and  that  death  itself  was  but  repose 
to  him,  and  a  triumph  for  his  fame." 3 


1  "February  1,  1645."     M.  de  Sabran  describes,  as  an  eye- 
witness, the  execution  of  M.  Morsse,  a  Jesuit  priest.     This  was 
the  death  desired  for  the  archbishop  by  the  "godly"  democrats:  — 
"  He  was  conveyed  to  Tyburn  on  a  stage,  escorted  by  the  sheriff 
and  fifty  horse-guards.     Having  arrived  at  the  place  of  execution, 
he  there  waited  half  an  hour  for  the  arrival  of  four  wretched  men, 
who  had  been  destined  to  be  hung  with  him.     Whilst  the  rope 
was  being  fixed  on  his  companions,  Morsse  addressed  the  people, 
inveighing  against  the  heresies  which  had  brought  down  such 
judgements  on  the  country.     The  sheriff  cut  short  his  discourse  ; 
when  being  confessed,  he  drew  the  cowl  over  his  eyes,  made  a  sign 
to  the  hangman,  the  cart  was  withdrawn,  and  they  remained  sus- 
pended.    His  bosom  was  then  laid  open,  his  heart  torn  out,  his 
entrails  burnt,  and  his  body  quartered,  each  part  to  be  exposed  on 
four  several  gates  of  London.     Though  the  guards  used  great 
efforts  to  prevent  any  relics  being  obtained  by  the  Roman  Ca- 
tholics, many  handkerchiefs  were  dipped  in  the  first  blood  that 
gushed  from  his  wound." — Additional  MSS.  5461,  British  Mu- 
seum, p.  84. 

2  Hallam,  Const.  Hist.  i.  578. 

3  It  was  the  Presbyterian  faction  that  committed  this  foul 


44  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [JAN. 

It  may  be  supposed  that  the  Parliament  ran 
little  risk  of  a  peace  after  thus  ushering  in  the 
treaty.  They  were  forced  by  the  passionate  desire  of 
the  people  to  go  through  the  form  of  a  treaty,  but 
nothing  was  further  from  their  thoughts.  "  Without 
having  conquered,  they  were  resolute  not  to  swerve 
from  the  utmost  rigour  of  a  conqueror's  terms." 

The  Commissioners  met,  however;  one  party 
occupying  the  "  best  Inn  "  at  one  end  of  the  town, 
the  other  the  rival  Inn  at  the  other  end.  They  ex- 
changed visits  with  one  another;  and  at  length 
came  to  the  matter  in  hand.  The  Parliament  insisted 
that  the  King  should  resign  the  Established  Church 
in  favour  of  Presbytery  (this  was  for  the  sake  of 


deed  :  "  they  wanted  at  first  to  have  had  him  hanged,  drawn,  and 
quartered." —  Whitelocke. 

"  L'Archev£que  de  Canterhery  fut  enfin  Execute  Vendredi  der- 
nier, et  tint  a  grace  de  n'avoir  que  la  t£te  tranchee.  Hors  de 
mourir  Catholique  il  ne  pourrait  mourir  plus  raisonable  n'y  plus 
constant." — M.  de  Sabran  a  M.  de  Jlrienne,  Jan.  25,  1644. 

1  Hallam  (Const.  Hist.  i.  583)  who  adds  that  "the  King 
more  secretly  cherished  illusive  hopes  of  a  more  triumphant 
return  to  power  than  any  treaty  could  be  expected  to  effect :"  the 
Parliamentary  rulers  did  not  give  him  an  apportunity  of  betray- 
ing his  secret  intentions  whatever  they  were.  Lord  Clarendon 
draws  an  interesting  picture  of  the  debates  at  this  treaty,  if  not 
of  the  treaty  itself.  The  clearness  with  which  the  Parlia- 
mentary Commissioners,  in  confidence,  foretold  the  result  of  a  con- 
tinued war,  the  pride  of  Northumberland  and  Denbigh,  the  in- 
terest of  Whitelocke,  and  the  fears  of  Pembroke  and  Salisbury, 
these  all  combated  with  their  convictions  of  the  penalty  their 
country  and  their  order  would  have  to  pay  for  the  obstinacy  with 
which  they  maintained  the  Parliament's  exacting  demands.  If 
there  had  been  one  truly  great  and  able  man  among  the  Commis- 
sioners, fervent  for  peace,  and  capable  of  accomplishing  it,  both 
the  King  and  Parliament  would  have  felt  themselves  in  a  false 
position. 


1045.]    PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.  45 

the  Scots ) ;  that  he  should  give  up  the  militia  (this 
was  for  their  own  sakes) ;  and  that  he  should  crush 
the  Roman  Catholics  of  Ireland  under  the  cruellest 
enactment  of  their  cruel  law  (this  was  for  the  sake 
of  religion ) ;  and,  that  he  should  consent  to  the 
attainder  of  his  evil  counsellors  (for  the  sake  of 
vengeance).  The  treaty  came  to  nothing.  After 
Naseby,  when  all  seemed  lost,  the  King  was 
offered  no  sterner  terms  than  these ;  and  if  he  even 
then  "  disdained  to  reign,  if  it  might  be  so  named, 
the  slave  of  Parliament,  with  the  sacrifice  of  liis 
conscience  and  his  friends,"  *  how  much  less  was  lie 
now  disposed  to  submit  to  such  a  destiny,  whilst  he 
commanded  an  army  as  resolute  as  that  of  his  ene- 
mies. Unfortunately,  too,  some  success  had  always 
stimulated  his  sanguine  spirit  before  every  treaty ; 
and  now,  when  the  trials  and  disasters  of  what  his 
historian  called,  "  his  year  of  happy  progress,"  might 
have  chastened  the  King  into  earnestness  and  truth, 
Montrose's  brief  but  brilliant  victories  in  the  North, 
had  rekindled  all  his  darkened  hopes.2 


1  Hallam,  Const.  Hist.  i.  593. 

2  My  limits  forbid  ine  to  enter  on  the  adventures   of  this 
"flower  of  Cavaliers  :"  he  has  been  fortunate  in  his  biographers. 
After  his  interview  with  Rupert  in  Yorkshire,  Montrose  repaired 
to  the  Highlands  with  one  attendant.     He  there  found  an  Irish 
body  of  troops  lately  landed  for  the  King.     They  followed  him  : 
loyal  Highland  hearts  soon  flocked  to  his  standard.     He  won  the 
battle  of  Tippermuir,  on  the  3rd  of  September,  1644.     Elcho  and 
Dundee  fell  before  him  soon  afterwards.     Charles  thought  that 
Marston  Moor  was  atoned  for,   the  Scots  neutralized,  and  the 
North  regained. — See  the  Legend  of  Montrose  ;  Napier's  Life  of 
Montrose. 


46  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [JAN. 

Whether  there  was  any  possibility  of  reconci- 
liation between  such  opponents  as  the  King  and  the 
Close  Committee  of  Parliament,  we  may  doubt. 
Certain  it  is  that,  all  the  more  honest  and  honour- 
able men  of  the  King's  party  even  among  the 
officers  desired  it :  not  only  the  Duke  of  Richmond, 
Lord  Southampton,  Sir  Edward  Hyde,  and  the 
better  statesmen  desired  peace,  but  even  Rupert 
anxiously  sought  to  promote  it.  War  seemed  every 
thing  to  him :  he  had  much  to  repair,  everything  to 
gain  by  war.  War  had  been  his  passion  from  a 
child  up ;  and,  as  long  as  there  was  a  fair  prospect 
of  waging  it  honourably,  it  would  have  been  the 
greatest  sacrifice  to  him  to  abandon  it.  But  no  one 
knew  so  well  as  he  did  the  weakness  of  the  King's 
resources.1  In  endeavouring  to  disguise  and  to 

1  Take,  in  passing,  this  letter  from  Goring  as  a  proof : — 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  TOUE  MAJESTY, 

I  esteem  myself  very  unhappy  to  be  diverted  from  the  pur- 
suit of  a  distracted  enemy,  by  that  which,  of  itself,  is  a  greater 
misfortune,  a  want  of  arms,  disorder  in  the  train,  and  an  universal 
deadness  and  backwardness  in  the  officers  of  foot  to  undertake  any 
action  without  refreshment.  I  was  necessitated  to  call  a  council 
of  war,  rather  to  please  some  of  them  than  to  hear  them,  and  I 
find  so  many  difficulties  and  objections  raised  in  all  things  I  pro- 
pose of  action,  that  I  shall  esteem  it  a  great  advancement  to  your 
Majesty's  service  hereafter,  if  I  have  the  honour  to  receive  your 
Majesty's  positive  orders  with  your  own  hand  to  them,  and  advise 
with  these  of  nothing  but  the  way  to  obey  them.  But,  sir,  I  have 
such  assurances  from  all  the  officers  of  foot,  that  after  their  arms 
are  fixed  and  their  men  refreshed,  they  will  be  ready  for  any 
action,  in  any  place  ;  and  the  soldiers  of  horse  and  foot  are  so 
willing  to  fight,  and  the  officers  of  horse  so  tractable  in  all  things, 
plunder  excepted,  that  if  your  Majesty  please  to  give  this  month 
to  the  desire  of  the  army,  and  suffer  us  to  remain  together,  with 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.          47 

repair  that  weakness  he  had  brought  upon  himself 
that  odium  and  responsibility  which  others  profited 
by,  yet  escaped  from.  He  forwarded  this  Treaty  by 
every  means  in  his  power,  and  deplored  its  failure. 
This  much,  and  unfortunately  no  more,  I  can  collect 
from  a  very  difficult  and  almost  illegible  cipher 
letter  of  the  Duke  of  Richmond. 

It  is  time  to  look  round,  and  observe  something  of 
what  is  going  on  through  England  during  this  time. 
In  the  west  Wyndham  writes  unjustly  against  Hop- 
ton  as  below ;  *  and  in  the  North  there  has  been  an 
attempt  at  treachery  in  Newark. 


such  orders  for  the  recruiting  these  forces  out  of  the  West  as  your 
Majesty  was  pleased  to  command,  I  am  very  confident  we  shall 
be  above  six  thousand  horse  and  foot  in  good  order,  besides  a 
garrison  in  Christchurch.  But  as  I  do  most  humbly  beg  a  posi- 
tive order  from  your  Majesty  for  my  undertakings  to  dispose  the 
officers  more  cheerfully  to  conduct  them,  so  I  do  most  humbly 
assure  your  Majesty,  that  the  least  intimation  of  your  Majesty's 
pleasure  is  sufficient  to  make  me  run  through  all  manner  of  diffi- 
culties and  hazard  to  perform  my  duty,  and  the  acknowledg- 
ments of  a  person  and  family  entirely  and  faithfully  devoted  to 
the  service  of  your  sacred  Majesty.  Your  Majesty's 

Most  humble,  most  dutiful,  and  most  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  GORING. 
Farnhara,  9th  Jan.  1645. 

1    MAY    IT    PLEASE   YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

I  lately  wrote  unto  you  that  you  might  receive  a  perfect 
account  of  the  state  of  his  Majesty's  affairs  in  this  county,  more 
particularly  in  relation  to  what  hath  been  acted  here  since  my 
Lord  Hopton's  coming  into  this  county,  where  I  was  absolute 
master  of  the  field,  and  I  did  believe  myself  strong  enough  to 
beat  the  enemy  out  of  the  country,  for  I  was  resolved  to  have 
attacked  him  in  his  head-quarter  at  Taunton ;  but  since  his 
Lordship's  coming,  our  strength  is  so  diminished  that  we  must 
retreat,  and  the  enemy  grown  so  bold  that  he  makes  out  quarters 
at  a  large  distance  from  the  town,  and  possesseth  himself  of  the 


48  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JAN. 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

Upon  my  coming  to  Newark,  I  found  the  enemy  gone 
from  Southwell  and  all  parts  beyond  the  river  where  they 
had  infested  us,  having  only  removed  their  quarters  a  little 
further  off;  and  no  doubt  if  there  was  that  care  requisite 
taken  within  us,  we  should  not  fear  so  much  without. 
There  was  very  lately  a  damnable  plot  for  the  betraying 
of  this  garrison:  Captain  Clay,  the  chief,  apprehended, 

best  part  of  this  county.  His  Majesty  did  sufficiently  understand 
me  before  he  went  out  of  this  town,  that  I  would  not  serve  under 
my  Lord  Hopton,  who  had  disobliged  me.  And  therefore  it 
seems  strange  to  me  that  his  Majesty,  unless  he  had  a  mind  to 
disturb  his  own  business,  that  he  should  thrust  his  Lordship  upon 
me  to  out  me  of  all  command  when  I  was  in  the  field  with  four 
thousand  men  to  oppose  the  enemy.  I  do  believe  your  Highness 
is  of  opinion  that  this  did  trouble  me,  and  all  those  officers  that 
were  with  me  to  see  me  outed  of  all  command,  and  new  officers 
put  upon  them  without  any  signification  of  his  Majesty's  pleasure 
or  civil  respect  done  to  me.  Yet  I  have  been  so  far  from  taking 
any  notice  of  this,  more  than  in  private  discourse,  that  I  have 
proffered  to  consent  to  anything  that  may  advance  his  Majesty's 
service  as  shall  be  agreed  on  by  a  council  of  war.  But  I,  seeing 
that  there  is  nothing  aimed  at  but  the  dispossessing  of  me  of  my 
force,  to  make  a  command  for  my  Lord  Hopton,  and  his  reformado* 
officers,  Sir  Foulk  Huncks,  Sir  Francis  Mackworth,  and  the  rest ; 
and  that  with  these,  he  and  the  Commissioners  must  join  to  advance 
these  impossible  projects,  am  resolved  that  I  will  go  into  my 
garrison,  that  I  may,  in  despite  of  those  that  strive  to  ruin  the 
King's  business,  preserve  for  him  what  I  am  able.  And  if  his 
Majesty  will  but  assign  me  the  absolute  command  of  my  own 
town,  and  hundreds  belonging  thereunto,  I  doubt  not  but  to  be 
able  to  give  him  a  better  account  of  my  endeavours  for  his  service, 
than  all  these  vast  undertakers  shall  be  able  to  do.  Whatsoever 
your  Highness  shall  direct  I  shall  submit  unto,  and  you  may 
give  his  Majesty  this  assurance,  that  no  usage  whatsoever  shall 
make  me  less  humbly  and  faithfully  to  serve  him,  but  I  cannot 
serve  him  against  my  own  reason,  nor  place  the  affection  of  all 
my  friends  where  he  will  dispose  them.  I  am,  in  all  things, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  and  most  obedient  servant, 
Chard,  6th  Jan.  1645.  EDMOND  WYNDHAM. 

*  "Unattached." 


1645.]     PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.  49 

and  divers  others  fled  upon  it ;  and  I  dare  justify  it  with 
my  life  there  is  no  other  way  to  prevent  that,  or  such  like 
miscarriages,  but  by  continuing  your  Highness's  resolution 
to  settle  these  parts  by  some  person  of  gallantry,  know- 
ledge, and  integrity.  I  humbly  beseech  your  Highness  to 
give  me  leave  to  acquaint  you  with  that,  which  indeed 
ought  not  to  be  concealed,  that  Lieutenant  -  Colonel 
Whichcote,  who  came  down  with  me  bringing  a  letter  to 
Sir  Richard  Byron,  from  his  mother  the  Lady  Byron,  who 
lyeth  in  Merton  College  [Oxford],  which  letter  opened  of 
itself,  being  slightly  made  fast  by  a  cover  of  paper, 
wherein  these  words  amongst  others  were,  that  she  was 
told  that  Prince  Rupert  had  joined  in  commission  with 
him  for  the  government  of  Newark,  Rhodes,  the  minister  ; 
and  if  it  be  so,  she  advised  him  either  not  to  suffer  him  to 
govern  there,  or  to  give  up  his  commission  ;  besides,  she 
added,  "there  are  governors  in  these  parts  who  will  not 
give  up  their  government,  but  keep  their  government 
against  Prince  Rupert's  will.  I  shall  use  all  means  to 
cross  Rhodes's  desire,  and  I  would  advise  you  to  get  Sir 
Jervase  Clifton  and  the  rest  of  your  friends  to  write  to 
the  King  or  Prince  Rupert  that  they  will  not  have  Rhodes 
to  govern  there."  This  letter,  and  these  very  words,  being 
copied  out  by  us,  came  to  the  governor's  hands,  which  I 
shall  be  ready  to  justify  by  Lieutenant-Colonel  Which- 
cote and  myself  with  our  lives  and  salvation,  all  which 
your  Highness  in  your  wisdom  will  make  use  of. 

I  beseech  your  Highness  to  give  me  leave  to  come  home 
nearer  to  the  preservation  of  this  place  once  more,  that 
unless  there  be  some  speedy  course  taken,  this  garrison 
will  never  be  sufficiently  victualled  by  our  government 
here,  the  enemy  taking  just  occasion  of  advantage  by  our 
nakedness,  as  well  of  the  understanding  part  for  govern- 
ment as  victual.  There  either  hath,  or  will  wait  on  your 
Highness,  a  gentleman,  one  Major  Wheeler,  from  Newark; 
I  beseech  your  Highness  to  examine  him  strictly  upon  his 

VOL.  III.  E 


50  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF          [JAN. 

reputation,  of  the  condition  of  these  parts ;  and  particu- 
larly of  the  carriages  of  our  forces,  drawn  out  when  the 
enemy  went  from  Southwell,  from  Friday,  the  3rd  of 
January,  to  the  Wednesday  after  ;  and  I  am  confident, 
however  some  here  may  attempt  the  biassing  of  him  to 
represent  things  their  own  way,  yet  he  hath  so  much 
known  gallantry,  that  he  will  give  your  Highness  full 
satisfaction  therein,  he  being  personally  engaged  in  all 
that  action.  As  for  that  commission  your  Highness  was 
pleased  to  give  me,  and  which  I  left  with  you,  I  do  with 
all  readiness  and  humility  submit  it  and  myself  to  your 
Highness's  wisdom,  and  if  my  appearing  in  it  may  in  the 
least  manner  prejudice  his  Majesty's  service,  I  desire  it 
may  never  be  thought  upon  more  ;  only  be  pleased  to  give 
me  leave  to  add,  that  whoever  they  are  that  may  blast  it 
or  me,  are  they  who  never  served  his  Majesty  with  that 
zeal  and  fervour  as  I  have  ever  done,  without  the  least 
ends  of  mine  own :  and,  if  your  Highness  be  pleased  to 
give  credit  so  far  to  me,  you  may  safely  believe  no  man 
more  able  and  faithful  to  give  a  just  account  of  all  the 
carriages  here  unto  whomsoever  your  Highness  shall  com- 
mand hither.  This  being  all  I  have  at  present  to  trouble 
your  Highness,  with  humble  desire  of  your  Highness's 
pardon  for  this  honest  presumption,  I  shall  remain  ever 

Your  Highness's  most  obedient  faithful  servant, 

JOSEPH  RHODES. 

May  it  please  your  Highness  to  give  me  leave  to  take 
such  notice,  that  just  upon  the  dispatch  of  these,  Major 
Wheeler  being  employed  to  this  end,  that  Sir  Richard 
Byron  should  write  and  be  desirous  of  some  other  to  com- 
mand abroad,  but  himself  continue  his  command  within 
the  walls  ;  herein  also  give  me  leave  to  speak  with  all 
clearness,  and  that  from  the  mouths  of  the  best  and  chief- 
est  officers,  that  his  Majesty's  service  cannot  be  done,  but 
we  necessarily  destroyed  if  both  one  and  other  be  not  . 


1645.J       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.         51 

.  .  .  hands  of  some  able  to  manage  it  ;  but  this  is  the 
device  of  our  Commissioners,  who  do  nothing  wherein  their 
own  in —  ...... 

For  Prince  Rupert's  Highness, 
Newark,  Jan.  10,  1645. 

There  was  some  repose  for  the  wearied  soldiers 
during  the  Treaty  of  Uxbridge,  and  for  some  time 
afterwards,  whilst  the  "  newly-modelled  "  army  was 
organizing  under  Fairfax  and  Cromwell  at  Windsor. 

Prince  Maurice  had  been  appointed  to  fill  Prince 
Rupert's  place  in  the  government  of  Wales,  but 
without  the  title  of  President :  he  writes  from  Eve- 
sham  this  note  on  the  16th  of  January : — 

DEAR  BROTHER, 

Since  my  coming  to  this  place,  I  received  letters  of 
credence,  by  the  hand  of  Mr.  Dudley  Wyatt,  from  the 
Commissioners  of  Salop  to  you  directed.  I  shall  not  need 
mention  the  state  of  the  business,  in  respect  Mr.  Wyatt, 
whom  I  have  stayed  here,  will  give  you,  in  writing,  a 
particular  account  thereof.  I  have  been  lately  informed, 
that  Sir  Nicholas  Byron  pretends  an  interest  to  the 
Government  of  Chester,  and  shall  therefore  desire  your 
special  order  and  direction  for  the  placing  of  one  there. 
I  desire,  likewise,  you  will  be  pleased  to  give  order  that 
my  Regiment  of  Horse  may  be  sent  to  me.  All  that  I 
shall  say  more  is,  that  I  am 

Sir,  your  loving  brother, 

MAURICE. 

In  the  next  letter  we  have  the  first  palpable  sign 
of  Goring' s  intrigues :  it  appears  that  he  applied  to 
the  King,  who  seems  to  have  been  infatuated  about 
these  reprobates,  for  a  command  independent  of  the 

E    2 


52  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [JAN. 

Commander-in-Chief.  This  favour  the  King  weakly 
bestowed,  and  Rupert  resented  openly  to  Goring 
himself.  That  accomplished  dissembler  thus  re- 
plies : — 

SIR, 

Your  Highness  is  pleased  to  think  yourself  dis- 
obliged by  me,  for  desiring  my  orders  under  the  King's 
hand.  As  I  remember,  sir,  the  reason  I  gave  his  Majesty 
for  it,  was  the  having  more  authority  by  that  to  guide  the 
Council  of  this  army  to  his  obedience ;  and  one  reason  I 
kept  to  myself,  which  was,. I  found  all  my  requests  denied 
by  your  hand,  and  therefore  desired  my  orders  from 
another.  As  for  having  made  means,  under-hand,  to  get 
an  independent  commission  from  His  Majesty,  I  assure 
you,  sir,  I  never  did.  And  if  I  find  myself  so  unhappy 
as,  for  want  of  your  favour,  to  be  disenabled  to  serve  His 
Majesty  in  this  charge,  I  shall  think  it  easier  to  resign  my 
command  than  to  lessen  yours.  And,  sir,  whereas  I  hear 
your  Highness  accused  me  for  desiring  your  orders  at  the 
same  time  I  did  the  King's,  truly,  sir,  I  did  not  think 
them  inconsistent,  and  though  I  begged  that  honour  from 
the  King,  yet  till  it  were  granted,  I  remained  under  the 
same  obligation  I  was  formerly,  which  was  to  address  my- 
self to  your  Highness  for  orders  ;  and  being  in  the  same 
condition  at  this  present,  I  shall  beseech  your  Highness 
not  to  attribute  the  applications  I  make  to  you,  to  a  mean 
courtship,  but  to  my  obedience  to  the  King,  and  respect 
to  his  Nephew  and  my  superior  Officers. 

Your  Highness's  most  dutiful  and  obedient  Servant, 

GEORGE  GORING. 

Salisbury,  22nd  January. 

On  the  26th  of  January  I  find  this  copy  of  the 
Prince's  brief  note  to  Essex  concerning  the  Uxbridge 
commissions : — 


1645.J        PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       53 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  THE  EARL  OF  ESSEX. 

MY  LORD; 

I  have  received  by  Sir  Peter  Killigrew,  the  safe  con- 
tents which  your  Lordship  sent.  The  Lords  and  others 
appointed  by  his  Majesty  for  the  Treaty,  will  not  fail  to  be 
at  the  time  and  place  agreed  upon. 

I  remain  your  Lordship's  servant, 
Oxford,  26th  Jan.  1645.  RUPERT. 

Prince  Maurice  is  now  settled  at  Worcester  in  a 
much  higher  command  than  he  was  well  fitted  to 
discharge.  He  has  summoned  a  meeting  of  the 
associated  counties: — 

DEAR  BROTHER, 

The  only  business  we  are  now  upon,  is  to  settle  the 
garrison  at  Evesham,  wherein  I  meet  with  many  diffi- 
culties. After  I  have  done  my  best  in  that,  I  shall  pro- 
ceed to  what  concerns  the  army.  In  order  thereunto,  the 
Commissioners  of  the  Associated  Counties  of  Worcester, 
Hereford,  Salop  and  Stafford,  have  appointed  to  meet  here 
on  Thursday  next.  According  to  our  proceedings,  I  shall 
not  fail  to  give  you  constant  advertisement,  which  you 
may  please  to  present  to  his  Majesty.  The  Governors  of 
Lichfield  and  Dudley  Castles,1  received  your  letters  very 
lately,  and  did  immediately  thereupon  prepare  themselves 
to  attend  you;  but,  being  reconciled  to  each  other,  I 
directed  them  to  return  to  their  garrisons  until  they  should 
receive  your  further  commands.  The  late  Governor  of 
this  place  [Sir  William  Russell]  died  yesterday ;  which  is 
all  I  have  to  say,  but  that  I  am, 

Sir,  your  loving  Brother, 

For  my  dear  brother  Prince  Rupert,  MAURICE. 

Prince  Palatine,  &c. 

1  Bagot  and  Lord  Loughborough,  between  whom  there  was  a 
bitter  feud  :  the  former  was  soon  killed. 


54  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [JAN. 

Like  most  unsuccessful  rulers,  Prince  Maurice 
attributes  his  want  of  capacity  to  want  of  power. 
He  thus  writes  on  the  29th  of  January  :— 

DEAR  BROTHER, 

I  shall  not  need  to  mention  any  other  particular 
than  that  which  concerns  the  enlargement  of  my  com- 
mission, and  therein  I  desire  no  farther  latitude  than  the 
same  from  you  which  you  had  from  the  King,  which  is 
absolutely  necessary  for  the  performance  of  what  is  ex- 
pected from  me;  for  the  gentlemen  of  Staffordshire 
desired  such  a  Commission  from  me,  for  the  regulating 
and  ordering  the  affairs  of  that  county,  as  you  granted  to 
Shropshire.  And  it  is  probable  those  of  other  counties 
will  desire  the  like,  or  to  have  theirs  renewed  upon  occa- 
sion. I  told  those  of  Staffordshire  they  should  have  such 
a  Commission,  but  I  have  not  as  yet  power  to  grant  it, 
though  I  would  not  let  them  know  so  much. 

I  refer  all  to  the  relation  of  Sir  Richard  Cave,  and 
desire  that  the  particulars,  considerable,  may  be  speedily 
advised  upon  by  such  as  His  Majesty  and  yourself  shall 
think  fit.  I  have  no  more  to  say  but  to  desire  you  to  be 
very  careful  in  the  business  of  the  Association,  which,  I 
fear,  tends  much  to  the  destruction  of  military  power  and 
discipline.  For  there  are  some  cunning  men  amongst 
them,  to  whom  nothing  of  these  papers  must  in  any  means 
be  communicated.  I  mean  especially  the  observations 
upon  the  propositions  of  the  Association.  So  I  rest,  and 
I  am 

Your  loving  Brother, 

MAURICE. 

Worcester,  29th  Jan.  1645. 

From  the  depths  of  Wales  comes  the  next  letter. 
Its  writer  no  less  a  personage  than  the  Archbishop  of 
York,  whom  we  have  already  seen  taking  his  leave  of 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.          55 

the  King,  when  his  Grace  fled  before  young  Hotham 
to  his  native  country  for  security.  Here  he  had 
stoutly  fortified  his  castle  of  Conway  against  intru- 
ders, whatever  was  their  party.  His  old  imperious 
habits,  too,  have  found  room  for  exercise  in  these 
simple  and  docile  wilds,  and  Archbishop  Williams 
has  got  into  great  difficulties  with  the  Royal  com- 
manders in  those  parts. 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

From  these  rumours,  which  Sir  John  Mennes  and  his 
men  spread  abroad,  in  ale-houses  up  and  down  the  country, 
of  your  Highness's  being  offended  with  me,  to  give  me 
leave  to  appeal  to  your  Princely  wisdom  and  justice,  and 
to  the  universal  testimony  of  all  these  three  counties  (not 
above  three  men  excepted  in  them  all)  how  true  and  faith- 
ful a  servant  I  have  been  to  the  King,  your  Highness,  and 
the  security  of  these  poor  counties.  And  to  believe  this 
to  be  true,  until  the  contrary  shall  be  made  to  appear — 
not  by  Sir  John  Mennes  and  Mr.  Wyatt,  who  want  some 
person  to  bear  their  own  aberrations,  or  the  clamours  of 
soldiers  for  money,  in  a  country  where,  whatsoever  your 
Highness  is  informed,  it  is  not  to  be  had,  by  reason  we 
have  no  free  sale  of  cattle  :  but  from  the  attestation  of  the 
Commissioners  of  Array,  the  Justices  of  the  Peace,  and 
gentlemen  of  the  three  counties. 

And  then,  I  am  assured  it  will  appear,  by  the  constant 
obedience  of  these  poor  counties  to  His  Majesty,  their 
extraordinary  love  and  affection  to  your  Highness,  their 
being  so  free  from  all  malignancy,  to  the  great  sorrow  and 
regret  of  some  that  would  be  plundering,  that  heretofore 
I  have  surely  done  His  Majesty  and  your  Highness  some 
better  offices  than  Sir  John  Mennes  was  able  to  do  in 
these  parts.  Howbeit,  of  late,  I  have  forborne  to  do  any- 
thing at  all,  as  I  am  resolved  to  abstain,  until  I  shall  have 


56  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JAN. 

the  honour  to  wait  upon  your  Highness,  and  a  passage 
opened  whereby  I  may  do  it. 

In   the   meantime,    I   humbly  crave   your    Highness's 
favour  to  receive  the  Petition  of  our  poor  [cattle]  Drovers 
(the  Spanish  fleet  of  North  Wales,  which  drings  hither 
that  little  gold  and  silver  we  have),  against  the  oppres- 
sion of  Sir  Michael  Woodhouse,  and  to  procure  them  that 
relief,  which  your  Highness  conceives  to  be  just  and  fitting, 
and  to  preserve  in  your  Highness  his  good  opinion. 
Your  Highness's  most  faithful  and 
most  humble  Servant, 

THE  ARCHBISHOP  OF  YORK. 

From  your  Highness's  garrison  town  of  Conway, 
29th  January,  1645. 

Very  few  of  the  numerous  complaints  of  our  Ca- 
valiers are  worth  listening  to  now,  if,-  indeed,  they 
ever  were  so ;  but  the  following  is  so  full  of  dismal 
humour,  and  the  Cavalier  spirit  that  could  scoff 
even  at  its  own  miseries,  that  I  do  not  hesitate  to 
insert  it : — 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

This  last  night  came  to  me  of  the  Queen's  regiment, 
to  share  with  me  in  Rifsgate  hundred  :  they  shewed  me 
your  Highness's  order,  and,  indeed,  I  received  another  to 
the  same  effect,  which  I  have  sent  back  again  to  your 
Highness  ;  resolving  to  keep  nothing  by  me  that  shall  hang 
me.  Indeed  the  commander  of  the  party,  so  soon  as  he 
saw  my  strength  in  horse  and  foot,  and  how  environed 
with  enemies,  blushed  to  see  the  unreasonableness,  and 
asked  me  how  many  hundreds  I  had  besides ;  which, 
when  I  truly  informed  him,  out  of  mere  pity  he  left  the 
hundred.  I  am  sorry,  sir,  to  see  myself  pitied  of  a 
stranger  I  never  saw  before,  and  your  Highness  so  little 
value  me.  I  'm  sure  'twas  otherwise  when  you  first  sent 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         57 

me  hither,  then  you  were  pleased  to  give  me  all  Rifsgate 
hundred,  and  so  soon  as  I  sent  you  a  list  of  the  state  of 
the  garrison,  I  should  be  allotted  more.  God  have  mercy 
upon  me,  for  I  see  your  Highness  will  leave  me ;  yet  I 
shall  once  more  look  up  to  heaven  and  send  in  my  list. 
What  horrid  crime  have  I  committed,  or  what  brand  of 
cowardice  lies  upon  me  and  my  men,  that  we  are  not 
thought  worthy  of  a  subsistence  ?  Shall  the  Queen's 
seventy  horse  have  Westmester  hundred,  Tewkesbury 
hundred,  and  God  knows  what  other  hundreds,  and  yet 
share  half  with  me  in  Rifsgate,  who  has  at  this  very  pre- 
sent a  hundred  horse  and  five  hundred  foot,  besides  a 
multiplicity  of  officers  ?  Sir,  at  my  first  coming  hither, 
the  gentry  of  these  parts  looked  upon  me  as  a  man  con- 
siderable, and  had  already  raised  me  sixty  horse  towards 
a  hundred,  and  a  hundred  foot,  and  were  continuing  to 
raise  me  a  greater  number.  But  at  the  sight  of  this  order 
of  your  Highness,  I  resolved  to  disband  them,  and  come 
up  to  Oxford,  where  I  '11  starve  in  more  security.  But 
finding  my  Lieutenant-Colonel  forced  to  come  to  your 
Highness,  and  to  tell  you  his  sad  condition ;  whom  I  find 
so  well  prepared  with  sadness  of  his  own,  that  I  cannot 
but  think  he  will  deliver  my  grievances  rarely.  As  I 
shall  find  myself  encouraged  by  your  Highness,  I  will  go 
on,  and  raise  more  forces.  Ever  submitting  all  my  pro- 
ceedings to  your  Highness's  orders,  bar  starving,  since 
I  am  resolved  to  live. 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  servant, 

R.  HOWARD. 

Camden,  Jan.  30,  1645. 

As  a  specimen  of  the  manner  in  which  supplies 
were  procured,  I  add  a  neighbourly  and  somewhat 
vague  requisition  from  two  of  the  Committee  of  the 
Associated  Counties,  and  the  Governor  and  Lieu- 
tenant-Go vernor  of  Shrewsbury : — 


58  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [FEB. 

MR.  BURTON, 

We  desire  you  to  deliver  as  much  hay  as  comes  to 
fifty  loads,  or  as  much  as  you  can  possibly  spare,  it  being 
for  his  Highness's  use,  and  we  will  see  you  paid  out  of  your 
contributions,  or  otherwise,  to  your  content.  We  rest, 

Your  affectionate  friends, 
FRANCIS  OTTLEY  &  Co.,  RICHARD  LEE, 
MICHAEL  ERNLY,  R.  LEVESON, 

THOMAS  EDWARDS,  FRANCIS  SANDFORD. 

For  our  loving  friend  Francis  Burton,  Esq. 
at  Longneas.  Nast.  these.1 
Feb.  3,  1645. 

These  requisitions,  and  others  far  more  severely 
worded  and  enforced,  produced  the  estrangement  of 
once  loyal  Shrewsbury,  and  it  was  finally  betrayed 
to  the  Parliament.2 


1  For  this  letter,  and  otherwise,  I  am  indebted  to  the  Rev. 
Henry  Burton. 

2  This  town  was  disgracefully  surrendered,  having  been  first 
disgracefully  betrayed.     The  garrison  only  made  terms  for  them- 
selves as  English  troops  :  they  abandoned  the  Irish  to  the  butchery 
of  the  Parliament  officers,  who  immediately  hanged  every  man  of 
them. — Owen  Blakewaijs  Hist,  of  Shrewsbury.     The  loss  of  this 
important  town  was  scarcely  compensated  by  the  gain  that  Sir 
Lewis  Dives  announces ;  especially  as  Weymouth  was  recovered 
soon  afterwards  "  through  the  usual  carelessness  of  the  King's 
officers." — Clarendon. 

MAY    IT   PLEASE    YOUR   MAJESTY, 

I  have,  by  God's  blessing  upon  my  weak  endeavours,  reduced 
Weymouth  again  under  your  Majesty's  obedience.  The  manner 
how  this  service  was  performed  I  have  taken  the  boldness  to  send 
unto  Prince  Eupert's  Highness,  that  from  his  hand  it  may  receive 
the  better  acceptation  from  your  gracious  Majesty,  and  to  help  the 
defects  of  the  relation,  I  have  likewise  sent  Major  Stroud,  a 
gentleman  who  was  present  at  the  action,  to  give  your  Majesty  a 
more  large  and  punctual  account  thereof.  Sir  "Walter  Hastings, 
the  governor  of  Portland,  who  was  the  foremost  man  that  entered 
their  works,  I  have  left  there  to  command  in  my  absence,  intend- 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         59 

The  following  letter  from  an  old  and  confidential 
friend  of  Prince  Maurice  tells  of  the  loss,  and  of 
its  causes : — 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

I  intended  to  have  made  use  of  Major  Fox's  and  Sir 
William  Russell's  Horse,  quartered  near  Shrewsbury,  to 
go  through  to  your  brother ;  but,  half-way  there,  I  met 
those  Horse  coming  this  way,  who  told  me  the  sad  news 
of  the  loss  of  Shrewsbury,  which  they  say  was  betrayed 
by  the  townsmen.  There  are  some  gentlemen  come 
hither  who  were  there  after  the  town  was  entered.  Amongst 
others,  Major  Butler,  in  coming  he  escaped  after  he  was 
hurt.  The  Castle  is  yet  held  by  the  Governor ;  but,  as 
they  say,  not  at  all  provided  of  victuals.  /  wish  your 
brother  had  some  experienced  commanders  by  him.  I  do 
not  hear  of  any  one  but  old  Roan.  And  now,  I  neither 
know  myself,  nor  can  I  learn  from  others,  how  I  may 
possibly  pass  to  your  brother.  I  mean,  God  willing,  in- 
stantly to  hire  messengers  at  any  price,  to  go  to  his  High- 
ness. I  have  spoken  with  Sir  Robert  Howard,  and  some 
other  gentlemen.  They  are  agreed  to  use  their  power  in 
raising  the  country,  if  any  considerable  number  come 
together,  I  will  wait  upon  the  gentlemen,  with  such  as 
will  follow  them  towards  Shrewsbury.  It  may  work 
something  if  the  Castle  can  but  hold  out,  as  I  hope  it 
will. 

ing  speedily  to  return  to  take  the  charge  thereof  into  my  own 
hands  as  the  fittest  place  for  my  residence,  and  of  greatest  conse- 
quence to  be  carefully  kept ;  wherein  I  have  already  taken  such 
care  to  secure  it,  that,  by  God's  assistance,  I  shall  not  doubt  to 
keep  it  for  your  Majesty's  service  against  the  best  army  which 
the  rebels  can  bring  before  it ;  from  whose  wicked  and  traitorous 
practices  I  shall  beseech  the  Almighty  to  preserve  your  sacred 
Majesty,  and  shall  ever,  to  the  utmost  of  my  life  and  fortunes, 
continue  your  Majesty's 

Most  loyal  subject  and  humblest  servant, 
Sherborne,  13th  Feb.  1645.  LEWIS  DlVES. 


60  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [FEB. 

I  have  not  time  to  write  in  ciphers.  If  I  had,  I  should 
say  more ;  for  all,  besides  this,  is  not  so  well  as  I  could 
wish,  nor  yet,  I  hope,  so  bad  as  some  would  make  me 
believe.  I  shall  adventure  my  letters  to  your  brother  to 
that  purpose,  as  your  Highness  commanded  me.  I  am 
much  unsatisfied  in  their  stay  there  where  they  are. 

I  am,  Sir, 
Your  Highness's  most  humbly  devoted  Servant, 

RICHARD  CAVE. 

Ludlow,  Feb.  15,  1645. 

The  next  notice  of  this  luckless  Prince  tells 
badly  for  his  popularity  as  a  commander. 

[Seal]  Whereas  divers  Officers  and  Soldiers  of  my  Army 
have  deserted  their  colours  without  leave  or  parole,  to  the 
great  prejudice  of  his  Majesty's  present  service  ;  these  are 
therefore  to  will  and  require  you,  with  all  diligence,  to 
make  enquiry  for  such  offending  soldiers,  and  them  to  take 
up  and  send  to  their  colours  again,  to  my  army,  wheresoever 
the  same  shall  be.  And  in  case  any  refuse  to  repair  to 
their  colours,  to  commit  them  to  safe  custody,  to  answer 
for  such  their  offence.  Hereof  you  are  not  to  fail  at  your 
peril. 

Given  at  Ruthin,  this  17th  of  February,  1645. 

MAURICE.1 

To  all  Mayors,  Sheriffs,  Bailiffs,  Commissioners 
of  Array,  Constables,  and  all  others  his  Ma- 
jesty's officers,  whom  it  may  concern,  of 
North  Wales. 

Prince  Maurice  made  a  tour  into  the  inte- 
rior of  Wales  to  raise  forces  and  compel  contri- 
butions, and  thence  returned  to  Chester  to  restrain 
Sir  William  Brereton,  Mitton,  and  Langham,  who 
were  beginning  to  menace  Chester  as  a  blind  to  their 

1  From  Mr.  Ormsby  Gore's  MSS. 


1645.J      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.         61 

descent  upon  Shrewsbury.  He  or  his  advisers  had 
the  good  sense  to  make  a  brave  and  honourable 
Welshman  his  Major-General.1 

To  this  officer,  who  was  afterwards  condemned  to 
die  by  the  Parliament,  Prince  Maurice  writes  on  the 
23rd  of  February : — 

TO  SIR  JOHN  OWEN,  MAJOR-GENERAL  AT  WREXHAM. 
SIR, 

Notwithstanding  the  order  I  sent  unto  you  this  after- 
noon, I  desire  you  only  to  draw  your  men  together  at 
Wrexham,  which  I  have  since  appointed  to  be  the  rendez- 
vous for  the  army.  The  enemy  [Brereton]  is  drawn  back 
again,  and  to  desire  you  to  have  a  care  of  your  quarters. 

MAURICE.2 

The  Prince  Maurice's  letters  are  so  few  I  subjoin 
two  more,  which  contain  all  that  need  be  known 
of  this  "  alarum  "  of  the  enemy  long  ago.3 

We  are  now  brought  back  to  Prince  Rupert  at 
Oxford  by  the  following  despatch  from  Essex,  who 
is  as  yet  still  General  of  the  Roundheads.  It  affords 

1  Sir  John  Owen.  2  Mr.  Ormsby  Gore's  MSS. 

3  SIR, 

I  would  have  you  draw  unto  Wrexham  the  two  companies 
impressed  and  raised  out  of  Denbighland,  under  the  command  of 

Captain  Hugh  Wynne  and  Captain  John ,  which  companies 

you  are  not  to  put  into  any  regiment  until  you  shall  receive 
orders  for  the  same  from  Your  affectionate  friend, 

MAURICE. 

For  Sir  John  Owen,  Knt.  my  Major-General, 
Chester,  7th  March,  1645. 

SIR, 

I  have  this  day  received  intelligence  that  the  enemy  have 
an  intent  to  force  their  passage  into  Wales,  either  by  Hoult  Pass 
or  some  of  the  fords  ;  wherefore  I  would  have  you  draw  all  your 


62  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [FEB. 

another  proof  of  the  courteous  tone    that  prevailed 
between  the  leaders  : — 

SIR, 

I  have  received  from  your  Highness,  by  this  bearer, 
a  letter,  wherein  I  must  acknowledge  your  favour,  and 
had  likewise  a  copy  of  a  letter  of  the  same  bodies,1  from 
the  Marquis  of  Hertford,  but  desire  much  the  original. 
I  would  have  sent  your  Highness  the  pass  for  Sir  Arthur 
Aston2  and  his  servants,  with  necessaries,  at  this  time ;  but 
in  regard  I  shall  grant  it  to  Bath,  for  the  recovery  of  his 
health  and  not  to  West  Chester,  I  forbear  it,  until  I 
know  whether  your  Highness  will  accept  of  it,  which 
if  you  do,  I  doubt  not  but  the  pass  granted  him  to  go 
beyond  the  seas  will  be  returned. 

Your  Highness's  humble  servant, 
Feb.  28,  1645.  ESSEX. 

The  state  of  Wales  was  rapidly  deteriorating ; 
loosening  altogether  from  its  allegiance,  not  to  the 
King  but  to  his  commanders;  it  had  no  desire  for 


foot  together,  and  to  be  at  the  rendezvous  on  Common  Wood  at 
four  o'clock  this  afternoon,  where  you  are  to  expect  further  orders 
from  me,  and  that  when  you  are  drawn  together  you  send  me  an 
exact  list  of  your  number  of  foot. 

[Signed]  MAURICE.* 

For  Sir  John  Owen,  Major-General  of  the  Army. 
Chester,  March  3,  1645. 

1  The  letter  alluded  to  was  from  a  Mr.  Pyne,  a  vehement 
Roundhead,  to  Colonel  Popham,  in  which  the  writer  vehemently 
and  bitterly  abused  Essex,  the  Scots,  and  the  King.     This  letter 
was  intercepted  by  Sir  Lewis  Dives,  and  came,  in  good  time,  to  be 
communicated   to  the   Commissioners   at   Oxford. — Clarendon's 
Rebellion,  v.  68. 

2  Sir  Arthur  had  been  obliged  to  have  his  leg  amputated,  and 
was  now  invalided.  He  was  afterwards  slain  at  Drogheda,  in  cold 
blood,  by  Cromwell. 

*  Mr.  Ormsby  Gore's  MSS. 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.          63 

Parliamentary  rule.  Rupert  is  obliged  to  look  after 
this  matter  amongst  others  ;  he  has  likewise  to  visit 
all  the  neighbouring  garrisons,  and  all  those  sur- 
rounding Oxford.  Also,  there  are  the  wild  club- 
men of  Dorsetshire,  who  have  risen  for  the  King,  or 
rather  against  the  Parliament,  and  he  has  to  settle 
with  them  too.  He  must  then  proceed  to  Ludlow  to 
organize  and  collect  such  scattered  forces  as  the 
King's  name  had  yet  power  to  raise.  When  we 
consider  that  on  the  one  hand,  were  the  Parliament, 
with  the  wealth  of  London  at  its  disposal,  with  the 
ablest  heads  and  bards  of  England  to  direct  and 
control  the  great  spirit  of  enthusiasm  that  their  arts 
had  inspired  —  that  on  the  other  side,  there  were 
only  such  villainous  instruments  as  Goring  and  Gren- 
ville  in  Devonshire,  the  young  Prince  of  Wales 
and  his  despised  Council  at  Bristol,  the  King  almost 
powerless  at  Oxford,  that  all  the  rest  depended  on 
Rupert,  we  must  admit  that  this  Prince  must  have 
exhibited  immense  powers  of  organizing  and  con- 
trolling, to  enable  him  to  oppose  such  adversaries. 
The  following  letter  from  him  occurs  here  : — 

PRINCE    RUPERT    TO    COLONEL    LEGGE. 

DEAR  WILL, 

I  fear   that  all  Wales  will  be  in  rebellion,  if  not 
speedily  suppressed.1      It  will  be  impossible  for  me  to 


1  "  Verie  sadd  newes  "  was  lately  come  from  Wales  that  Tenby 
Castle  was  taken,  and  all  that  country  round  had  fallen  into  the 
hands  of  the  enemy,  as  well  as  those  parts  lost  by  Shrewsbury's 
capitulation. 


64  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [MAR. 

check  this  business,  as  I  am  opposed  by  a  powerful  enemy  ; 
unless  the  King  resolve  to  take  the  field.  I  do  not  see 
how  my  brother  Maurice  and  I  can  join,  but  I  will  try. 
I  must  stay  here  about  six  days,  at  all  events.  Let  me 
know  what  ammunition  I  am  to  expect,  and  when.  There 
has  been  a  meeting  here  among  the  Generals  principally ; 
but  they  got  nothing  by  it.  So  name  this  only  to  the 
Duke  of  Richmond  and  the  Council.  Hasten  the  [Artil- 
lery] train,  and  clothes  for  the  soldiers,  and  assure  your- 
self that  I  am  Your  most  faithful  friend, 

RUPERT. 
Ludlow,  March  18,  1645. 

His  absence  reopens  the  correspondence  from 
the  Court.  The  chief  measure  now  in  agitation  is 
the  separation  of  Prince  Charles  from  his  father. 
The  King  begins  to  feel  that  nothing  but  his  blood 
will  satisfy  the  patriots  in  London  :  but  he  conceives 
that  as  long  as  his  successor  be  still  safe,  the  Revo- 
lutionists will  have  less  motive  to  desire  his  own 
destruction.  The  Prince  was,  therefore,  to  be 
despatched  to  the  West,  invested  with  supreme  com- 
mand, but  controlled  by  his  Council.  With  his 
Royal  Highness  went  the  best  and  truest  of  the 
King's  friends,  the  Duke  of  Richmond,  Hyde,  Cole- 
pepper.  It  was  a  fatal  arrangement  in  every  respect. 
The  King,  no  doubt,  considered  himself  well  able  to 
act  without  such  advice  as  that  which  he  affectionate- 
ly devoted  to  his  son  ;  but  the  reader  who  takes  an 
interest  in  the  monarch's  mournful  history  trembles 
to  see  his  easily  guided  mind  delivered  over  to  such 
influences  as  those  of  Digby  and  Ashburnham. 
These  dangerous  men,  and  their  confederate  Goring, 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.          65 

alone  rejoiced  in  the  Prince's  departure,  as  he  took 
away  with  him  their  most  honest  opponents.  Ru- 
pert frankly  and  vehemently  deprecated  the  arrange- 
ment, but  Digby  had  now  fascinated  the  King,  and 
ruled  supremely.  These  observations  are  necessary 
to  the  understanding  of  the  following  letter  from 
the  Secretary  of  State  :  "  the  mad  misfortune "  of 
Goring  was  the  loss  of  Weymouth,  owing  to  the 
reckless  and  debauched  conduct  and  supine  negli- 
gence of  that  officer. 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

The  letters  which  you  were  pleased  to  send  to  my 
brother-secretary,  from  Stowe,  and  which,  through  his 
sickness,  were  given  to  me  by  his  Majesty,  serve  only  to 
let  his  Majesty,  and  all  those  that  have  the  honour  to 
serve  him,  see  how  much  you  value  his  service,  that  are 
pleased  so  frankly  and  so  readily  to  undertake  in  person 
such  a  difficult  task  as  you  are  now  engaged  in,  in  those 
distracted  countries.  But  as  you  are  pleased  to  do  your 
part  so  nobly,  I  hope  we  shall  do  our  duties  here  as  dili- 
gently in  all  things  that  may  concern  your  service,  espe- 
cially in  that  of  powder  for  which  the  orders  are  doubly 
repeated  since  Dabscourt's1  going.  I  send  your  Highness 
here  inclosed  such  letters  as  have  been  received  from 
Hereford,  wherein  you  will  see  how  necessary  it  is  that 
timely  and  vigorous  remedies  be  applied  to  that  growing 
mischief,  wherein  it  is  not  doubted  but  your  wisdom  will 
direct  you  to  the  properest  course. 

Since  your  Highness's  going,  my  Lord  Hopton  is  come 
hither,  and  having  represented  unto  his  Majesty  the  state 
of  the  garrison  of  Bristol,  it  is,  upon  a  full  debate  at  the 

1  For  Dabridgecourt. 
VOL.   III.  F 


66  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF       [MAR. 

Committee  which  your  Highness  was  wont  to  honour 
with  your  presence,  thought  fit  to  be  represented  unto 
you,  as  most  necessary  to  the  support  and  improvement 
of  the  garrison  of  Bristol  whither  the  Prince  of  Wales 
is  tomorrow  going,  that  the  establishment  be  observed, 
as  well  to  Berkeley  Castle  as  the  rest,  according  as  was 
at  first  settled.  I  confess  it  was  not  my  opinion  when  I 
last  spoke  with  your  Highness  upon  the  argument ;  nei- 
ther was  it  my  Lord  Treasurer's  [Ashburnham],  as  may 
appear  by  our  letters  to  my  Lord  Hopton,  upon  occasion 
of  his  resenting  the  alteration ;  but  indeed  we  are  both 
converted,  upon  full  consideration  of  the  arguments  and 
objections  on  both  sides;  so  that  I  believe  Sir  Charles 
Lucas  will  hardly  think  that  place  a  command  worthy  of 
him.  In  case  your  Highness  shall  be  of  our  opinions, 
with  the  reasons  of  which  I  shall  acquaint  your  Highness 
at  large,  if  your  own  reflections  upon  the  matter  do  not 
satisfy  you.  But  if  your  Highness  shall  think  fit,  that 
the  said  garrison  of  Berkeley  be  continued  in  its  former 
dependence  upon  the  establishment  of  Bristol,  so  as  Sir 
Charles  Lucas  shall  decline  the  command ;  I  shall  then 
humbly  offer  unto  your  Highness's  consideration,  whether 
you  will  not  think  Mr.  Richard  Weston,  the  Lieutenant- 
Governor,  worthy  to  be  made  Governor  of  that  place  ; 
who,  as  he  is  a  very  gallant  man,  so  is  he  a  very  modest 
man  also,  and  who,  I  suppose,  will  content  himself  with 
the  former  moderate  allowance,  and  not  enter  into  con- 
testation for  more.  Thus  much  I  am  commanded,  and  I 
do  humbly  offer  unto  your  Highness.  This  enclosed  to 
your  Highness  from  General  Goring,  which  the  King 
opened,  was  received  the  last  night.  I  profess,  sir,  I  have 
not  patience  to  discourse  of  the  unlucky  subject  of  it;  so 
mad  and  so  wild  a  misfortune  was  never  heard  of,  where- 
ever  the  fault  light.  I  shall  only  give  you  an  account  of 
the  orders  sent  by  his  Majesty  to  General  Goring  there- 
upon, which  you  will  find  in  the  enclosed  .  copy  of  his 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         67 

Majesty's  letter  to  him,  which  was  accompanied  with  a 
second  peremptory  order  to  Sir  R.  Grenville,  in  pursuance 
of  your  Highness's  former  directions  to  him,  to  march 
away  from  Plymouth,  leaving  it  well  blocked  up.  It  was 
the  only  course  that  could  be  thought  here,  either  rational 
or  probable,  to  repair  that  loss.  This  is  all  the  trouble  at 
present  from 

Your  Highness's  most  affectionate  humble  servant, 

GrEORGE  DlGBY. 

Oxford,  March  5,  1645. 

P.S.  —  Although  the  King  hath  written  unto  your 
Highness  himself,  concerning  my  Lord  Loughborough, 
and  that  my  brother-secretary  hath  written  unto  you  more 
at  large,  yet  I  am  commanded,  likewise,  to  recommend 
unto  your  Highness's  consideration,  the  great  impor- 
tance to  his  Majesty's  service  that  his  Lordship'  be  not 
sent  home  discontented,  as  here  he  appears  to  be  highly. 

The  subjoined  letter  relates  to  one  of  the  few 
successes  that  broke  the  mournful  monotony  of  this 
spring.1 

1  MAT    IT   PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

Colonel  Mason  was  importunate  to  wait  on  your  Highness 
with  such  letters  as  were  to  be  sent  from  the  officers  of  the 
Northern  Horse,  but  finding  him  very  slow  in  a  case  of  that  im- 
portance, I  sent  this  gentleman  to  receive  orders  from  your 
Highness  whether  we  shall  come  unto  you ;  we  are  now  at 
Bingham,  and  intend  to  march  on  towards  Shrewsbury,  as  your 
Highness  sent  us  orders,  if  I  receive  no  other  order  to  the  con- 
trary. For  the  success  of  our  march  it  hath  been  prosperous  be- 
yond expectation  ;  we  routed  Rosseter's  forces  at  Melton  Mowbray, 
and  drove  the  Yorkshire  forces  from  Kelford  to  Doncaster,  and 
from  thence  to  Pontefract,  where  we  had  a  sharp  and  long  conflict 
with  them,  but  God  gave  us  the  victory ;  we  killed  two  hundred 
and  odd,  took  five  hundred  prisoners,  there  were  drowned  five 
hundred.  Above  twenty  colours,  thirty-four  barrels  of  powder, 
one  piece  of  cannon,  are  taken,  besides  a  great  store  of  all  manner 
of  ammunition  and  arms,  but  there  are  letters  coming  to  your 

F  2 


68  MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [MAR. 

The  Prince  of  Wales  is  now  gone  to  Bristol, 
under  Lord  Hopton's  especial  care,  Lord  Berkshire's 
nominal  governance,  and  his  council's  direction. 
The  South-western  counties  had  associated  them- 
selves «  for  peace,  and  for  the  King,"  and  the  Prince 
of  Wales  was  specially  their  general.  His  own 
forces  consisted  of  two  imaginary  regiments,  quaint- 
ly described  by  Lord  Clarendon  as  to  be  raised  by 
Lord  Capel,  and  at  Lord  CapeFs  cost. 

His  Royal  Highness  lived  at  Bristol  at  Lord 
Hopton's  expense,  the  King  "  having  not  one  penny 
in  his  exchequer  to  bestow  upon  him." 

Prince  Rupert  is  still  hastening  his  preparations 
at  Ludlow. 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  COLONEL  LEGGE. 
DEAR  WILL, 

I  have  received  but  one  despatch  in  return  for  three 
sent.  Hasten  the  ammunition.  I  shall  not  want  pike- 
heads  ;  there  are  two  thousand  three  hundred  at  Worcester. 
I  must  have  stores  or  money.  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale 
[with  the  Northern  Horse]  is  come  to  Bridgenorth.  On 
Thursday  we  meet  at  Wellington ;  on  Friday  [cipher 
Rupert]  and  Maurice  will  join,  if  possible,  near  Ellesmere. 


Highness  that  will  relate  the  business  more  at  large,  we  have 
accomplished  our  desire  in  the  relief  of  Pontefract  castle,  and 
find  the  country  infinitely  willing  to  come  in  if  we  might  have 
staid,  but  we  all  are,  and  ever  will  be,  at  your  Highness's  com- 
mand, whereof  one  is  your  Highness's 

Most  faithful  and  humble  servant, 

MAR.  LANGDALE. 
Bingham,  6th  March,  Thursday, 
4  of  the  clock,  1645. 

[After  this  victory  Sir  Marmaduke  proceeded  to  Bridgenorth.] 


1645.1        PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.         69 

If  this  succeed  there  will  be  some  hopes  left.  Dabscourt 
writes  the  powder  is  stopped  in  Monmouthshire,  where 
they  are  associating  [against  us],  and  will  send  no 
carriages.  Therefore,  you  at  Oxford  must  look  to  them. 
I  am  going  about  a  nobler  business ;  therefore  pray  God 
for  me,  and  remember  me  to  all  my  friends. 

Your  assured  Friend, 
Ludlow,  March,  11,  1645.  RUPERT.1 

Prince  Maurice  is  at  Chester,  misusing  the  linger- 
ing loyalty  and  patience  of  those  parts,  and  injuring 
every  one  except  the  enemy.  All  this,  however, 
was  done  by  him  with  the  best  intentions ;  he  was 
only  that  most  hurtful  of  all  characters,  a  man  of 
weak  judgment  and  strong  impulses.  Prince  Rupert 
himself  is  not  sanguine  about  his  brother's  success ; 
nor  had  the  appointment  been  of  his  proposing. 
The  "  affairs  in  the  West,"  alluded  to  in  the  follow- 
ing letter,  are  the  blockade  of  Taunton  by  Wind- 
ham,  and  the  disputes  between  the  truculent  Gren- 
ville  and  the  scoundrel  Goring.  Rupert's  heart  is 
still  high,  and  he  has  still  a  soldier's  confidence  in 
the  power  of  his  will. 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  COLONEL  LEGGE. 

DEAR  WILL., 

Our  army  now  is  marching  towards  Herefordshire,  to 
refresh  after  the  Dutch  fashion.  You  can  easily  imagine 
what  it  is  that  pressed  us  to  go  thither ;  it  is  not  for  fear 
of  the  enemy,  for  they  are  but  weak,  and  keep  their  holds. 
Hasten  the  King  with  ordnance,  horse,  and  foot,  and 
doubt  nothing.  We  are  few,  but  shrewd  fellows  as  ever 

i  Earl  of  Dartmouth's  MSS. 


70  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF        [MAR. 

you  saw;  nothing  troubles  us  but  that  Prince  Charles 
is  in  worse,  and  pray  God  that  he  were  here.  I  ex- 
pect nothing  but  ill  from  the  West;  let  them  hear 
that  Rupert  says  so.  As  for  Charles  Lucas's  business, 
assure  the  King  that  nothing  was  meant  but  that  it  should 
be  conceded  by  Lord  Hopton:  but  his  Lieutenant,  or 
Slingsby,  is  a  rogue  ;  I  have  enough  against  him  to  prove 
him  so,  when  time  shall  be.  This  inclosed  will  shew  you 
a  fine  business  concerning  my  cousin,  the  Bishop  of  York. 
Pray  acquaint  his  Majesty  with  it,  it  concerns  him.  Mar- 
tin's man  carried  a  letter  to  you  from  Stowe,  which  you 
did  receive,  and  one  to  Sir  Henry  Herbert.  Pray  remem- 
ber me  to  him  and  to  all  my  friends,  and  inquire  about 
this  letter;  you'll  find  knavery  in  it.  Prince  Charles 
wrote  to  me  about  Mark  Trevor ;  I  denied  it  as  well  as  I 
could :  he  goes  to  him.  Cheshire  will  not  prosper :  your 
company  is  here — so  is  your  friend, 
Sheffield,  24th  March,  1645.  RUPERT. 

The  Northern  Horse  who  had  been  led  from 
Marston  Moor  by  Prince  Rupert,  at  this  time  be- 
gan to  shew  their  yeomanry  nature,  and  to  desire, 
home  quarters.  I  give  their  petition  for  removal 
below.1 

1    TO    THE    KING'S   MOST   EXCELLENT   MAJESTY,   THE    HUMBLE 

PETITION    OF   THE    NORTHERN    OFFICERS.* 
MAY   IT    PLEASE   YOUR   SACRED    MAJESTY, 

Whereas  we  are  confident  that  we  have  sufficiently  to  the 
satisfaction  of  your  Majesty  asserted  our  loyalties  against  what- 
soever any  contradictions  or  jealousies  may  suggest  to  the  con- 
trary ;  arid  now,  seeing  our  native  countries  as  valuable  and  con- 
siderable, as  we  conceive,  as  any  other  parts  of  your  Majesty's 
dominions,  lieth  enthralled  under  the  pressures  and  insolencies  of 
the  enemy,  and  seeing  the  care  and  cure  of  those  countries  is  no 
less  your  Majesty's  work  than  the  preservation  of  these,  and  in 

*  Compare  this  with  Clarendon's  Rebellion,  v.  171. 


1645.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         71 
Prince   Maurice   now   sends   forces   to  join   his 


justice  and  charity,  ought  to  be  our  endeavour  before  any  other 
undertaking,  and  seeing  that  Pontefract  and  Carlyle,  the  only 
considerable  forts  remaining  in  those  parts  wherein  are  shut  up 
most  of  the  faithful  and  powerful  gentry  of  those  countries 
straitly  besieged  if  not  distressed.  And,  therefore,  if  we  be 
wanting  any  longer  to  afford  them  that  relief  to  which,  by  many 
solemn  obligations,  we  stand  engaged,  we  shall  render  our  case 
desperate,  by  disenabling  ourselves  and  party  there  from  all  such 
services,  and  which,  as  yet,  we  conceive  and  hope,  by  God's 
assistance,  may  be  highly  advantageous  to  your  Majesty  in  those 
parts.  And  seeing  that  many  of  our  soldiers  are  already  wasted, 
and  do  daily  moulder  away,  and  that  the  main  of  our  present 
strength  consists  of  officers,  gentlemen  of  quality,  and  their  at- 
tendants, unmeet  for  these  duties  which  are  expected  and  re- 
quired ;  and  that  the  loss  of  any  of  them  is  not  small,  but  involves 
in  it  such  multitudes  as  may,  by  their  power  and  respect,  be 
raised,  if  they  once  approach  their  own  habitations. 

We,  upon  these  considerations,  and  many  other  obvious  to  the 
imaginations  of  all  such  as  are  sensible  of  our  condition ;  as  also 
your  Majesty's  gracious  promise  to  this  purpose,  humbly  entreat 
your  sacred  Majesty  that  you  would  be  pleased  to  vouchsafe  your 
consent,  encouragement,  and  assistance,  so  far  forth  as  your  occa- 
sions in  these  parts  will  give  leave,  to  us  to  march  into  the 
North,  where  we  are  constantly  resolved  to  adventure  our  dearest 
blood  in  the  pursuance  of  your  just  and  most  Christian  cause ; 
and  reducing  of  these  miserable  countries  into  a  condition  where- 
by, we  doubt  not,  they  shall  be  enabled  to  contribute  effectual 
assistance  for  the  suppressing  of  this  unnatural  rebellion. 

And  the  petitioners  will  pray,  &c. 


F.  Fetherstonhaugh. 
E.  Deelengtill. 
Robert  Hilliard. 
John  Forier. 
H.  Fetherstonhaugh. 
John  Sayer. 
Will.  Brooke. 
John  Thornton. 
Ralph  Brandlinge. 
Ralph  Myllot. 
Francis  Middleton. 
Alane  Bland. 
Tim.  Calverley. 


Gam1.  Dudley. 
Francis  Anderson. 
Fra.  Hungate. 
John  Smith. 
Phi  11.  Monckton. 
Witten  Reveley. 
George  Tonge. 
Gilbert  Markeham. 
Jo.  Gallard. 
Will.  Tompkins. 
J.  Vaglor. 
Ho.  Brocke. 


W.  Mason. 
Will.  Blackiston. 
Jo.  Shallcross. 
Oliver  Fleetwood. 
Geo.  Wray. 
Francis  Melham. 
Ralph  Hodson. 
Henry  Sotherby. 
Raynald  Carnaby. 
Peregrine  Palmer. 
Will.  Redmaine. 
Ralph  Carnabye. 


72  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [MAR. 

brother;    the    following    are    his    orders    for   the 

march : — 

TO  SIR  JOHN  OWEN. 
SIR, 

To-morrow  being  Monday,  the  17th  present,  you  are 
to  be  with  all  the  foot  at  the  rendezvous,  on  Botchfield 
Heath,  precisely  by  seven  of  the  clock  in  the  morning. 
You  are  likewise  to  give  strict  order  that  every  officer 
under  the  degree  of  a  major,  march  a-foot  with  his  com- 
pany :  and  that  no  officer  or  soldier  presume  to  straggle, 
or  be  found  pistol-shot  from  his  colours  upon  pain  of 
death.  Hereof  you  may  not  fail.  Given  at  Ellesmere,  this 
16th  day  of  March,  1645.  MAURICE.1 

For  Sir  John  Owen,  Kntv  Major-General 
to  the  Foot. 

Prince  Rupert  reached  Hereford  on  the  17th,  and 
beat  Massey  from  its  neighbourhood :  he  is  recalling 
those  parts  to  obedience  with  the  assistance  of  the 
"  shrewd  fellows  "  mentioned  in  his  last.  He  has 
heard  of  the  Roundheads  hanging  thirteen  of  the 
troops  from  Ireland,  when  Shrewsbury  was  taken; 
and  he  had  previously  sworn  that  he  would  hang 
man  for  man  until  the  Roundheads  revoked  their 
murderous  order  to  give  no  quarter.  In  a  slight 
skirmish  he  had  lately  taken  some  prisoners;  he 
selected  thirteen  by  lot,  and  hanged  them  on  the 
nearest  tree.  It  was  a  stern  deed  of  retribution, 
but  it  was  effectual  in  stopping  the  practice  of 
hanging  every  soldier  whom  the  Roundheads  chose 
to  consider  Irish.2  When  the  Parliament  first 
heard  of  their  men  being  executed,  they  were  very 

1  Mr.  Ormsby  Gore's  MSS.  2  Heath's  Chronicle. 


1645.]       PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.  73 

indignant,  and  ordered  Essex  to  write  "word  to 
Rupert  that  there  was  a  very  great  difference 
between  Englishmen  and  Irishmen."1 

The  following  letter  from  the  Prince  explains 
itself.  It  will  be  recollected  that  the  arms  collected 
in  Bristol  were  his  by  right  of  conquest ;  and  that, 
as  Governor  of  that  town,  and  Generalissimo  of  the 
King's  armies,  he  had  a  good  right  to  dispose  of 
them. 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  COLONEL  LEGGE. 

DEAR  WILL, 

Your  last  by  Mortaigne  I  received  last  night,  late. 
Rupert  [the  Prince  always  uses  a  cipher  for  his  own 
name]  well  did  misdoubt  him  when  he  delivered  the  letter. 
The  Scots  are  come  to  Whitehaven,  so  that  I  cannot  come 
to  your  garrison.  Perhaps,  when  we  march  from  hence 
towards  Evesham,  I  shall  from  thence  come  to  Oxford ;  in 
the  mean  time  do  your  business  without  Rupert.  I  now 
intend  for  Bristol,  to  rob  them  of  their  arms,  and  (if  I 
had  power)  of  Prince  Charles.  His  council  already  sends 
orders  to  Goring,  and  are  well  received.  Pray  desire  to 
know  of  the  King  if  he  have  given  them  power  so  to  do. 
Pray  let  Sir  Edward  Herbert  be  by — he  can  argue  better 
than  you.  I  must  have  Sam.  Fawcett  with  me  :  really  I 
cannot  want  him,  therefore  set  your  heart  at  rest — your 
companion  shall  come  in  recompense.  Desire  the  King  to 
bring  as  few  scullions  and  beefeaters  with  him  [as  possi- 
ble], else  this  army  and  he  cannot  quarter  in  a  place.  I 
would  give  anything  to  be  but  one  day  at  Oxford,  when 
Rupert  could  discover  some  that  were  in  this  plot  of  He- 
refordshire, and  the  rest ;  but  I  despair  of  it.  Pray  will 

1  "  Perfect  Passages,"  April  9th,  1645. 


74  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF     [APRIL, 

you  inquire  after  Lord  Digby's  man,  he  had  your  letter 
which  I  sent  from  Stow-in-the-Wold.      Your  friend, 

RUPERT. 

Hereford,  March  31,  1645. 

Prince  Rupert  is  vigorously  recruiting  from  all 
parts.  At  his  word,  levies  have  been  made  in 
Wales,  and  are  summoned  to  join  him  on  the 
shortest  notice.  Prince  Maurice,  too,  has  been  sti- 
mulated into  active  measures,  with  orders  to  ingra- 
tiate himself,  as  far  as  was  in  his  nature  to  do,  with 
the  local  authorities.  He  thus  writes  from  Chester 
on  the  23rd  of  March,  1645. 

FOR  SIR  JOHN  OWEN,  MAJOR-GENERAL,  AT  WREXHAM 

OR  RHUABBON. 
SIR, 

My  resolution  being  to  take  the  advice  and  opinion 
of  some  of  His  Majesty's  Commissioners  of  the  several 
counties  of  Merioneth,  Denbigh,  Flint,  Carnarvon,  and 
Anglesea,  for  the  security  and  safety  of  those  parts,  I 
shall  therefore  earnestly  desire  you  to  send  to  the  Com- 
missioners of  each  of  the  aforesaid  counties,  that  they 
speedily  attend  me  here,  for  the  purpose  aforesaid,  which 
is  all  at  present,  but  that  I  am 

Your  affectionate  Friend, 

MAURICE. 

On  the  10th  of  April,  Sir  John  Owen  receives 
the  following  letter  from  Prince  Rupert: — 

TO  SIR  JOHN  OWEN  AND  COLONEL  THELWALL. 
GENTLEMEN, 

You  are,  upon  sight  hereof,  to  march  with  those 
thousand  men,  which  were  to  be  raised  and  delivered  unto 
you  out  of  the  counties  of  North  Wales,  and  all  others 
that  you  can  get  by  Aberystwith,  where  the  Governor  may 


1645.]       PRINCE  RUPERT  AND   THE    CAVALIERS.        75 

furnish  you  with  a  convoy ;  or  by  the  safest  ways  you 
know  for  your  security,  to  the  City  of  Hereford,  where 
you  shall  receive  further  orders  from-  me.  Hereof  you 
may  by  no  means  fail. 

RUPERT.1 

Hereford,  2nd  April,  1645. 

We  have  next  a  short  note  relating  to  private 
affairs.  "  My  brother "  is  Prince  Edward  :  for- 
tunately for  Rupert,  and  the  King  and  kingdom, 
this  other  Palatine  did  not  accept  the  invitation  to 
England  :  he  remained  at  Paris,  and  soon  afterwards 
he  made  a  wealthy  marriage,  as  we  shall  hear, 
and  became  a  Roman  Catholic. 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  COLONEL  LEGGE. 

DEAR  WILL, 

My  last  was  in  haste.  Goring  had  orders  to  go  with 
his  Horse  into  Wiltshire,  or  with  his  Foot  to  Taunton,  at 
which  he  is  disconcerted,  and  himself  gone  to  Bath. 
Lords  Capel  and  Colepepper  go  to  the  forces  with 
private  instructions.  You  may  easily  perceive  what  that 
tends  to.  I  have  had  a  letter  from  my  brother  in  France, 
who  desires  my  order  to  come  to  me  :  if  it  be  His  Majesty's 
desire  I  should  send  word  presently.  I  have  sent  to  His 
Majesty  in  Cheshire ;  he  will  be  pleased  to  order  therein 
as  he  shall  think  fitting.  This  is  all  I  have  to  send, 
resting  Your  Friend, 

RUPERT. 

April  13,  1645. 

Since  I  wrote,  I  remember  that  the  King  was  contented ; 
therefore  I  will  send  an  express  for  my  brother. 

1  From  Mr.  Ormsby  Gore's  MSS. 


76          MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF      [APRIL, 

The  necessity  for  exertion  was  very  urgent. 
Cromwell  Lad  been  now  emancipated  from  the 
control  of  all  the  "peace-makers"  by  the  Self- 
denying  Ordinance  ;  and  had  himself  been  exempted 
from  the  operation  of  that  ordinance.  He  was 
already  on  the  move,  hovering  about  Oxford.  The 
King  was  hastening  to  join  his  forces  to  those  of 
Rupert,  in  order  to  fight  the  Scots  before  Fairfax 
could  join  them.  Fairfax  was  then  employed  in 
the  new-modelling  of  the  old  armies,  so  that  Crom- 
well was  only  accompanied  by  his  own  trained 
troopers.  With  them  he  roved  about  untrammelled, 
and  soon  "  uncattled  "  the  neighbourhood  of  Oxford, 
as  the  parliamentary  papers  termed  it.  On  April 
the  22nd  he  defeated  two  thousand  men  sent  by 
Prince  Rupert  to  convoy  the  King  and  his  artillery. 
On  the  24th,  "  merely  by  dragoons  and  fierce  coun- 
tenances, he  took  Bletchington  "  from  poor  Colonel 
Windebank.  The  Colonel  was  inexcusable ;  he  was 
only  attacked  by  cavalry ;  he  was  within  four  miles 
of  Oxford,  one  hour  from  assistance :  he  had  made 
no  resistance ;  his  young  wife's  fears,  they  say,  had 
paralysed  his  energies  :  a  strong  and  important  gar- 
rison was  lost ;  its  young  Governor  was  condemned 
by  court-martial  to  die,  and  was  accordingly  shot  to 
death,  leaning  his  back  against  Merton  College,  the 
great  lady-barracks.  He  died  with  the  high  courage 
of  his  caste.  Digby's  account  of  the  matter  follows. 

1  Heath's  Chronicle,  p.  122. 


1645.]    PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.          77 

LORD    DIGBY    TO    PRINCE    RUPERT. 

[Partly  in  cipher.] 
MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

In  my  last  by  Stevens,  I  gave  your  Highness  an  ac- 
count of  Cromwell's  incursion  into  your  quarters  with  three 
thousand  horse  and  dragoons :  of  his  success  in  the  base 
delivery  up  of  Bletchington  House,  and  in  routing  some  of 
our  horse  :  since  that  he  hath  beaten  up  others  of  our 
quarters.  I  believe  his  first  design  was  to  go  join  with 
Massey,  but  these  successes  will  make  them  stay  in  these 
parts,  hoping  to  hinder  the  King's  march  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert, and  by  the  reputation  of  it  to  draw  an  army  quickly 
out  of  London  to  distress  us  here.  The  truth  of  it 
is,  it  is  impossible  for  the  King  to  march  till  they  be 
removed,  which  how  to  do  but  by  your  drawing  your 
army  this  way,  I  know  not.  The  King  hath  sent  orders 
that  all  Goring's  horse,  and  what  foot  can  be  consented  by 
the  Mayor  of  Hertford's  council  upon  the  consideration  of 
the  worst,  to  march  immediately  hither.  If  those  horse 
were  near  there  they  would  suffice  to  do  the  work  ;  but  it 
must  be  expected  that  ere  they  can  come  hither,  the  rebels 
will  have,  in  our  quarters,  a  good  body  of  foot,  and  then 
if  we  have  not  foot  enough  to  deal  with  them,  those  horse 
will  be  exposed  to  the  same  hazards  and  inconveniences 
that  the  horse  we  now  have  here  are :  besides  that  the 
country  is  so  eaten  up,  that  if  we  have  not  a  force  that 
can  support  itself,  or  put  it  to  an  issue  quickly,  it  will  be 
impossible  for  those  horse,  when  they  come,  to  subsist.  It 
is  therefore  proposed  unto  your  Highness,  whether  upon 
this  occasion  it  be  not  necessary  for  Prince  Rupert  to 
march  hither  as  strong  as  Prince  Rupert  can,  and  to  frame 
our  body  of  an  army  hereabouts,  without  which  not  only 
the  King's  conjunction  with  you  will  be  impossible,  but 
he  will  be  in  danger  of  being  besieged  here,  and  then 
Prince  Rupert  will  be  forced  to  march  hither  to  relieve 
him  upon  worse  terms  than  now.  To  prevent  all  this,  the 


78          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [APRIL, 

truth  is  that  the  distress  of  Chester  is  an  unhappy  objec- 
tion ;  but  since  your  Highness  says,  you  cannot  relieve  the 
place  without  the  train,  and  that  it  is  not  possible  for  the 
King  to  bring  the  train  to  Prince  Rupert,  that  objection 
ceases  by  the  law  of  necessity.  This  is  all  I  have  to  say 
by  his  Majesty's  command,  submitting  all  to  your  High- 
ness's  judgment,  I  rest 

Your  Highness's  most  faithful  humble  servant, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 

Oxford,  April  27,  1645. 

During  all  this  time  Sir  Richard  Grenville  had 
been  besieging  the  town  of  Plymouth  with  a  very 
small  army ;  he  having  appropriated  to  his  own  use 
the  large  sums  advanced  for  the  raising  and  main- 
tenance of  eight  thousand  troops.  At  length  he 
had  been  ordered  to  leave  Plymouth  to  a  blockade, 
and  to  besiege  Taunton,  which  was  stoutly  held  by 
Blake.  Grenville  being  wounded,  Sir  Jobn  Berkely 
succeeded  to  the  command  ;  but  Sir  Richard  had 
taken  measures,  even  during  bis  removal  on  a  litter, 
to  set  his  officers  against  his  successor.1 


1  Sir  Richard  was  a  younger  brother  of  Sir  Bevil's,  "  though  in 
his  nature  or  his  humour  not  akin  to  him."  He  had  served  in  the 
Low  Countries  under  Prince  Maurice  of  Nassau,  in  Lord  Vere's 
regiment.  He  was  a  devoted  follower  of  the  Duke  of  Bucking- 
ham, who  procured  for  him  a  baronetcy  and  a  wealthy  wife.  He 
used  the  latter  brutally,  and  at  length  she  separated  herself  from 
him,  to  his  great  joy.  This  was  soon  put  an  end  to,  however,  on 
his  discovery  that  she  had  settled  her  fortune  in  trustees  so  firmly 
before  her  marriage,  that  he  was  left  penniless.  He  assailed  Lord 
Coventry,  who  gave  judgment  at  law  against  him,  with  such  bit- 
terness, that  he  was  imprisoned  by  the  Star  Chamber.  Escaping 
from  prison,  he  betook  himself  to  France,  until  the  Civil  War 
broke  out,  when  he  obtained  a  command  in  Ireland.  On  the 
cessation  of  arms  being  there  proclaimed,  he  declared  that  his 


1645.]       PRINCE    RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         79 

The  subjoined  letter  from  one  secretary,1  and  that 
which  follows  it  from  the  other,  gives  all  the  intel- 
ligence from  Court. 


"  conscience"  would  not  allow  him  to  serve  the  King  any  longer, 
and  he  was  warmly  received  by  the  Parliament.  He  again  de- 
serted, however,  almost  immediately  to  the  King,  and  was  finally 
appointed  to  blockade  Plymouth.  He  was  a  sanguinary,  brutal, 
dishonourable  man,  who  did  infinite  injury  to  the  cause  he  pre- 
tended to  serve.  He  was  not  even  brave ;  but  he  understood  the 
business  of  a  soldier  well. 

1  SECRETARY    NICHOLAS    TO    PRINCE    RUPERT. 

MAY    IT   PLEASE    YOUR   HlGHNESS, 

The  news  of  Colonel  Gerrard's  happy  success  against  Lang- 
horne,  as  it  is  attributed  to  an  effect  of  your  Highness's  good  con- 
duct, so,  I  assure  your  Highness,  it  came  very  seasonably  hither 
to  allay  the  vain- glorious  boasting  of  the  rebels  upon  Cromwell's 
petty  victories  on  several  quarters  of  ours  in  these  parts,  through 
want  of  that  diligence  and  vigilancy  in  the  chief  commanders 
hereabouts,  which  your  Highness's  good  example  might  lead  them 
unto  [ciphers].  Cromwell  is  now  lying  at  Stamford  and  other 
places  next  to  Farrington,*  with  six  regiments  of  horse  and  four 
troops  of  dragoons  of  the  rebels,  expecting  the  coming  of  Colonel 
Eoyden's  regiment  hither.  I  have  herein  sent  your  Highness 
copies  of  the  agreement  lately  made  by  the  four  Western  counties 
unanimously,  at  the  Prince's  late  being  at  Bridgewater,  whereby 
your  Highness  will  understand  that  there  is  very  good  hopes  of  a 
great  army  to  come  from  those  parts,  f  The  rebels  are  drawing 
down  by  Maidenhead  and  Winham  all  the  horse  and  foot  they 
can,  but  their  pressed  men  run  away  in  great  numbers,  and  their 
officers  are  still  very  unwilling  to  march  under  Sir  Thomas 
Fairfax.  It  is  reported  that  Cromwell's  forces  are  intended  for 
Gloucester  to  reinforce  or  rather  displace  Massey. 

Colonel  Windebank,  who  was  condemned,  at  a  council  of  war, 
for  delivering  up  Bletchington  House  without  fighting,  was  to 
have  been  shot  this  day,  but  is  reprieved  now  till  Saturday  next. 


*  Farrington  Castle  was  stoutly  defended  by  Roger  Burgess, 
who  replied  with  a  defiance  to  Cromwell's  summons  and  oath  to 
put  every  man  to  the  sword  if  the  castle  was  not  rendered. 
Cromwell  was  baffled. 

t  At  the   meeting   of  the  Commissioners   of  the    associated 


80  MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [APRIL, 

Prince  Maurice  has  now  joined  his  brother,  and 
they  march  together  towards  Woodstock   to  meet 

I  hear  that  the  Marquis  of  Newcastle,  Lord  Wilmot,  and  Lord 
Percy  are  all  at  Paris ;  the  Queen  hath  been  dangerously  sick, 
but  is  now  hoped  to  be  on  recovery.  The  copies  of  my  news 
from  London  will  tell  your  Highness  what  I  hear  from  thence, 
and  my  actions  and  endeavours  shall  ever  approve  me  to  be  really 
and  humbly,  sir,  your  Highness's 

Most  humble  and  most  faithful  servant, 
Oxon,  30th  April,  1645  EDWARD  NICHOLAS. 

LORD   DIGBT   TO    PRINCE   RUPERT. 
MAY   IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

Mr.  Whitfield  is  returned,  with  the  joyful  news  of  Charles  Ger- 
rard's  great  victory,  and  of  your  sudden  advance  this  way.  I  have 


counties  of  Somerset,  Dorset,  Devon,  and  Cornwall;  at  Bridg- 
water,  at  the  Town  Hall  there,  the  24th  April,  1645. 


PRESENT. 


SOMERSETSHIRE.  Sir  Edw-  Berkeley.      Sir  Peter  Ball. 

T     A  TT     i  Mr.  Sproke.  Sir  GeorgeParry. 

Lord  Hawley.  M    Phillips.  Sir  Henry  Gary. 

Governor  of  Bndg-  Mr.  K    boPn.  Mr.  Modfford/ 

Mwanter'    4  Mr.  Wingfield. 

Mr.  Coventry  Mr  w£g  DORSETSHIRE. 

Sir  Jo.  Stawell,  TVT    T>  n  «•    T     «A 

Q.    ni      -p    i    i  Mr.  Bull.  Sir  Jo.  Strangeways. 


r  . 

Sir  Edward  Rodney.  Mr"  Newt>ery.  Mr.  Ryves. 

Sir  Tho.  Bridges  Vic.          DEVONSHIRE.  CORNWALL. 

Sir  Jo.  Powlet.  Sir  John  Berkeley.      Sir  Henry  Killegrew. 

It  is  resolved  upon  the  question  that  these  grand  committees 
of  the  associated  counties  shall  take  into  present  consideration 
the  raising  of  an  associated  army  in  the  four  associated  counties 
for  the  defence  thereof. 

That  they  will  declare  that  their  intention  is,  that  these  eight 
thousand  men  shall  be  over  and  above  the  guard  now  raising  for 
his  Highness  and  the  several  garrisons,  and  that  the  same  shall 
be  ready  to  march  as  his  Highness  shall  give  orders,  was  likewise 
offered,  though  the  same  be  not  put  in  writing  in  the  paper 
delivered  to  his  Highness. 

This  is  declared,  accordingly,  by  word  of  mouth,  to  the 
Prince,  and  to-morrow  in  writing. 

Examined  per  RICHARD  FANSHAWE. 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.  81 

the  King,  and  escort  his  unconscious  majesty  to- 
wards the  fatal  field  of  Naseby.  We  trace  their 
progress  by  an  intercepted  letter  from  Massey,  late 
governor  of  Gloucester,  to  Alderman  Brown,  lately 
a  wood-merchant,  now  a  general. 

FOR   MAJOR-GENERAL  BROWN,  GOVERNOR  OF  ABINGDON. 

SIR, 

I  have  endeavoured,  by  all  ways  and  means,  to  give 
you  advertisement  of  Prince  Rupert  and  Prince  Maurice's 
march  this  morning.  They  marched  from  Broadway  before 
day,  and  were  at  Stowe  by  ten  of  the  clock.  Their  march 
is  exceedingly  speedy,  and  towards  Oxford.  I  humbly 


nothing  to  add  to  my  dispatches  last  night  by  Ned  Villiers,  but 
that  it  is  impossible  for  the  King  to  be  ready  to  move  so  soon  as 
Sunday,  unless  Prince  Rupert  bring  along  with  him  one  hundred 
draught  horses  ;  for  the  enemy's  falling  into  our  quarters,  and 
lying  all  around  us,  makes  it  absolutely  impossible  for  us  to  be 
supplied  hereabouts.  But,  if  horses  were  had,  we  are  ready  with 
all  things  else  at  an  hour's  warning.  Cromwell,  having  drawn 
most  of  the  foot  out  of  Abingdon,  is  this  day  before  Farringdon, 
hoping  that  it  is  weakly  manned  since  the  loss  of  George  Lesley's 
three  hundred  men ;  but  I  make  no  doubt  of  its  holding  out  till 
Rupert  comes  to  relieve  it.  If  Rupert  holds  this  day,  I  am  not 
in  despair  but  Goring  may  also  come  time  enough  to  do  it  :  but 
this  is  not  to  be  relied  upon.  God  bless  and  prosper  your  High- 
ness. I  rest 

Your  Highness's  most  faithful  humble  servant, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 
Oxford,  April  30,  1645. 

Since  the  writing  of  this,  there  is  one  come  from  the  Com- 
mander in  Farringdon,  to  assure  unto  the  King  that  they  are 
strong  enough  to  hold  on  five  days,  and  that  there  is  a  hundred 
of  George  Lesley's  men  supposed  to  be  lost — gone  in  to  them  with 
their  arms. 

P.S.  [By  the  King.]  The  desire  of  hastening  this  dispatch, 
makes  me  not  write  otherwise  than  this  to  you,  having  no  more 
to  say  at  this  time  but  what  you  find  in  this  paper.  C.  R. 

VOL.  III.  G 


82  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [MAY, 

desire  that  his  Excellency  may  have  timely  notice,  and 
also  Lieutenant-General  Cromwell.     I  rest,  Sir, 

Your  most  humble  Servant, 

EDWARD  MASSEY. 

Sudeley  Castle,  May  3,  1645. 

We  have  now  a  letter  from  Paris,  which  affords 
some  variety  from  military  details  — 

LORD  JERMYN  TO  PRINCE  RUPERT. 
SIR, 

I  received  this  day,  in  a  packet  of  mine,  your  High- 
ness's  of  the  first  of  April,  from  Hereford,  to  the  Queen. 
She  is  not  yet  in  estate  to  give  your  Highness  an  answer ; 
and  therefore  desires  you  to  receive  it  from  me.  She  had 
charged  Tom  Elliot,  your  Highness's  faithful  servant, 
with  many  things  to  say  to  you  ;  but  he  receiving  the 
King's  command  to  stay  here  till  he  had  order  to  return, 
and  being,  notwithstanding  that  command,  gone  into 
England,  may  perchance  not  have  the  liberty  to  wait  upon 
you,  which  I  am  sorry  for,  the  occasion  not  permitting  the 
transmission  of  so  many  things  as  he  had  in  command. 
In  short,  they  all  went  to  the  assuring  your  Highness  of 
the  constant  friendship  of  the  Queen  to  you,  and  that  she 
hath  not  departed  from  any  of  the  promises  she  hath  made 
to  you.  I  am  joyed  to  find,  in  your  Highness's  letter,  a 
wish  that  the  Prince  of  Wales'  army  might  be  as  good  as 
yours.  We  hear,  out  of  the  West,  his  is  like  to  be  very 
good,  which  makes  us  hope  that,  both  together,  our  affairs 
may  go  well  this  summer.  Your  Highness  is  to  know  a 
romance  story  that  concerns  you  here,  in  the  person  of 
Prince  Edward.  He  is  last  week  married  privately  to  the 
Princess  Anne,  the  Duke  of  Nevers'  daughter.  This 
Queen — the  thing  being  done  without  her  consent — hath 
been  very  much  offended  at  it ;  and,  notwithstanding  all 
the  endeavours  of  your  brother's  friends,  he  hath  received 
a  command  to  retire  himself  into  Holland,  which  he  has 


1045.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         83 

done.  This  is  to  satisfy  the  Q-ueen's  displeasure,  who 
pretends  the  King's  authority  was  wounded  in  this  pro- 
ceeding of  your  brother's.  But  there  will  come  no  further 
disadvantage  to  him  than  a  little  separation  from  his  wife. 
She  is  very  rich  ;  six  or  seven  thousand  pounds  a-year 
sterling  is  the  least  that  can  fall  to  her,  maybe  more :  and 
is  a  very  beautiful  young  lady.  I  have  now  no  more  to 
trouble  your  Highness  withall ;  yet,  before  I  conclude, 
I  cannot  avoid  adding  this  word,  that  I  am,  according  to 
the  frequent  and  constant  vows  I  have  made,  with  all 
truth  and  passion,  Sir,  your  Highness's  most  humble 

and  most  obedient  Servant, 
Paris,  May  5,  1645.  HENRY  JfiRMYN. 

After  this  there  is  but  one  more  letter  until  the 
Prince  joins  the  King  at  Woodstock.  "  Will 
Legge  "  has  been  appointed  to  command  in  Oxford 
during  the  King's  absence,  and  Prince  Rupert  sends 
him  an  authority  that  few  cared  to  question,  in  the 
following  commission : — 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  COLONEL  LEGGE,  GOVERNOR  OF  THE 

CITY  AND  COUNTY  OF  OXFORD. 
SIR, 

You  are  immediately,  upon  sight  hereof,  to  take  into 
your  charge  and  command  as  Commander-in-Chief,  all  the 
inferior  and  subordinate  garrisons  to  and  near  the  City  of 
Oxford,  the  garrison  of  Banbury  excepted,  all  which  are 
to  obey  and  receive  orders  from  you ;  further  requiring  all 
Commanders,  Governors,  and  Officers  of  all  other  His 
Majesty's  garrisons  to  be  aiding  and  assisting  unto  you, 
upon  all  occasions  whensoever  they  shall  be  required  by 
you  for  the  defence  of  the  City  and  County  of  Oxford. 
Hereof  you  and  they  respectively  are  not  to  fail. 
Given  at  Barford,  this  seventh  May,  1645. 

RUPERT. 
G  2 


84  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [MAY, 

While  waiting  for  the  King  we  may  find  time  to 
peruse  the  following  extract  from  an  amusing  squib 
against  the  Prince,  printed  about  this  time  in  Lon- 
don, under  the  title  of 

THE    LAST    WILL    AND    TESTAMENT    OF    PRINCE    RUPERT, 

Wherein  he  disposeth  of  all  his  estate  here  in  England, 
and  maketh  Sir  F.  Fairfax  executor,  and  Lieut.- 
General  Cromwell,  Major-General  Brown,  and 
Colonel  Massey,  overseers  of  the  same  Will. 
Printed  at  London,  October  7,  1645. 

I,  Rupert,  Plunder  -  Master  -  General,  being  most 
dangerous  sick,  yet  of  perfect  memory ;  and  calling  to 
mind  the  impartiality  of  the  times,  am  very  well  assured, 
by  common  computation,  the  time  of  my  continuance 
cannot  be  long.  And,  whereas  I  have  been  prodigal,  both 
of  the  innocent's  lives  and  estates,  and  being  desirous,  so 
near  as  I  can  (now  I  can  do  no  more  mischief)  peaceably 
to  depart  and  give  every  man  his  due,  do  constitute  and 
ordain,  depute  and  make  this  my  last  Will  and  Testament, 
in  manner  and  form  following : 

***** 
Item — Whereas  my  whole  estate  being  disposed  of,  as 
aforesaid,  to  my  poor  friends  (i.  e.,  all  my  friends),  I  can 
and  will  bequeath  nothing,  only  this  to  my  confounding 
d— d  Lords,  my  proud  Papistic  and  Atheistic  Prelates, 
and  all  other  of  my  high-qualitied  friends,  who  were  more 
rich  than  honest,  more  learned  than  religious ;  I  will  be- 
queath unto  them  contrition  and  repentance,  and  wondrous 
submissive  petitions  ;  and,  for  my  second  sort  of  friends, 
that  were  excellent  swearers,  gallant  drunkards,  and  most 
notable  plunderers,  that  killed  poor  countrymen  with 
mouth-guns  ;  I  will  and  bequeath  them  new  ropes  to  hang 
themselves,  &c.  &c. 

COMMANDER  RUPERT. 


1645.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         85 

On  the  7th  of  May  the  King  commenced  his  last 
and  fatal  campaign.  He  reached  Woodstock  that 
night,  and  was  welcomed  by  the  intelligence  that 
his  intended  convoy  had  just  routed  a  party  of  the 
enemy.  The  next  day  he  joined  Prince  Rupert  at 
Stow-in-the-Wold ;  and  a  council  of  war  was  then 
held  as  to  their  future  movements.  Sir  Edward 
Walker,  who  records  this  campaign,  finds  it  neces- 
sary to  attribute  every  subsequent  misfortune  to 
Prince  Rupert's  advice.  Had  the  left  wing  of  the 
Royal  army  at  Naseby  been  as  well  commanded  as 
that  which  Rupert  led,  where  would  have  been 
all  Sir  Edward  Walker's  and  Sir  Edward  Hyde's 
criticisms?  What  basis  would  they  find,  or  even 
seek  to  rest  upon  ? 

At  the  rendezvous  at  Stow-in-the-Wold  on  the 
8th  of  May,  there  were  but  eleven  thousand 
troops.  All  England  was  to  be  kept  in  view  ;  all 
dangers  met,  all  obstacles  overcome  by  this,  the 
King's  only  army.  The  Prince  of  Wales  at  Bristol ; 
the  leaguering  force  at  Taunt  on  ;  the  besieged  gar- 
rison of  Chester,  were  all  to  be  immediately  cared 
for.  The  Scots,  too,  were  to  be  immediately  en- 
countered in  the  North,  lest  they  should  join  Fairfax. 
All  this  was  to  be  provided  for,  and  that  imme- 
diately, by  eleven  thousand  men,  in  the  face  of  a 
powerful  enemy,  having  more  than  twice  that  num- 
ber of  eager  and  resolute  men,  with  a  Fairfax  to 
command,  and  a  Cromwell  to  impel  them  !  Not- 
withstanding all  this,  Rupert  effected  almost  every 


86  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [MAY, 

urgent  object,  so  far  as  his  arrangements  could 
provide  for  them  ;  and,  moreover,  within  a  month  he 
mustered  nearly  twenty  thousand  men  upon  the 
field  of  Naseby.  Those  who  have  studied  military 
affairs,  or  who  will  dispassionately  consider  even  the 
pecuniary  and  commissariat  difficulties  of  such  an 
undertaking  will  admit  that  Prince  Rupert  display- 
ed a  masterly  power  of  combination,  and  a  grasp 
of  thought  that  has  seldom  grappled  with  more 
numerous  and  discordant  difficulties. 

I  shall  not  enter  into  the  debates  of  his  Council 
of  War :  I  shall  only  state  briefly  the  results,  and 
hasten  to  the  battle  of  Naseby.  I  fear  the  reader 
must  be  anxious  to  change  the  scene,  and  to  hasten 
over  the  tragic  remainder  of  the  King^s  sad  story. 

Goring  was  despatched  to  Taunton  to  take  that 
town,  which  he  swore  he  could  do  at  once  ;  to  en- 
courage the  demonstrations  the  West  Counties'  As- 
sociation had  lately  made  in  favour  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales ;  to  check  Fairfax,  and  keep  him  separate 
from  Cromwell ;  and  finally  to  join  the  King's 
army,  and  enable  it  to  meet  the  enemy  in  a  general 
battle.  The  Northern  Horse,  whose  imperious 
petition  we  have  lately  seen,  were  to  be  indulged  by 
a  move  in  the  direction  of  their  homes.  Chester, 
sorely  pressed  by  Brereton  and  Mitton,  was  to  be 
relieved;  Yorkshire  recovered,  and  the  army 
recruited  there;  the  Scots  defeated,  and  then,— 
right  about  and  face  Fairfax. 

On  the  9th  Goring  was  hastened  away  to  the 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.  87 

South,  and  the  King's  army  proceeded  to  the  North 
by  Evesham.  Campden  House  was  dismantled  by 
the  way  and  its  garrison,  under  Sir  Henry  Bard, 
added  to  the  marching  army.  Hawkesly  House, 
near  Bromsgrove,  was  taken  by  Prince  Maurice,  and 
the  garrison  made  prisoners.  Forward  by  Wolver- 
hampton  the  army  moved  to  Stowebridge,  Newport, 
Drayton,  and  Stowe.  Here  Lord  Byron  met  the 
King  with  intelligence  that  at  his  approach  the  enemy 
had  drawn  off  from  Chester.  Thereupon  the  Royal 
forces  now  moved  away  by  Uttoxeter,  Burton -upon- 
Trent,  Ashby-de-la-Zouch,  and  Loughborough,  to 
Aylstone  near  Leicester.  Intelligence  now  arrived 
that  Fairfax  was  besieging  Oxford,  and  this  caused 
a  pause  in  the  Northern  design.  It  was  resolved  to 
halt  until  circumstances  should  decide  whether  it 
were  necessary  to  return  towards  the  South.1  To 
occupy  the  interim  it  was  determined  to  besiege  the 
opulent  and  important  town  of  Leicester.  On  the 
28th  of  May  it  was  partially  invested  by  Sir  Mar- 
maduke  Langdale's  patroles.  On  the  29th  Sir 
Richard  Willis  arrived  at  the  Royal  quarters  with 
a  reinforcement  of  eight  hundred  men  from  the 
garrison  of  Newark,  and  the  siege  was  regularly 
commenced  on  the  same  day.2 

During  the  night,   "  by  the   admirable  diligence 


1  Iter  Caroliimm;  Walker's  "  Hist.  Discourses,"  125,  6,  7. 

2  The  following  account  is  taken  chiefly  from  Mr.  Boiling's 
excellent  little  History  of  Leicester,  and  Sir  Edward  Walker's 
relation,  in  his  Historical  Discourses. 


88  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [MAY, 

and  command  of  Prince  Rupert,"  as  Sir  Edward 
Walker  confesses,  "  a  battery  was  raised  against  the 
southern  wall,  and  from  this,  on  the  following  morn- 
ing, the  31st  of  May,  the  Prince  ordered  two  pieces 
of  heavy  ordnance  to  be  fired  against  the  walls  "  as 
a  ceremony."  He  then  sent  a  trumpeter  into  the 
town,  offering  free  pardon  to  the  citizens,  and  leave 
to  Major  Innes  to  withdraw  unmolested  with  his 
dragoons.  Sir  Robert  Pye,  as  a  sensible  citizen, 
and  Major  Innes,  as  an  old  soldier,  pronounced  the 
place  to  be  untenable,  and  that  it  ought  not  to  be 
wantonly  subjected  to  assault  and  plunder.  Others 
professed  that  "  they  had  undertaken  the  Parliament 
cause,  and  desired  to  die  in  no  other."  The  trum- 
peter finally  was  dismissed  with  a  request  on  the  part 
of  the  garrison,  to  be  allowed  time  for  debate.  The 
Prince,  who  had  meanwhile  mounted  a  second 
battery  with  guns,  sent  him  back  for  an  immediate 
reply ;  it  was  delayed ;  the  Prince  opened  his  fire, 
and  in  four  hours  effected  a  breach  in  the  strong 
walls  of  "  the  Newark/'  as  the  fortified  part  of  the 
town  is  still  called.  The  garrison  fought  with  de- 
termined courage,  and  prepared  to  defend  the 
breach  by  a  characteristic  rampart  of  wool-packs. 
Night  fell ;  fascines  had  been  prepared,  while  the 
artillery  was  opening  away  into  the  doomed  citadel : 
as  soon  as  night  fell  the  moat  was  filled  with  the 
fascines,  and  the  stormers  advanced  to  the  assault 
under  Colonel  Leslie.  A  close  and  murderous  fire 
repelled  them  ;  they  advanced  again,  won  their  way 


1045.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.         89 

for  one  moment,  and  the  next  were  driven  back 
over  the  breach ;  again  and  again  the  Cavaliers 
pressed  into  that  deadly  chasm,  and  were  slain  or 
driven  back  by  the  stout  defenders.  The  "King's 
guards  "  now  advanced  with  levelled  pikes,  and 
stormed  for  the  last  time ;  as  they  struggled  in  the 
breach,  a  shout  of  victory  piercing  through  all  the 
clamour,  announced  that  the  town  was  won  else- 
where. In  three  other  quarters  the  walls  were 
attempted  by  escalade,  and  at  length  the  Newark 
Cavaliers  entered  with  sword  and  pistol,  just  as 
they  had  dismounted,  and  won  their  way.  At 
daybreak  the  town  was  the  King's ;  Rupert's 
black  banner  was  flying  over  the  well-defended 
walls,  and  the  fight  was  scattered  away  among  the 
streets,  where  the  men,  and  even  the  women,  still 
fought  desperately  from  roof  and  window  of  their 
homes;  hence  it  happened  that  several  women, 
shewing  a  soldier's  courage,  met  with  a  soldier's 
death.  The  town  was  utterly  sacked,  but  there 
appears  to  have  been  no  wanton  bloodshed,  for  the 
whole  casualty,  on  both  sides,  is  only  stated  at  from 
two  hundred  to  three  hundred  slain : ]  twelve  hun- 
dred armed  men  were  taken  prisoners  ;  fifty  barrels 

1  Whitelocke,  with  his  usual  candour,  refutes  the  assertions 
of  some  of  the  Roundhead  journals  that  the  streets  ran  with  the 
blood  of  the  inhabitants ;  that  the  Scots  were  murdered  in  cold 
blood ;  and  that  the  Parliamentary  committee  had  been  hanged. 
The  real  case  was  bad  enough  ;  and  St.  Sebastian  and  Badajos  in 
later  days  may  prove  that  a  rude  soldiery,  brutalized  by  ignorance, 
intoxication,  and  the  sense  of  danger,  cannot  be  controlled  in 
the  hour  of  hard-won  victory. 


90  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [MAY, 

of  powder,  nine  guns,  and  one  thousand  muskets 
were  the  most  important  spoil.  One  hundred  and 
forty  waggon-loads  of  plunder  were  sent  off  to 
Newark. 

This  was  one  of  the  best  fought  and  defended 
actions  of  the  war :  there  yet  remain  some  most 
interesting  memorials  of  it  in  that  part  of  the  town 
which  is  still  called  the  Newark,  a  strong  enclosure 
approached  under  the  gateway  of  "  Rupert's  tower." 
The  effects  of  this  successful  opening  of  the  cam- 
paign were  very  important :  all  the  surrounding 
garrisons  of  Bagworth,  Coleorton,  Kirby  Bellers, 
and  Burleigh  House,  were  precipitately  abandoned 
by  the  Roundheads,  and  even  London  was  filled 
with  dismay.  The  City  petitioned  the  Parliament 
to  stem  "  the  increasing  and  prevailing  of  the 
Cavaliers'  successes  by  sea  and  land,  like  a  mighty 
torrent."  Charles  himself,  "  deceived  by  this  light- 
eninge  before  his  ruine,"  wrote  to  the  Queen  to  say 
that  his  fortunes  had  never  yet  been  in  so  flourish- 
ing a  condition.1 

The  Royal  forces  rested  here  for  some  days  to 


1  Nor  was  this  impression  confined  to  his  Majesty  or  to  his 
party  as  may  be  seen  from  the  following  extract  of  a  letter  from 
Sir  Samuel  Luke  to  Major  Watson,  dated  Newport,  June  6th, 
1 645.  "  I  am  most  heartily  sorry  for  the  ill  success  of  our  forces 
in  all  parties,  which  hath  caused  a  dead  heartedness  in  all  people, 
that  they  are  struck  with  such  a  panic  fear,  that,  if  I  am  not 
deceived,  the  Parliament  cause  was  never  in  so  declining  a  con- 
dition as  at  present.  His  Majesty's  head-quarters  was  last  night 
at  Harborough,  and  part  of  his  horse  advanced  seven  miles  off 
Northampton. — Ellis's  Collection,  vol.  iv.  p,  243. 


1645.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.  91 

refresh  and  to  be  reorganised,  a  process  always  very 
necessary  after  a  victory  or  defeat  amongst  our 
Cavaliers.  Lord  Loughborough  had  all  his  recent 
discontents  soothed  by  being  appointed  Governor  of 
the  conquered  town.  Colonel  Page,  who  had  been 
first  on  the  escalade,  was  knighted,  so  also  was 
Appleyard,  and  these  honours  were  rendered  valuable 
by  their  rarity.  The  breaches  made  by  the  Royal 
artillery  were  carefully  repaired ;  other  fortifications 
were  superadded,  "  and  the  country  shewed  great 
cheerfulness  in  assisting." 

It  is  now  time  to  look  back  upon  our  correspond- 
ence :  from  Oxford  we  hear  something  of  Crom- 
well's movements. 

SIR    EDWARD    NICHOLAS    TO    PRINCE    RUPERT. 
MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

Though  I  have  sent  home  two  expresses  since  I 
received  any  letter  from  the  Court,  yet  the  despatch 
enclosed,  coming  to  me  the  last  night,  by  an  express  from 
Newark  to  your  Highness  and  my  Lord  Digby,  and  the 
person  that  brought  the  same  being  on  the  way  hurt  by 
the  rebels  ;  and  finding,  by  my  letter,  that  there  was  in 
them  matter  of  more  than  ordinary,  I  have  thus  suddenly 
troubled  your  Highness  again  with  my  despatches,  before 
I  understand  whether  you  had  not  rather  that  I  should 
spare  you  pains.  We  have  several  reports,  by  passengers, 
that  Taunton  is  rendered,  and  also  the  Castle,  but  no 
letters  of  it  from  any  credible  hand.  Cromwell  had  ga- 
thered up,  together  with  his  own,  about  seven  thousand 
horse  and  foot.  He  marched  yesterday  from  five  miles 
beyond  Banbury,  towards  Coventry,  and  intends  to  draw 
all  the  rebels'  garrisons,  and  to  pursue  the  King,  at  a 
good  distance,  towards  Chester.  He  is  now  the  principal 


92  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [MAY, 

counsellor  of  the  rebels,  who  are  much  dissatisfied  with 
Thomas  Fairfax  ;  and  if  Cromwell  should  miscarry,  nei- 
ther Scots  would  advance,  nor  the  rebels  be  able  to 
raise  any  considerable  army.  This  year  I  hear  nothing  of 
certainty  what  is  become  of  Fairfax's  forces  in  the  West, 
only  from  report,  that  Lord  Goring  met  with  and  dis- 
persed a  good  part  of  them.  But  others  say,  they  never 
came  near  Lord  Goring,  but  ran  away  by  small  numbers, 
so  as  the  foot  are  not  above  two  thousand  in  all,  and  that 
they  are  about  Dorchester,  in  county  Dorset.  The  town 
of  Taunton  is  in  part  burnt,  but  the  people  there  hold 
out  with  very  great  obstinacy,  and  refuse  quarter  when 
they  are  taken  prisoners.  I  am  really,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  and  faithful  servant, 

EDWARD  NICHOLAS. 

Oxford,  May  16,  1645. 

The  next  is  from  Lord  Clarendon,  and  it  is  some- 
what interesting  to  find  his  private  letter  so  like  a 
page  out  of  his  own  great  Work : — 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

I  came  the  last  night  to  this  place,  having  been  com- 
pelled to  take  shipping  at  Barnstaple  for  Bristol.  Mr. 
Fox  told  me  at  my  alighting,  that  he  had  then  sent  a  let- 
ter from  your  Highness  to  me  by  the  way  of  Bridgewater, 
so  that  if  you  receive  not  satisfaction  in  that  particular  of 
your  commands  by  this,  you  will  impute  it  to  that  misfor- 
tune of  mine,  that  I  have  not  yet  received  it ;  for  truly  in 
what  shall  come  to  me  from  you,  you  shall  find  me  most 
exactly  obedient.  I  find  since  my  coming  hither,  that 
many  of  my  letters  have  miscarried ;  and  I  fear  some  that 
I  have  presumed  to  direct  to  your  Highness.  My  last,  by 
Colonel  Fitzwilliam,  I  hope  came  safe  to  you  :  if  you  have 
not  received  a  very  particular  account  of  all  the  Devon- 
shire garrisons,  one  very  long  letter  of  mine  hath  missed 
you  :  but  in  truth,  though  I  expected  very  much  from 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.          93 

Barnstaple,  it  exceeded  far  even  that  expectation,  and 
considering  all  circumstances  is  the  most  miraculously  for- 
tified place  that  I  know,  and  I  am  confident  is  the  best 
provided  to  receive  an  enemy,  especially  in  a  magazine  of 
victuals,  of  any  town  in  England.  Having  all  places  so 
convenient  to  them,  and  the  levies  of  men  in  great  for- 
wardness, I  was  extremely  troubled  to  find  so  much  sad- 
ness and  discontent  here  upon  the  orders  and  letters  lately 
sent  from  Court ;  I  have  not  yet  had  leisure  to  peruse 
them,  but  I  find  enough  to  satisfy  me  that  you  have 
received  information  there  of  matters  of  fact  without  the 
least  colour  of  truth.  194,  134,  240,  255,  329,  240,  225, 
156,  infinitely  troubled  28,  330,  399,  28.  48,  241,  201, 
203,  152,  302,  304,  153,  241,  225,  330,  241,  Mr.  100,  241, 
391,  which  trouble  hath  been  sufficiently  improved  by 
other  men.  But  I  doubt  not,  as  he  is  one  of  the  most 
honest  men  I  know,  and  therefore  for  God's  sake,  sir, 
esteem  him  so,  so  he  will  in  this,  and  in  all  things  else, 
comport  himself  with  great  duty  to  your  Highness,  and  in 
earnest  (though  I  very  well  know  you  have  great  reason 
not  to  be  so  well  satisfied  with  Slingsby  as  such  a  trust 
would  require)  I  fear  in  this  conjuncture  of  time,  Mr. 
Fox  will  have  no  great  joy  in  the  preferment.  I  have 
infinite  particulars  to  acquaint  you  with,  which  you  shall 
receive  by  the  next,  for  I  had  very  little  notice  of  this 
messenger,  but  will  dispatch  another  speedily  to  your 
Highness,  If  my  Lord  Goring  be  called  away,  leaving 
such  a  strength  behind  him  as  may  resist  the  present  inso- 
lence of  the  enemy,  and  the  Prince  himself  remove  from 
the  further  west,  I  am  confident,  besides  the  provision 
of  money  and  ammunition  which  otherwise  will  hardly 
be  made,  there  will  be,  against  the  end  of  summer,  such 
a  supply  of  men  as  may  give  a  great  advantage  to  the 
King's  service.  We  receive  strange  alarms  every  day  from 
Oxford ;  but  if  such  a  town  cannot  endure  the  face  of  an 
army  for  some  time,  I  would  dwell  hereafter  in  the  fields 


94  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [MAY, 

and  villages,  and  think  no  more  of  fortifying  towns.  Your 
Highness  will  pardon  this  hasty  scribble,  and  believe  that 
you  have  no  servant  more  at  your  devotion  than,  sir, 
Your  Highness's  most  obedient  servant, 

EDW.  HYDE. 

Bath,  this  27th,  May,  almost  two  in  the  morning. 

With  respect  to  the  next  letter,  which  displays 
Goring's  hypocrisy  very  vividly,  it  is  necessary  to 
explain  that  Mr.  ONeil  has  devoted  himself  to 
Lord  Digby's  faction  at  Court,  and  has  proportion- 
ally fallen  in  Prince  Rupert's  favour.  He  now 
dangles  about  Digby's  antechamber,  or  travels  forth 
as  messenger,  instead  of  charging  in  thickest  fight 
by  the  Prince's  side.  Thus  Digby's  confederate 
writes  concerning  him  : — 

SIR, 

I  have  so  entirely  fastened  myself  to  your  Highness's 
service,  that  I  should  be  sorry  to  have  any  person  I  have 
a  kindness  to,  excluded  out  of  the  number  of  those  that 
are  avowed  by  your  Highness  in  that  quality.  I  profess 
myself,  I  shall,  therefore,  humbly  beseech  your  Highness 
to  let  me  know  if  there  be  any  such  incapacity  in  Mr. 
O'Neil,  that  he  may  not  be  admitted  into  the  same  pos- 
ture, which  he  has  had  the  honour  and  happiness  to  hold 
formerly  in  your  good  opinion ;  and,  if  the  difficulty  be 
not  great,  that  your  Highness  will  be  pleased  to  remove 
it,  for  my  sake  :  since  I  should  not  have  adventured  upon 
this  request,  if  I  did  not  find  him  disposed  in  such  man- 
ner to  your  service,  as  he  ought  to  be,  that  is  recom- 
mended to  your  favours,  by  your  Highness's 

Most  humble,  faithful,  and  most  obedient  servant, 
Ash,  May  19,  1645.  GEORGE  GORING.1 

1  To  this  I  subjoin  an  extract  from  another  letter  by  the  same 


1045.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.         95 

Lord  Clarendon  again  writes  cheerfully  as  fol- 
lows : — It  seems  evident  that  if  Naseby  had  been 
won  by  the  King,  England  had  been  the  King's  in 
the  same  hour,  whether  for  good  or  ill  to  the 
conquerors  and  conquered  : — 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

I  know  not  how  my  letters  arrive  with,  you,  but  this 
is  the  third  I  have  written  to  you  since  I  came  from 
Bridgewater,  in  which  I  have  given  you  an  account  of  the 
state  of  this  county,  and  of  the  levies  here,  which  truly 

able  and  unprincipled  hand.  The  siege  of  Taunton  has  been 
abandoned,  owing  to  the  grossest  misconduct  on  the  part  of  Goring 
and  Grenville  : — 

SIR, 

There  being  a  messenger  just  now  ready  to  go  to  your 
Highness,  I  shall  defer  sending  one  of  mine  own  till  three  or  four 
days  are  over,  that  I  may  give  your  Highness  a  more  certain 
account  of  the  resolutions  that  are  taken  here  than  I  can  now ;  that 
which  I  find  by  discourse  with  some  of  the  Prince's  council, 
having  yet  entered  into  no  consultation  with  them,  is,  that  I 
shall  be  presently  rigged  out  with  the  foot  that  were  before 
Taunton,  and  a  good  body  of  horse,  and  remove  out  of  this 
country,  upon  the  edge  of  Wiltshire  for  the  present,  and  as 
occasion  offers  itself,  either  attempt  upon  Fairfax,  or  stand  upon 
the  defensive.  If  Cromwell  be  joined  with  him,  and  if  they  should 
follow  your  Highness  in  the  rear,  we  shall  be  ready  without  any 
other  orders,  to  attend  them  and  give  the  greatest  interruption 
to  their  march  that  can  be,  but  for  my  more  certain  rule  and 
directions,  I  humbly  beseech  your  Highness  to  send  me  as  fre- 
quent commands  as  you  can,  and  I  assure  your  Highness  faith- 
fully that  I  will  hazard  eight  thousand  lives  rather  than  leave 
anything  undone  that  I  think  may  conduce  to  the  King's  service, 
and  to  your  Highness's  satisfaction  j  being  joyed  at  nothing  in 
this  world  more  than  in  the  assurance  of  your  favour,  and  that 
it  will  not  be  in  the  power  of  the  devil  to  lessen  your  goodness 
to  me,  nor  to  alter  the  quality  I  have  of  my  being 

Your  Highness's  most  humble, 

Faithful,  and  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  GORING. 
Bristol,  12th  May,  1645. 


96  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [MAT. 

are  advanced  so  well,  that  I  am  confident  the  King  will 
have  a  very  noble  army  from  these  parts ;  and  if  the  civil 
business  of  these  parts  be  attended,  and  prosecuted  with 
that  vigour  and  authority,  as  it  may  be,  truly  great  things 
may  be  done.  I  have  already  given  you  an  account  of 
the  several  garrisons,  which  I  think  are  in  the  best  con- 
dition, and  the  best  fortified  in  England ;  and  if  your 
Highness  gives  direction  for  the  regulating  and  recon- 
ciling those  differences  and  contradictions  in  commissions, 
which  I  mentioned  to  you  in  my  last,  this  county  will  be 
happy.  Since  I  wrote,  that  is  on  Sunday  morning  last, 
has  arrived  at  Dartmouth  a  ship  with  two  hundred 
barrels  of  powder,  and  at  Falmouth  there  are  great,  very 
great  quantities  of  match  and  muskets,  and  pistols,  ar- 
rived. I  have  given  directions  for  drawing  a  good  pro- 
portion of  all  to  Bristol,  by  Barnstaple,  and  have  likewise 
written  to  Charles  Gerrard,  to  appoint  some  persons  to 
receive  his  powder  at  ...  from  whence  he  may  have 
it  at  Swansea  in  one  tide.  I  expect  an  answer  from  him 
tomorrow  night,  at  Barnstaple,  whither  I  go  to  give 
direction  for  the  constant  transportation  of  all  that  am- 
munition which  I  have  directed  to  be  sent  thither,  for.  I 
would  not  venture  too  much  at  a  time.  I  have  made  two 
contracts,  both  which  the  Commissioners  of  this  county 
have  undertaken  to  make  good,  with  two  merchants  of 
this  city,  who  are  gone  six  days  since  into  France :  the 
one  is  to  bring  two  hundred,  and  the  other  three  hundred 
barrels  of  powder ;  and  they  have  promised  that  both 
shall  arrive  within  twenty  days  after  their  going  from 
hence  ;  for  I  much  fear  Cullimore  will  not  perform.  I 
hope  to  be  at  Bristol,  or  where  the  Prince  is  (I  would  he 
were  in  these  parts,  for  I  hear  the  plague  hath  driven  him 
from  Bristol),  within  four  days.  From  whence  I  shall 
trouble  your  Highness  again  with  many  particulars,  which 
I  had  not  now  leisure  to  convey  to  you  in  cipher ;  and 
when  I  shall  be  most  glad  to  receive  any  commands  from 


1645.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        97 

you,  which  shall  be  obeyed  by  no  man  with  more  cheer- 
fulness and  alacrity  than  by,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HYDE. 

Exeter,  this  21st  of  May,  1645. 

The  next  is  from  Oxford : — 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

Cromwell,  with  about  seven  thousand  horse  and 
foot,  hath  lain  long  about  Southam,  expecting  Sir  Thomas 
Fairfax ;  but  on  Sunday  last,  Cromwell  quartered  at  Kil- 
lingworth ;    Monday,  he  marched  from   thence   towards 
Daventry,  and,  by  the  way,  kept  a  rendezvous  on  Duns- 
more-heath,   from   whence   he  marched   towards  Daven- 
try; Sir  Thomas  Fairfax,  his  horse,  and  sixteen  pieces, 
whereof  divers  are  drawn  by  twenty-four  horses,   came 
thither  Monday   night,    about    midnight.     We  marched 
this  last  night  within  three  miles  of  this  town,  with  two 
thousand  foot  and  about  one  thousand  horse   to   guard 
them ;  some  other  parties  of  his  horse  being  sent  before 
towards   Islipp  and  Woodstock.     He  hath  in 
all  not  above  four  thousand  horse  and  foot,  and  some  say 
[not  so]  many.     It  is  given  forth  that  he  resolves  to  join 
with  Cromwell,    and   then  either    to   fall    on  this  town, 
which,  from  several  hands,  is  advertised  from  London  to 
be  their  chief  design,  to  divert  the  King ;   or  else  follow 
the  King  :  or  to  march  into  the  associated  counties.   Fair- 
fax quartered  this  last  night  about  this  town.     It  is  here 
much  wondered,  that  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax  should  come 
out  of    ...     without  any  interruption,   and  lie  quiet 
at     ...     almost  a  week,  and  not  so  much  as  notice[d], 
by  any  out  of  the  West,  of  his  forces  coming  this  way 
nor   his   quart[ers]    disturbed.      The   Lords   here   desire 
they  m[ay]  .  .  ]   obliged  to  your  Highness  to  give  order 
to  the  Commanders  [in]  Chief,  [Goring]  in  the  West,  to 
advertise  their  Lordships  here,  the  motions  and  proceed- 
VOL.  III.  H 


98  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [MAY, 

ing  of  his  Majesty's  forces  in  these  towns,  for  what  may 
concern  even  these  parts  ;  and  to  hold  some  correspondence 
with  some  of  the  Privy  Council  .  .  .  that  his  Ma- 
jesty's servants  may  not  suffer,  for  not  having  such  intel- 
ligence and  correspondence  as  is  .  .  .  If  Fairfax  and 
Cromwell  should  receive  some  considerable  blow,  it  would 
not  only  check  .  .  .  Scots  and  Northern  rebels,  in 
advancing  hither,  but  add  so  much  to  the  present  distrac- 
tions at  London,  as  would  prepare  an  easy  way  for  a 
happy  removing  the  present  miseries  of  this  kingdom: 
which,  that  the  [Lord]  will  grant,  is  the  earnest  prayer  of, 
Sir,  your  Highness's  most  humble  servant, 

EDWARD  NICHOLAS. 
Oxon,  22nd  May,  1645. 

And  now  we  turn  to  the  Council  of  War,  whose 
decision  sealed  the  fate  of  Charles. 

The  three  pointsdebated  were,  1st,  To  march  towards 
Worcester,  and  meet  Sir  Charles  Gerrard's  division 
of  three  thousand  horse  and  foot ;  2nd,  To  press  on 
towards  the  North,  and  either  to  give  battle  to  the 
Scots  and  relieve  Carlisle ;  or  to  come  to  terms  and 
form  an  alliance  with  them ;  which  was  then  be- 
lieved to  be  very  practicable,  so  disgusted  were  the 
Presbyterian  Covenanters  with  the  insolent  Inde- 
pendents. The  3rd  proposition  was  to  return  to  Ox- 
ford and  relieve  the  siege :  Fairfax  was  there  with  a 
force  inferior  to  the  King's,  and  Cromwell  was  away 
in  the  Eastern  counties.  To  the  Oxford  proposition 
the  Courtiers  lent  an  eager  support ;  they  had  found 
themselves  gradually  declining  in  influence  during 
the  campaign,  as  the  soldier  party  rose.  They  in- 
sisted on  the  importance  of  rescuing  the  Duke  of 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.          99 

York,  and  the  expedience  of  saving  the  Court  Ladies 
from  the  Rebels'  hands.  TV  latter  had  importuned 
all  the  chief  personages,  and  especially  Prince  Ru- 
pert,1 to  move  to  their  assistance.  The  Prince, 
however,  had  his  heart  too  much  set  upon  the  pro- 
secution of  the  war  to  admit  of  such  influences ; 
Oxford  was  in  no  distress ;  Gerrard's  division  coming 
to  Leicester  would  be  left  behind;  the  Northern 
Horse  were  highly  discontented  at  returning ;  Lord 
Newcastle's  soldiers  were  to  be  recruited  from  York- 
shire. Rupert  therefore  earnestly  insisted  on  the 
Northern  movement.2  Digby,  and  Ashburnham,  and 
the  ladies  carried  it  against  him.  It  was  determined, 
in  spite  of  the  reluctance  of  the  Northern  Horse, 
and  the  remonstrances  of  all  the  soldier  party,  to 
proceed  towards  the  South.  On  the  4th  of  June,  the 
Royal  Army  marched  from  Leicester,  having  set  fire 
to  Leicester  Abbey,  the  Countess  of  Devonshire's 
residence,  where  the  King  had  been  twice  a  guest 
After  this  unaccounted-for  proceeding,  they  pro- 
ceeded to  Harborough  and  Daventry,  which  they 
reached  on  the  7th  ;  the  King  and  Prince  Rupert 
having  their  quarters  at  the  "  Wheatsheaf  Inn." 
Here  they  heard  that  Fairfax  had  retired  from 

1  Sir  Edward  Walker,  p.  128. 

2  I  find  a  note  in  Prince  Rupert's  Diary,  relating  an  anecdote 
redounding,  as  usual,  to  Colonel  Legge's  credit.  "  Before  the  King 
left  Oxford  he  sent  for  him  (then  governor),  and  told  him  he 
should  not  trust  to  any  person's  report  but  his  :  he  desired  him 
also  to  tell  him  the  truth  of  everything,  if  he  (honest  Will.  Legge) 
should  find  himself  in  necessity."     I  presume  honest  Will,  did 
not  write  on  this  occasion. 

H  2 


100        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JUNE, 

Oxford  ;  the  courtiers  had  no  longer  an  excuse  for 
returning  thither,  and  Prince  Rupert  prevailed  in 
favour  of  the  North.  Some  cattle  were  sent  thither, 
and  the  army  was  once  more  put  in  motion.  He 
thus  writes  to  Will.  Legge  on  the  8th : — 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  COLONEL  LEGGE. 

DEAR  WILL., 

There  was  a  plot  to  send  the  King  to  Oxford,  but  it 
is  undone.  The  Chief  of  the  Council  was  the  fear  some 
men  [viz.,  Digby  and  Ashburnham]  had  that  the  soldiers 
should  take  from  them  the  influence  which  now  they 
possess  with  the  King.  I  would  fain  come  over  to  you  ; 
but  I  will  not  ask  leave,  for  fear  of  the  rest  of  the  officers. 
If  I  can,  pray  let  me  speak  with  you  ;  tell  me  of  a  business 
which  concerns  you.  Somewhat  I  have  inquired,  and 
hear  nothing  at  all  of  it,  but  rather  the  contrary.  I  be- 
lieve he  has  sent  you  word  of  this  by  Progers.  I  pray  you 
let  Sir  William  Compton  have  one  of  the  twelve  field- 
pieces  I  left  at  Oxford.  He  deserves  encouragement,  for 
his  brother  [Earl  of  Northampton]  and  he  are  fallen  out. 
Pray  deliver  this  enclosed  to  the  Duke  of  York  :  it  comes 

from  1 

Daventry,  8th  June,  1645. 

It  may  be  supposed  that  at  this  momentous 
crisis  in  his  affairs  the  King  and  his  officers  were 
earnestly  occupied  with  the  affairs  of  the  army. 
Not  so;  the  King  amused  himself  with  hunting, 
and  his  officers  were  almost  all  similarly  engaged 
while  they  remained  at  Daventry,  and  even  as  they 
retired  before  Fairfax  on  the  13th,  towards  Leices- 

1  Earl  of  Dartmouth's  MSS. 


1645.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  ""HE  CAVALIERS.      101 

ter.1  That  night  the  King  slept  at  Lubenham.2 
The  day's  march  had  passed  over  a  wide  and  wavy 
open  country,  in  the  centre  of  which  stands  Naseby, 
still  unchanged  from  the  appearance  it  presented 
then.3  The  Prince  with  his  Life-guards  had  been  in 

1  Sprigge's  "  Anglia  Rediviva,"  1647.  This  writer  was  chaplain 
to  Fairfax,  and  is  the  principal  authority  for  the  battle. 

2  Now  the  Old  Hall,  near  Harborough,  where  it  is  said  he 
dreamed  (for  the  second  time)  that  Strafford  appeared  to  him  in  a 
dream,  and  warned  him  not  to  engage  in  fight. — RastaWs  "History 
of  Southwell"     In  Evelyn,  v.  134,  we  have  a  letter  from  the  King 
to  Sir  Edward  Nicholas,  dated  "  Lubnam"  [in  Leicestershire]  13th 
June,  the  day  before  the  battle.     It  is  in  cipher,  but  so  much  is 
intelligible  as  to  prove  that  when  he  wrote  it  he  was  going  to 
supper.     He  had  then  no  idea  of  that  battle  on  the  morrow, 
which,  recommended  by  a  midnight  council,  was  so  fatal  to  his 
cause.     In  Ellis's  Hist.  Letters,  Lond.  1846,  vol.  iv.  p.  247,  et 
seq.,  there  is  some  correspondence  relating  to  this  action.     On 
June  12,  Sir  Samuel  Luke  writes  to  Essex  that  every  man  they 
had  taken  had  20s.  or  30s.  in  his  pocket,  and  a  sergeant  had 
201.  "  which  would  make  men  fight  for  victory  over  such."   Crom- 
well writes  to  Sir  Samuel  Luke  to  desire  him  to  convey  prisoners, 
and  Fiennes  to  convey  treasure  taken  at  Naseby  to  Northampton. 
Luke's   account  of  casualties  (Ellis  iv.   254),  is  two  thousand 
killed,  five  hundred  wounded,  four  thousand  five  hundred  pri- 
soners, twelve  pieces  of  cannon,  two  hundred  carriages,  seven 
coaches,  and  the  King  and  Prince's  "  sampler  horses."  Sir  Samuel 
Luke  and  his  father,  Sir  Oliver,  were  both  Colonels  of  Horse 
under  Parliament.     Sir  Samuel  was  Scout-master  for  Bedfordshire 
and  other  counties,  Governor  of  the  garrison  of  Newport  Pagnel. 
He  is  the  supposed  original  of  Hudibras.     Butler  lived  with  him 
some  time  as  his  clerk. 

3  See  the  old  map  and  plan  of  the  battle  in  Sprigge's  "  Anglia 
Rediviva."     The  sketch  of  the  town  is  very  faithful  to  its  present 
appearance  j  every  house,  I  think,  stands  now,  as  sketched  long 
ago  in  this  otherwise  incorrect  plan.     Lansdowne,  near  Bath, 
and  Roundway,  near  Devizes,  are  the  only  two  scenes  of  action  in 
the  Civil  wars  that  remain  unchanged.     In  the  reign  of  George 
II.,  Leicestershire  and  Northamptonshire  had  very  few  enclosures 
— the  farm-houses  stood  (as  now,  on  the  Wiltshire  Downs)  sur- 
rounded by  a  champaign  country.     The  Rev.  Mr.  Martin,  writing 
of  Naseby  in  1792,  speaks  of  the  country  round  as  "  an  extensive 


102        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JUNE, 

the  van,  as  usual,  in  marching  toward  the  enemy. 
They  now  formed  the  rear-guard  in  retiring  before 
him.  The  Prince  slept  at  Harborough  that  night, 
but  he  had  left  a  troop  of  his  guards  at  Naseby,  as 
an  outpost. 

They  took  their  ease,  as  was  the  custom  of  the 
Cavaliers  in  all  times  and  circumstances,  and  sat 
down  to  supper  at  an  old  oak-table,  which  may  still 
be  seen  in  the  village,  deeply  indented,  and  stained 
from  the  carousals  of  ages.  Suddenly  the  well- 
known  bugle  rang  to  horse,  but  too  late ;  before 
they  could  snatch  up  armour  or  weapons,  Ireton's 
troopers  were  upon  them,  and  slew  or  took  them  all 
prisoners.  One  of  the  videttes,  however,  rode  off 
over  the  hills,  and  found  the  King  at  the  "  Hall 
House,"  whence  he  rode  into  Harborough  to  Ru- 
pert's quarters,  and  ordered  a  council  of  war  to  be 
called.  For  once  Rupert  counselled  retreat : l  Ger- 
rard's  division  was  hourly  expected  at  Leicester; 
there  were  reinforcements  behind  them  at  Melton 
and  at  Newark.  Digby  and  Ashburnham  as  usual 
opposed  the  Prince;  they  declared  that  retiring 
before  an  enemy  already  discomfited  at  Oxford, 
would  only  provoke  danger,  and  discountenance 
their  own  soldiers.  The  King  had,  unfortunately, 
just  received  a  triumphant  despatch  from  Mon- 

and  almost  boundless  open  field,  consisting  of  about  two-thirds 
pasture  and  one- third  arable,  the  whole  very  improvable  by  an 
enclosure."     The  lordships  were  divided  from  each  other  by  hedges 
even  in  1 645,  but  within  themselves  only  by  "  field-marks." 
1  Sir  Ed.  Walker,  129  ;  Sanderson's  «  Charles  I." 


1645.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     103 

trose,  another  of  those  false  beacons  that  led  him 
to  destruction.1  He  decided  for  battle,  and  it  only 
remained  for  Rupert  to  execute  the  order.  It 
was  now  daylight;  the  scout-master  was  sent  out 
to  reconnoitre,  and  with  the  usual  worthlessness  of 
the  King's  servants,  he  returned  with  the  assertion 
that  there  was  no  enemy  in  the  neighbourhood. 
Rupert  then  mounted  and  rode  out  at  the  head  of 
a  few  troopers  and  dragoons ;  he  soon  observed  the 
enemy  in  some  force  upon  the  hill-side,  north-west- 
ward of  the  town  of  Naseby.  Fairfax  had  been 
joined  by  Cromwell  the  evening  previously,  and  his 
arrival  determined  him  to  fight.  Rupert  at  this  time 
only  knew  the  strength  of  the  army  with  which 
Fairfax  had  been  marching,  and  was  the  more  easily 
deceived.  He  thought  that  his  enemy  was  retreat- 
ing when  in  fact  he  was  only  changing  his  position 
for  the  sake  of  the  wind.  In  those  days  it  was  con- 
sidered as  important  to  get  to  windward  of  an  enemy 
as  if  fleets  instead  of  armies  were  maneuvering. 
Seeing  the  Roundheads  thus  retiring,  Rupert  sent 
a  message  to  the  King  to  advance  as  speedily  as 
possible.  The  troops,  ever  eager  for  action,  pressed 
on  to  meet  their  doom,  and  by  nine  o'clock  were 
formed  into  line  within  cannon-shot  of  the  enemy.2 

1  The   battle   of  Auldearne,   fought   on   the    10th   of  May, 
1645. 

2  I  am  also  enabled  (by  Mr.  Hollings)  to  detail  the  regiments 
that  composed  the  army  of  Naseby,  containing   scarcely  nine 
thousand  men,  viz. : — 

The  King's  Life  Guard,  consisting  of  two  troops,  the  King's 


104         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JUNE, 

Fortunately  I  am  here  able  to  refer  to  the  plan  of 
battle,  as  drawn  up  by  Prince  Rupert's  orders,  and 
found  amongst  his  papers.  It  differs  considerably 
from  Mr.  Sprigge's  curious  plan,  but  agrees  with  it 
in  placing  Sir  Marmaduke  (now  Lord)  Langdale  on 


and  Queen's,  commanded  by  the  Earl  of  Lichfield  (lately  Lord 
Bernard  Stuart). 

Prince  Rupert's  Life  Guard  of  Horse,  commanded  by  Sir 
Robert  Crane. 

Prince  Maurice's  Life  Guard,  the  horse  consisting  of  about  a 
hundred  gentlemen  and  reformadoes  (unattached  officers),  com- 
manded by  the  Lord  Molineux. 

Prince  Rupert's  Regiment  of  Horse,  consisting  of  four  hundred ; 
eight  troops,  commanded  by  Sir  Thomas  Dalyson. 

Lord  Loughborough's  regiment  of  Blue  Coats,  three  troops,  one 
hundred. 

Colonel  Horatio  Gary's  regiment,  not  two  hundred,  inde- 
pendent. 

The  body  of  horse  was  divided  into  four  brigades,  two  of 
southern  and  two  of  northern  horse. 

James,  Earl  of  Northampton's,  consisting  of  these  four  regi- 
ments : —  , 

Queen's  Regiment,  commanded  by  Sir  John  Campfield,  a  hun- 
dred and  fifty. 

Prince  Maurice's  Regiment,  commanded  by  Lieutenant-Colonel 
Guy  Molesworth. 

Earl  of  Northampton's  own  regiment,  two  hundred  and  fifty. 

Sir  William  Vaughan's  Regiment  (it  was  Sir  Thomas  Lucas's 
in  Ireland),  consisting  of  these  seven  regiments  : — 

Colonel  Samuel  Sandys'  of  Worcestershire,  Governor  of  Wor- 
cester, consisting  of  one  hundred  and  fifty. 

Colonel  Thomas  Howard,  eighty. 

Colonel  Leveson,  Governor  of  Dudley  Castle,  one  hundred  and 
fifty. 

Colonel  Bagot,  Governor  of  Lichfield,  two  hundred. 

Sir  Robert  Byron,  one  hundred. 

Sir  Henry  Bard,  Governor  of  Campden  House,  one  hundred, 
commanded  by  Barker. 

Colonel  Morthe's  (were  Colonel  Marrowe's  first),  one  hundred. 

Total  of  this  brigade,  eight  hundred  and  eighty. 


a 


sN 


11* 


:"CH  ^^ 

rs  II 


K: 


1 1 
it 


to 
& 


"iu  i  M  0ml 


mil  • 


ii  f 

^i|felllillii 

«E3  ?5g      3S?5S3 


B 


t«?SJ  S<5  1^3  S-^^^'S^  1 


£ 


l«  ?'. 


^\^^ 


1645.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.        105 

the  left  wing,  and  Rupert,  with  Prince  Maurice,  on 
the  right.  By  this  time  it  was  known  that  Cromwell 
was  on  the  Held,  and  Rupert  sought  to  meet  him 
where  he  had  previously  found  him,  on  the  enemy's 
left  wing.  But  Cromwell  had  this  time  selected 

Major-General  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale's  Brigade,  divided  into 
three  divisions. 

Sir  William  Blackstone's  and  the  Northern  Horse,  divided 
into  two  brigades.  Total,  fifteen  hundred. 

Sir  Richard  Willis's  Horse  from  Newark,  twelve  hundred. 

Summa  Totalis  of  the  whole  army  of  Horse  : — 

King's  and  Queen's  Troops  130 

Prince  Rupert's    140 

Prince  Maurice's  120 

Prince  Rupert's  Regiment  of  Horse 400 

Lord  Loughborough's    100 

Colonel  Gary's 200 

Earl  of  Northampton's  Brigade    850 

Colonel  Howard's  Brigade    880 

Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale's  and  Sir  William )  -,  ^nn 

Blackstone's  Brigade     J  10UU 

Sir  Richard  Willis's..  1200 


5520 

The  Infantry  of  the  Royal  Army  on  the  9th  of  May  are  thus 
enumerated : — 

King's  Life  Guards  200 

Lord  Bard's  Regiment  ....       300 

Colonel  Lisle's  Foot  500 

Prince  Rupert's 1000 

Lord  Astley's    3300 

5300 
Simmonds's  Diary. 

This  estimate  closely  agrees  with  that  of  Major  Innes,  who  in 
his  relation  reckons  the  besieging  force  at  about  ten  thousand 
men.  Sir  Edward  Walker,  however,  states  that  many  of  the 
King's  soldiers  deserted  with  their  plunder ;  and  the  casualties  of 
the  siege,  as  well  as  the  garrison  of  Leicester,  are  to  be  deducted 
from  the  above. 


106        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JUNE, 

the  right  wing,  and  assigned  to  Ireton  the  command 
of  the  troops  that  were  to  oppose  the  Prince.  Fair- 
fax commanded  his  infantry,  forming,  as  usual,  his 
centre,  and  his  artillery  flanked  his  battalions  on  the 
right  and  left.1  The  King's  artillery  consisted  only 
of  twelve  small  guns,  none  of  which  appear  to  have 
been  even  brought  into  position.  The  field  of 
Naseby  was  then  about  one  mile  in  breadth ;  two 
hedges,  diverging  eastward  and  westward,  enclosed 
the  scene  of  action.  Two  great  undulating  hills 
mark  where  the  armies  stood ;  the  intermediate  vale 
was  the  battle-ground,  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death  to  thousands.  It  is  still  vividly  green  where 
some  of  the  best  blood  of  England  enriched  its  dust. 
The  Royalist  battle-word  was  "God  and  Queen 
Mary !"  that  of  the  Puritans,  "  God  with  us  ! "  The 
former  were  for  the  most  part  veterans ;  the  latter, 
recruits  of  the  new  model,  mingled  with  some  regi- 
ments of  stern  experience.  With  one  impulse  both 
armies  advanced ;  "  the  Royalists  moving  in  a  very 
stately  and  gallant  style." 2  Rupert  and  his  brother, 
supported  by  Lord  Northampton's  gallant  troops,3 


1  "In  this  posture,"  says  Vicars  ("Jehovah  Jireh,"  160),  "we 
inarched  to  meet  our  resolute  enemy,  who,  I  confess,  seemed  unto 
us  to  come  on  with  undaunted  courage  :  and  who  would  not, 
having   a   King  with  them  that  was  able  to  honour  them  at 
present,  and  to  promise  large  revenues  afterwards  to  all  those 
that  fought  valiantly?" 

2  Letter  from  Okey,  who  commanded  the  Parliament's  dragoons, 
in  King's  Collection,  No.  212. 

3  "  With  such  gallantry  as  few  ever  saw  the  like." — "  Parlia- 
mentary Weekly  Account" Jor  1645. 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      107 

charged  upon  the  left  wing  of  the  enemy,  and  was, 
as  ever,  irresistible.  Ireton,  bleeding  from  two 
wounds,  vainly  strove  to  rally  his  cavalry,  whilst  old 
Skippon,  also  sorely  wounded,  as  vainly  endeavoured 
to  keep  his  foot  within  their  ranks.  Rupert  won 
his  part  of  the  battle,  as  at  Edgehill  and  Marston, 
and  with  incorrigible  impetuosity  he  pressed  upon 
the  fugitives  until  he  swept  them  off  the  field ; 
there,  finding  himself  unsupported,  and  the  battle 
still  raging  in  the  rear,  he  wheeled  about,  summons 
ing,  as  he  passed,  Colonel  Bartlett,  and  the  guard  of 
the  waggon-train *  to  surrender ;  their  answer  was 
a  heavy  fire.  Having  no  time  to  dispute  the  matter, 
the  Prince  passed  on,  and,  crowning  the  hill,  beheld 
an  awfully  changed  aspect  of  affairs.  All  was  in 
confusion  in  the  vale  below :  but  the  struggle  for 
the  bravest  kingdom  in  Christendom  was  still 
fiercely  contested :  both  Fairfax  and  Cromwell  had 
their  helmets  knocked  off,  and  rode  bareheaded  in 
the  desperate  mdlee.  The  right  wing,  commanded 
by  Cromwell,  and  led  by  Colonel  Whalley,  had 
beaten  in  the  Newark  and  Northern  Horse,  though 
they  fought  stoutly  too,  and  still  maintained  a 


1  Rushworth,  secretary  to  Fairfax,  was  here  ensconced  :  he  has 
taken  the  account  of  the  battle,  however,  entirely  from  Chaplain 
Sprigge.  The  ancient  Germans  made  use  of  no  other  defence  to 
their  camps  than  a  barrier  of  waggons,  with  which  they  formed 
the  precinct.  I  am  told  that  even  in  later  years  this  mode  of  de- 
fence has  been  used,  and  called  "Waggenburg,  or  the  camp  of 
waggons.  Rupert  is  described  as  wearing  a  red  montero,  or  short 
cloak,  "  like  that  of  Fairfax." 


108        MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF       [JUNE, 

retreating  fight  among  the  gorse  bushes  which  still 
cover  the  rabbit-warren  that  then  checked  the 
Roundheads'  charge.  At  length  the  Northern  Cava- 
liers gave  way,  and  Cromwell,  sending  two  officers 
in  pursuit  of  them,  turned  with  his  deadly  "  Iron- 
sides," upon  the  flank  of  the  "blue  regiments." 
These  poor  fellows,  by  their  enemies'  admission, 
fought  heroically  against  fearful  odds,  and  perished, 
or  were  made  prisoners  to  a  man.1  Their  comrades 
in  the  centre  had  been  more  successful.  As  they 
advanced  against  the  hill  where  the  Roundhead 
centre  stood  to  receive  their  attack,  the  whole  of 
the  enemy's  artillery  opened  on  them,  but  with 
little  effect ;  they  also  encountered  and  disregarded 
a  heavy  fire  of  musketry,  and  gained  the  hill ;  then 
their  musketeers  clubbed  their  muskets,  and  the 
pikemen  levelled  low,  and  so  they  went  in  upon 
the  Roundheads  and  for  a  moment  broke  their  line. 
Just  then  the  cry  of  victory  in  their  rear  forced 
them  to  turn;  and  they  retreated,  fighting  front, 
flank,  and  rear.  They  only  regained  their  ground 
to  die.  Cromwell's  Horse  were  there  carrying  all 
before  them ;  and  skirting  the  mdtie,  was  seen  the 
King,  striving  vainly  to  rally  his  broken  squadrons. 
Such  was  the  scene  the  ill-starred  Rupert  beheld 
when  he  thought  the  victory  was  all  his  own.  In 
a  moment  he  plunged  into  the  thickest  of  the  fight, 
cleaving  his  way  furiously  towards  where  the  King 

1  Vicars'  "Jehovah  Jireh." 


1645.]        PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     109 

was  cheering  on  his  dismayed  troopers.  "  One 
charge  more,  gentlemen ! "  cried  the  unhappy  Mon- 
arch, "  one  charge  more,  and  the  day  is  ours ! "  * 
Then,  placing  himself  at  the  head  of  his  most 
forward  troopers,  he  prepared  to  charge.  The  Royal 
impulse  communicated  itself  in  a  moment  to  thou- 
sands; once  more  they  faced  the  enemy,  and  in 
another  moment  the  King  might  have  won  a  glori- 
ous victory,  or  more  glorious  death,  when  one  of  his 
courtiers,  ever  his  curse,  snatched  at  the  King's 
bridle,  and  turned  him  from  the  path  of  honour  to 
despair.  Was  there  no  hand  to  smite  that  traitor 
to  the  ground — not  even  the  King's,  that  should 
have  done  it  ?  The  momentary  glow  in  the  King's 
breast  was  past;  he  suffered  himself  to  be  led 
away  like  a  child  ;  he  turned  his  back  upon  his 
enemy,  his  kingdom,  and  his  honour.  Rupert  just 
then  came  up,  but  it  was  too  late ;  the  battle-heart 
of  his  men  was  broken  ;  the  Horse  were  in  disgrace- 
ful and  tumultuous  retreat.  Vainly  he  strove  to 
rally  even  his  own  devoted  cavalry.  They,  too,  were 
unmanned.  All  was  over  except  the  slaughter. 
The  enemy  poured  in  from  every  side,  all  was  aban- 
doned to  them  :  some  regiments  of  infantry  fought 
with  desperate  and  hopeless  valour  to  the  last,  but 
the  Horse  were  already  over  the  far  hills  leaving  their 
Foot,  their  artillery,  and  even  their  women  behind 
them.  The  Puritans  flew  upon  these  helpless  vic- 

1  Vicars'  "  Jehovah  Jireh." 


110         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JUNE, 

tims  with  all  the  fury  of  fanaticism  ;  three  hundred 
were  slain,  and  "  most  of  the  others "  had  their 
fair  faces  cut  and  slashed  by  the  "  godly  "  in  their 
hideous  glee.1 

The  whole  of  the  King's  infantry,  in  short,  were 
slain  or  made  prisoners.  The  cavalry,  for  the  most 
part,  reached  Leicester  in  most  disgraceful  rout,  and 
many  of  them  fled  on  to  Newark,  thirty  miles  from 
the  field  of  battle.  Among  the  slain  on  the  King's 
side  were  Sir  Thomas  Dallison,  Sir  Richard  Cave 
(our  correspondent),  Sir  Peter  Brown,  Colonel 
Thomas,  and  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  other 
gentlemen. 

The  pursuit  was  carried  hotly  on  for  fourteen 
miles,  almost  the  whole  way  to  Leicester.  Nearly 
half  the  Royal  army, — "five  thousand  men  were 
slain  or  taken  prisoners/' 2 


1  This  seems  almost  incredible,  but  it  is  exultingly  dwelt  upon 
by  the  Puritan  historian,  Vicars,  in  his  "Jehovah  Jireh  :"  he 
says,  "  one  hundred  of  them  were  slain  upon  the  ground,  and 
most  of  the  rest  were  marked  in  their  faces  or  noses  with  slashes 
and  cuts,  and  some  cut  off,  just  rewards  for  such  wicked  queans." 
Many  of  these  were  officers'  wives ;  many  others,  poor  wretches, 
however,  no  doubt  were  sinful  enough,  as  the  Rev.  Mr.  Vicars 
says,  but  all  were  slaughtered  indiscriminately  under  the  title  of 
"  Irishwomen  ;"  it  was  said  these  last  had  skenes,  or  long  knives, 
to  cut  their  prisoners'  throats  with.     Vicars  afterwards  says  more 
candidly  that  there  were  "  slain  on  the  whole,  in  fight  and  flight, 
about  three  thousand  men,  and  between  three  and  four  hundred 
Irish  queans ;  four  lords  mortally  wounded,  Prince  Rupert  bruised, 
and  Sir  Jacob  Astley  hurt  on  the  head."     Mr.  Vicars  thus  con- 
cludes :  — "  Thus  now,  indeed,  did  the  Lord  shew  himself,  as  Moses 
sweetly  sets  him  out,  triumphing  gloriously,  and  overthrowing  both 
the  horse  and  the  rider." — Vicars' "  Jehovah  Jireh"  part  4,  1644. 

2  Carlyle's  "Cromwell,"  i.  233. 


1645.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       Ill 

The  Roundheads  had  the  most  complete  victory 
that  they  could  desire.  Yet  "  nothing,"  as  the  Par- 
liament writers  affirm,  "  could  equal  the  gallantry  of 
the  Cavaliers,  except  their  want  of  discipline."  The 
Roundheads,  dogged  and  stern,  rallied  slowly  but 
firmly  after  every  defeat  or  triumph ;  the  Cavaliers 
scarcely  ever  could  be  brought  to  a  second  form- 
ation ; — scarcely  even  when  their  King  called  upon 
them  in  accents  of  despair  to  make  one  united  effort 
for  his  dying  cause. 

The  Royal  standard  was  taken  ;  the  Queen's  white 
colours,  the  two  Palatine  Princes',  and  the  Duke  of 
York's  colours,  all  were  captured,  together  with  the 
colours  of  every  infantry  regiment  on  the  field.1 


1  Here  is  the  relation  of  a  Puritan  eye-witness  after  the 
fight— 

"  I  saw  the  field  so  bestrewed  with  carcasses  of  horses  and  men 
as  was  most  sad  to  behold,  because  subjects  under  one  govern- 
ment j  but  most  happy  in  this  because  they  were  most  of 
them  professed  enemies  of  God  and  of  his  Son.  The  field  was 
about  a  mile  wide  when  the  battle  was  fought.  The  bodies  lay 
slain  about  four  miles  in  length,  the  most  thick  on  the  hill  where 
the  King  stood.  I  cannot  think  there  were  less  than  four  hun- 
dred men  slain  there,  and  truly,  I  think,  not  many  more,  and  near 
three  hundred  horse.  We  toolf  at  least  four  thousand  prisoners 
between  Naseby  and  Harborough — near  three  hundred  carriages, 
twelve  of  which  were  ordnance,  one  drawn  by  twenty-six  horses, 
carrying  a  twenty-four  pound  bullet.  There  were  many  carts 
laden  with  rich  plunder,  which  the  soldiers  soon  emptied  as 
they  did  the  middle  sort  of  ammunition-women  [queans,  as 
Vicars  calls  them]  who  were  full  of  money  and  rich  apparel; 
there  being  at  least  one  hundred  and  fifty  of  that  tribe.  The 
gentiles  were  in  coaches,  whereof  I  only  saw  seven  taken,  stuffed 
with  that  commodity,  and  the  common  rabble  of  common 
vermin  on  foot,  five  hundred  of  whom  are  kept  under  guard  until 
order  was  taken  to  dispose  of  them  and  their  mates  "  [in  slaughter]. 
—Special  Relation,  King's  Coll.  212. 


112          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE    OF      [JUNE, 

All  the  bag  and  baggage,  too,  belonging  to  the  Cava- 
liers, with  all  their  wealth,  was  seized.  The  heaviest 
loss  of  all  was  the  King's  cabinet  of  letters  contain- 
ing his  private  correspondence  with  the  Queen  and 
others,  who  were  but  too  much  in  his  confidence.1 

These  papers  were  immediately  read  in  public  by 
the  Roundheads,  and  commented  upon  before  an 
assembly  of  citizens  in  Guildhall.  The  Parliament 
deduced  from  them  that  the  King  had  never  sin- 
cerely desired  a  treaty:  that  his  insincerity  was 
incorrigible,  that  it  was  vain  to  seek  for  peace 
with  one  whom  no  oaths  could  bind.2 


1  This  celebrated  collection  of  letters  was  immediately  pub- 
lished by  the  Parliament,  and  the  world  then,  and  for  the  most 
part  now,  believed  and  believes  his  correspondence  to  have  been 
one  tissue  of  perjury  and  falsehood.    Those  who  take  the  trouble  to 
read  these  letters  (Harleian  Miscellany,  v.  514),  will  be  surprised 
to  find  on  what  slight  foundation  this  assertion  has  been  founded. 
The  fondest  affection  for  the  Queen,  indeed,  breathes  through 
all  the  letters,  and  the  most  unbounded   confidence;  there  is 
many  a  political  intrigue  alluded  to,  and  many  matters  confessed 
to  the  Queen,  that  never  had  been  related  to  the  public ;  but, 
considering  the  reputed  falsehood  of  the  King,  and  the  tortuous 
line  of  action  in  which  he  was  compelled  to  wander  in  avoiding 
his  innumerable  and  implacable  enemies  from  within  and  from 
without ;  considering  all  this,  the  accusations  against  him  seem 
to  owe  much  of  their  weight  to  party-feeling.     If  the  dark  and 
crafty  Cromwell's,  or  the  deep  and  plotting  Pym's  most  private 
correspondence  had  been  laid  open  to  the  world  by  their  enemies, 
how  would  it  stand  in  comparison  ?     The  former  of  these  two 
professed  that  it  was  lawful  to  play  the  knave  with  a  knave,  and 
the  latter  acted  on  the  axiom.     See  Appendix. 

2  Of  these  letters,  when  published,  the  King  himself  says, 
amongst  other  things,  "  Nor  can  any  man's  malice  be  gratified 
further  by  my  letters  than  to  see  my  constancy  to  my  wife,  the 
laws,  and  religion  :  bees  will  gather  honey  where  the  spider  sucks 
poison.     The  integrity  of  my  intentions  is  not  jealous  of  any  in- 
jury my  expressions  can  do  them  ;  for,  although  the  confidence  of 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        113 

The  King  was  now  a  fugitive :  he  and  Prince 
Rupert  fled,  together  with  such  few  troopers  as 
could  be  collected,  to  Ashby-de-la-Zouch.  .Thence 
by  Lich  field,  Bewdley,  Bromyard,  to  Hereford. 
Here  Gerrard,  with  two  thousand  men,  joined  the 
Royal  banner  (the  standard  was  gone),  and  immediate 
steps  were  taken  to  raise  levies  out  of  Wales.  Sir 
Edward  Walker  says,  that  the  gentry  "  promise 
mountains  "  but  that  Prince  Rupert  having  gone  to 
Bristol  to  strengthen  that  last  stronghold  of  the 
West,  the  levies  languished,  and  the  intended  army 
came  to  nothing.  From  Hereford  the  King  went  to 
Ragland  Castle,  where  the  Marquis  of  Worcester1 
received  him  with  sumptuous  magnificence  in  his 
grand  old  castle;  brought  together  all  the  nobles 
and  gentry  of  the  surrounding  country,  and  restored 
to  the  wearied  monarch  the  pomp  and  circumstance 


privacy  may  admit  greater  freedom  in  writing  such  letters  which 
may  be  liable  to  envious  exceptions ;  yet  the  innocency  of  my 
chief  purposes  cannot  be  so  stained  or  misinterpreted  by  them 
as  not  to  let  all  men  see  that  I  wish  nothing  more  than  a  happy 
composure  of  differences  with  justice  and  honour,  nor  more  to 
mine  own,  than  my  people's  content  who  have  any  sparks  of  love 
or  loyalty  left  in  them,  who  by  those  my  letters  may  be  convinced 
that  I  can  both  act  and  mind  mine  own  and  my  kingdom's  affairs 
so  as  becomes  a  prince ;  which  mine  enemies  have  always  been  very 
loath  should  be  believed  of  me,  as  if  I  were  wholly  confined  to 
the  directions  and  dictates  of  others,  whom  they  pleased  to  brand 
with  the  names  of  evil  counsellors." — Icon  Basilicon,  p.  180. 

1  "  Henry  Somerset,  first  Marquis  and  fifth  Earl  of  Worcester," 
Mr.  Lodge  says,  "was  already  an  old  man,  when,  in  1627,  .he 
succeeded  to  the  dignities  and  great  estates  of  his  superb  House  ; 
little,  up  to  this  time,  is  known  of  his  life,  but  that  he  lived  long 
in  Spain  and  Italy,  and  was  summoned  by  anticipation  to  the 
House  of  Peers,  in  the  first  Parliament  of  James  I.  He  made  a 

VOL.  III.  I 


114          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF      [JULY, 

of  a  Court.  "  There,"  says  his  own  historian, 
Walker,  "  his  Majesty  stayed  three  weeks ;  and  as 
if  the  genius  of  that  place  had  conspired  with  our 
fates,  we  were  there  all  lulled  to  sleep  with  sports 
and  entertainments;  as  if  no  crown  had  been  at 
stake,  or  in  danger  to  be  lost,  until  the  marching 
of  Fairfax  after  the  regaining  of  Leicester  and 
defeating." 

It  was  very  natural  that  in  his  trouble  the  King 
should  seek  refuge  in  the  castle  of  his  powerful  and 
devoted  subject,  but  that  he  should  have  passed  his 
time  in  sports  and  entertainment  in  the  morning,  and 
controversies  on  questions  of  divinity  in  the  evening, 
appears  almost  incredible.  Meanwhile,  the  Cava- 

clear  manifestation  of  his  loyalty  in  1642,  by  defraying  nearly 
the  whole  expense  of  transporting  Charles  and  his  train  to 
York.*  He  raised  and  equipped  the  first  regiment  of  horse  on 
the  King's  side,  and  actually  levied,  at  his  own  cost,  two  little 
armies  in  Wales.  The  whole  of  the  sacrifices  made  by  this 
nobleman  and  his  sons  in  this  cause  amounted  nearly  to  the 
enormous  sum  of  a  million  sterling."  This  generous  old  noble- 
man not  only  gave  up  his  wealth,  but  his  honours,  to  the  require- 
ments of  Charles  I.  I  have  letters  before  me,  proving  that 
"  whereas  the  King  desired  to  have  the  Presidency  of  Wales," 
entire  as  it  was  in  the  time  of  his  Majesty's  predecessors ;  he 
had  requested,  and  the  Marquis  and  his  son  had  surrendered, 
the  Lord-Lieutenancy  of  all  the  counties  of  South  Wales.  The 
religion  to  which  the  Marquis  and  his  son  faithfully  adhered, 
rendered  the  latter  very  unpopular  as  a  commander  in  that 
excited  time.  He  yielded  up  in  one  instance  the  very  army  that 
he  had  himself  raised  and  furnished  at  his  own  cost.  This  same 
religion  prevented  Charles  from  creating  the  Marquis  Duke  of 
Somerset,  for  which  the  patent  was  made  out. 


*  See  Lord  Glamorgan's  (the  Marquis  of  Worcester's)  very 
interesting  letter  in  the  Appendix. 


1(545,]      PRINCE  RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       115 

Hers  were  losing  "  life,  and  all  but  honour,"  for 
him  almost  everywhere.  The  peace  party  in  Parlia- 
ment had  been  silenced  by  the  publication  of  the 
King's  private  letters,  and  the  comments  that  were 
made  thereon.  The  Scots,  after  some  demur,  had 
marched  into  the  interior,  Carlisle  having  been  sur- 
rendered to  them  on  honourable  terms  by  Sir  Thomas 
Glenham.  They  had  lately  taken  a  strong  castle 
near  Worcester  by  assault,  putting  every  living  thing 
within  the  walls  to  the  sword.  Goring  had  been  dis- 
gracefully beaten  at  Lamport.  Bridgewater  was 
soon  afterwards  surrendered,  and  Hereford  was  be- 
sieged by  the  Scots.  Then  the  King  roused  himself 
once  more,  and  repaired  in  person  to  Glamorgan- 
shire, where  the  county  was  summoned  to  meet  him 
at  Cardiff. l  The  "  county  "  came,  and  with  it  many 
grievances,  for  which  it  claimed  redress.  This  the 
King  reluctantly  granted,  but  at  the  same  time 
allowed  Sir  Charles  Gerrard,  who  was  especially 
unpopular,  to  upbraid  them  violently,  and  made  him 
a  baron  at  the  time  their  discontent  with  him  rose 
highest.  Just  then,  Lord  Gerrard's  forces  were 
defeated  by  Langhorne,  and  the  Welsh  declined  to 
appear  in  arms  notwithstanding  all  the  Royal  conces- 
sions. Then  the  King  found  it  necessary  to  make 
his  escape  from  those  parts,  and  resolved  to  move 
towards  the  conquering  Montrose.  He  passed  as 
a  fugitive  by  the  Scottish  camp,  and  with  but  few 

1  Hither  also  came  Rupert  to  invite  the  King  to  Bristol. 

i  2 


11G  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [AUG. 

attendants.  Thence,  often  in  great  want,  he  fled  to 
Derbyshire.  On  the  14th  of  August,  we  find  him 
at  "  Chatsford,  the  Earl  of  Devonshire's  "  (now  the 
stately  Chatsworth).  Thence  to  Welbeck,  Doncas- 
ter,  Newark,  and  Belvoir  Castle,  still  bravely  held 
by  its  little  garrison.  Thence  on  by  Huntingdon 
and  Woburn  to  Oxford,  which  he  reached  on  the 
30th  of  August, 

Here  one  more  bright  and  delusive  gleam  of  good 
fortune  shone  in  upon  the  King's  gloomy  prospects : 
on  the  31st  he  learned  the  glorious  news  of  Montrose's 
triumph  at  Kilsyth  ;  but  for  his  unfortunate  retreat 
from  Lesley's  men  at  Rotherham,  the  King  would 
have  been  in  time  to  share  one  victory.  But  his  im- 
placable destiny  or  incorrigible  infirmity  of  purpose 
precluded  every  prospect  of  success.  Still,  the  news 
of  his  chivalrous  defender's  triumph  revived  his 
spirits,  and  reanimated  his  drooping  Cavaliers. 
Almost  immediately  he  marched  against  the  Scots, 
who  were  still  besieging  Hereford.  They  too  had 
heard  the  news,  and  hastily  marched  away  towards 
Scotland.  The  consequences  of  Montrose's  victory 
were  so  great  as  almost  to  restore  that  country 
to  the  King.  The  army  opposed  to  him  was  de- 
stroyed; Both  well,  Glasgow,  Edinburgh,  fell  into 
the  conqueror's  hands ;  all  the  waverers  rallied 
round  his  standard ;  Lords  Douglas,  Annandale, 
Linlithgow,  and  many  others.  Some  such  news 
as  this  was  much  wanted,  after  the  King's  weary 
and  most  bootless  tour.  When  he  had  reached 


1645.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      117 

Doncaster,  he  learned  that  David  Lesley  was  at 
Rotherhatn,  and  without  further  intelligence  he  had 
turned  and  fled  towards  the  South  again.  At  that 
moment  Lesley's  horse  were  still  sore  from  Montrose's 
victory  at  Kilsyth,  and  could  scarcely  have  with- 
stood the  attack  of  the  King's  Cavaliers,  then  with 
him ;  much  less  that  of  the  three  thousand  York- 
shiremen  who  were  to  have  joined  him  on  the 
morrow.  His  retreat  was  only  anticipated  by  that 
of  the  King,  for  whom  Montrose  was  vainly  waiting 
upon  the  Borders ;  and  the  poor  fellows  who  had 
come  to  the  Royal  rendezvous  in  Yorkshire  "  were 
abandoned,"  as  Sir  Edward  Walker  says,  "to  the 
mercy  of  the  rebels."  The  same  companion  and 
historian  of  the  King,  gives  sad  accounts  of  the 
Royal  Horse  at  Huntingdon  and  elsewhere. 

The  Scots  had  withdrawn  from  Hereford  at  the 
King's  approach,  and  his  Majesty  was  received  in 
that  well-defended  town  with  the  last  loyal  accla- 
mations he  was  ever  destined  to  hear.  From  thence 
he  proceeded  to  Oxford,  whence  we  must  now 
return  to  Prince  Rupert. 

From  the  hour  that  Naseby  fight  was  over,  the 
young  "  Generalissimo  of  England  "  appears,  to  me, 
to  have  given  up  the  cause  as  hopeless.  None  knew 
so  well  as  he  did,  the  exhausted  state  of  the  King's 
resources;  the  broken  spirit  of  his  commanders; 
the  impossibility  of  making  head  again  against  the 
now  active  and  resolute  enemy.  For  all  these  rea- 
sons he  counselled  the  King  to  come  to  some  agree- 


118         MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

ment  with  the  Parliament,  and  that  quickly.  He 
and  his  brother  Cavaliers  were  destined  to  lose  every- 
thing by  such  a  measure ;  but  he  counselled  it, 
nevertheless ;  and  meanwhile  he  exerted  himself  far 
more  in  warlike  preparations  than  Digby  or  any  of 
the  war  party  among  the  courtiers.  The  first  mat- 
ter that  claimed  his  attention  was  the  rising  of  the 
Clubmen,1  poor  rustics  of  Dorset  and  Somersetshire, 
who,  maddened  by  injustice  and  cruelty,  had  risen  in 
masses,  not  for  the  King  but  against  the  Parliament. 
Even  these  rudely  armed  men  were  of  importance 
to  conciliate  or  suppress  at  such  a  time.  They  had 
made  some  demonstration  of  "  placing  the  Prince  of 
Wales  at  their  head,"  but  the  difficulty  was  to  find 
that  head.  They  were  without  leaders  or  advisers 
and  ran  riot  in  their  unwieldy  strength.  They  now 
began  to  blow  their  swineherd  horns  at  night,  among 
the  hills  and  glens  of  beautiful  Somersetshire;  it 
was  rumoured  that  they  were  forming  nocturnal 
assemblies,  all  to  meet  on  a  given  night  and  pour 
into  Bristol  -a  merely,  it  seems,  by  its  plunder,  to 
indemnify  themselves  for  their  losses.  They  were 
nowise  formidable  but  from  their  number  and  their 
English  hardihood ;  their  arms  were  farming  imple- 
ments ;  their  banner  was  a  torn  sheet,  with  this 
rugged  but  intelligible  distich  for  a  motto  : — 

"  If  you  take  our  cattle, 
We  will  give  you  battle." 

1  Prince  Rupert's  Diary. 


1645.]        PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     119 

with  this  novel  enemy,  Rupert  had  much  trouble. 
He  vainly  tried,  in  the  first  instance,  to  enrol  these 
peasants  under  the  King's  standard  ;  he  then  sup- 
pressed them :  night  after  night,  he  was  among  the 
hills,  like  Claverhouse  among  the  Covenanters,  dis- 
persing every  assemblage,  and  at  length,  wearying 
or  frightening  the  rustics  into  peaceableness. 

All  the  events  I  have  here  briefly  summed  up  are 
more  or  less  alluded  to  in  sundry  letters  which  I 
think  better  to  omit.1  Only  one  letter  from  Prince 
Rupert  occurs  during  this  time,  but  that  one  is 
very  interesting : — 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  COLONEL  LEGGE. 

DEAR  WILL, 

I  have  sent  you  back  Lord  Northampton's,  and,  ac- 
cording to  my  promise,  have  sent  you  back  a  spare  one, 
Mrs.  Howard's.  Pray  let  me  know  what  is  said  among 


1  The  following  document  I  give  as  being  of  a  nature  not  yet 
presented  to  the  reader ;  it  contains  minutes  of  a  council  of  war, 
and  the  results  of  its  too  sanguine  and  very  vain  calculation  : — 

Present : 
His  Majesty. 

Prince  Rupert.  Duke  of  Richmond. 

The  Lord  Chancellor.  Lord  Astley. 

Lord  Digby.  General  Gerrard. 

Resolved,  to  send  to  General  Goring,  to  advertise  him  of  the 
rebels'  movements,  and  to  know  what  he  intends  to  do. 

Sir  Bernard  Astley's  men  to  march  hither  presently  from  Wor- 
cester to  be  recruited  here. 

General  Gerrard's  foot  to  march  for  Newport  and  Caerlpeon], 
and  the  foot  of  this  town  to-morrow. 

A  despatch  to  the  Lord  Byron  to  require  him  to  send  Colonel 
Thelwell  to  Brecknock  with  the  eight  hundred  foot  that  are 


120          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JUNE, 

you  concerning  our  last  defeat.  Doubtless  the  fault  of  it  will 
be  put  upon  [cipher  Rupert].  I  sent  you  word  of  the  truths 
in  my  last  from  Wolverhampton.  Garrett  [Gerrard  ?]  is 
about  Hereford,  with  four  thousand  foot  and  one  thousand 
horse  ;  so  that  I  hope  in  a  short  time  we  shall  be  stronger 


ready  in  North  Wales ;  Sir  John to  be  sent  to  assist 

therein. 

Sir  William  Bellenden  to  get  all  possible  quantities  of  pro- 
visions for  the  army. 

To  send  presently  to  break  down  the  bridge  at  Ross. 

Men.     Horse. 

1000     30     Sir  Thomas  Langford,  for  Monmouth  ;  5  July,  about 

Newport. 
500  Earl  of  Carbery,  for  Llangollen ;  5  July,  thence  to 

Swansea. 
800  Herbert  Price,  for  Brecknock ;    5  July,  thence  to 

Newport. 
500  Sir  Francis  Lloyd,  for  Cardigan ;  5  July,  thence  to 

Swansea. 
1000     30     General  Gerrard,  for  Glamorgan ;  5  July,  thence  to 

Newport. 

500  Sheriff  Butler,  Pembroke ;  5  July,  thence  to  Swansea. 

2000     50     Sheriff  Scudamore,  Hereford. 
2000     50     To  Prince  Maurice ;  5  July,  thence  to  Hereford. 

6300 

Letters  to  all  these  generals  and  governors  to  assemble  the 
country  together. 

Council  of  War  at  Hereford, 
June  23,  1645. 

To  this  I  may  add  a  fragment  of  a  letter  from  Secretary 
Nicholas  : — 

The  rebels  at  London  are  very  insolent  upon  their  late  vic- 
tory, and  extremely  averse  to  peace,  as  I  hear.  I  have  adver- 
tisement that  at  Barnet,  within  ten  miles  of  London,  the  King's 
soldiers  (prisoners)  fell  out  with  their  convoy ;  and  fighting 
with  them,  many  of  them  got  away,  insomuch,  as  it  is  believed, 
there  were  not  carried  into  London  above  six  or  seven  hundred 
prisoners,  though  they  emptied  all  their  garrisons  of  Northampton, 
Newport-Pagnel,  and  of  the  prisoners  which  they  had  long  de- 
tained to  increase  the  show.  I  have  herein  sent  your  Highness  a 


1045.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        121 

than  ever.  I  doubt  only  the  want  of  powder  and  cannon. 
We  hear  nothing  at  all  from  the  enemy,  but  fear  suffi- 
ciently. Since  this  business,  I  find  Digby  hath  omitted 
nothing  which  might  prejudice  [Rupert],  and  this  day 
hath  drawn  a  letter  for  the  King  to  Prince  Charles,  in 
which  he  crosses  all  things  that  befel  here  in  Rupert's 
behalf.  I  have  shewed  this  to  the  King,  and  in  earnest ; 
and  if,  thereupon,  he  should  go  on  and  send  it,  I  shall  be 
forced  to  quit  generalship,  and  march  into  my  ....  to- 
wards Prince  Charles,  where  Rupert  hath  received  more 
kindness  than  here.  Pray  remember  me  to  Sir  Edward 
Herbert :  so  farewell 

Your  faithful  Friend, 

RUPERT. 

Bewdley,  June  18,  1645. 


better  cipher,  which  when  I  shall  understand  you  have  received, 
I  shall  make  use  of,  being  really,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  affectionate  servant, 

EDW.  NICHOLAS. 
Oxford,  23rd  June,  1645. 

The  following  is  one  of  many  orders  of  a  similar  nature  issued 
at  this  emergency : — 

TO  SIR  JOHN  OWEN,  KNIGHT  AND  COLONEL. 
SIB, 

The  present  condition  of  his  Majesty's  affairs  is  such,  that 
it  is  necessary  to  hasten  the  recruits  for  the  army ;  in  order  to 
which  I  have  written  to  the  Lord  Byron  to  speed  away  Colonel 
Thelwell  with  the  eight  hundred  men  which  were  to  be  levied  in 
North  Wales.  I  shall  therefore  desire  you,  knowing  the  power 
and  interest  you  have  in  those  parts,  to  give  him  all  the  further- 
ance and  assistance  you  can  for  expediting  the  service.  Wherein 
being  confident  you  will  not  be  wanting, 

I  rest  your  very  loving  friend, 

RUPERT.* 
Hereford,  this  25th  June,  1645. 


*  From  Mr.  Ormsby  Gore's  MSS. 


122         MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JUNE, 

The  following  letter,  however,  is  of  some  import- 
ance, as  illustrating  Lord  Clarendon's  complaint 1 
that  Digby  had  procured  such  limitation  in  the 
powers  of  the  Prince's  Council,  and  even  dictation  of 
his  place  of  residence,  that  Goring  gave  himself 
great  airs  thereupon.  The  letter  subjoined2  from 
Digby  to  Goring,  privately  explains  why  this  letter 
was  written,  and  encloses  to  that  most  unprincipled 
Cavalier  a  copy  of  the  following  epistle  from 

THE  KING  TO  PRINCE  CHARLES. 
DEAR  SON, 

Being  informed  that  our  letter  unto  you  of  the  tenth 
of  May,  from  Evesham,  concerning  the  granting  of  Com- 
missions, and  giving  of  positive  orders  unto  the  Lord 
Goring,  hath  been  misunderstood  there,  and  taken  to  be 
a  lessening  of  your  power,  honour,  and  authority  in  those 
parts  which  we  have  entirely  committed  to  your  care  ;  we 


i  Hist.  Rebel.,  vol.  v.  p.  188. 

2  LORD  DIGBY  TO  LORD  GORING. 

DEAR  GENERAL, 

It  having  been  represented  here  unto  the  King  that  his  letter 
of  the  10th  of  May  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  concerning  the  grant- 
ing of  commissions,  and  of  giving  you  no  positive  orders,  was 
understood  as  a  great  lessening  of  his  power  and  honour,  and 
amounting  to  little  less  than  a  vacating  of  his  commission.  It 
hath  been  held  necessary  for  the  satisfaction  of  his  Highness  and 
his  council  to  send  another  letter  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  by  way 
of  explanation  of  the  former ;  which,  for  fear  it  should  be  wrong 
represented  unto  you  by  somebody  that  is  not  well  pleased  with 
anything  of  that  kind,  I  have  sent  you  a  copy  of  which  I  am  con- 
fident you  will  approve  of,  and  rest  still  more  and  more  confident 
that  I  shall  never  fail  of  all  circumstances  of  vigilance  in  all 
things  that  may  concern  you  as  being  unalterably,  my  lord, 
Your  most  humble,  faithful  servant, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 
Hereford,  June  21,  1645. 


1645.J      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       123 

have  thought  fit  to  express  unto  you,  that  it  was  far  from 
our  intention,  by  the  said  letter,  to  abridge  or  lay  any 
restriction  upon  the  same,  but  only  to  give  you  such 
cautions  as  at  that  time  we  thought  necessary,  concerning 
the  exercise  of  that  power,  in  those  two  particulars  ;  we 
being  still  of  the  same  opinion.  But  we  do  not  at  all 
restrain  that  power  which  we  formerly  granted  you,  but 
do  leave  you  to  the  full  exercise  of  it,  by  the  advice  of  the 
Council,  according  to  your  commission  and  instructions, 
as  you  shall  from  time  to  time  judge  most  for  our  service. 
And  we  do  further  allow  you,  by  the  advice  of  our  Coun- 
cil aforesaid,  to  make  your  personal  residence  in  what 
place  soever  you  shall  judge  most  expedient.  And  so  we 
bid  you  heartily  farewell. 

Given  at  our  Court  at  Hereford,  the  twentieth 
day  of  June,  1645. 

BY  HIS  MAJESTY'S  COMMAND. 

On  the  26th  of  June  Sir  Edward  Nicholas  writes 
thus  from  Oxford : — 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

Since  I  wrote  to  your  Highness  this  morning,  I  re- 
ceived a  letter  from  Sir  Richard  Willis,  whereof  you  shall 
herein  receive  a  copy,  as  also  of  my  last  advertisements  from 
London,  which  will  give  your  Highness  notice  of  the  Scots 
being  advanced  southward.  I  hear  that  Fairfax's  head- 
quarters were  at  or  near  Camden  on  Tuesday,  and  that  the 
last  night  he  was  at  Chipping  Norton.  I  am  very  credibly 
advertised  that  Fairfax's  Council  of  War,  held  on  Monday, 
resolved  that  their  design  should  be  for  Bristol.  I  hear 
he  hath  not  in  all  above  one  thousand  three  hundred  horse, 
foot  and  dragoons,  and  that  he  hath  left  all  his  ordnance 
carriages  in  Warwick  Castle,  and  carries  on  horseback 
such  munition  as  he  thinks  necessary  for  his  use  ;  whereby, 
I  suppose,  they  conceive  they  have  a  treacherous  party  for 
them  in  Bristol,  or  else  they  would  never  have  resolved  to  go 


124     MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

thither  without  ordnance.  Some  of  the  officers  under 
Fairfax  affirm  that  Cromwell  is  sent  for,  upon  complaint 
of  the  Synod,  to  appear  at  London  within  forty  days,  upon 
pain  of  being  banished  the  kingdom  ;  which  shews  that 
the  Scots  are  advanced,  as  Sir  R.  Willis  writes.  The 
clubmen  in  Hampshire  and  "Wiltshire  grow  numerous, 
and,  I  hear,  very  stout.  They  have  above  five  hundred 
arms  in  Hampshire.  The  rebels  have  given  orders  for 
suppressing  of  them.  I  have  heard  nothing  from  the 
King  since  he  was  at  Wolverhampton.  God  prosper  all 
your  Highness's  noble  designs  with  a  happy  success. 
So  prays,  Sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  Servant, 

Oxford,  26th  June,  1645.  EDWARD   NICHOLAS. 

The  Prince  of  Wales  was  all  this  time  at  Barn- 
staple,  as  much  as  possible  out  of  harm's  way,  the 
plague  raging  at  Bristol  and  Winchester.  It  ap- 
pears that  Rupert  found  time  to  pay  him  a  flying 
visit  there. 

[ADDRESS  ERASED.] 
SIR, 

It  was  not  my  fortune  to  see  you  after  I  }iad  taken 
leave  of  the  Prince.  I  have  therefore  entrusted  this  gen- 
tleman, Arthur  Trevor,  with  my  earnest  desire  to  you,  not 
doubting  your  willingness  to  favour  me  in  a  business  of 
that  nature  and  concern  to  me,  which  will  put  an  eternal 
obligation  upon  your  faithful  and  loving  friend 

Tiverton,  June  31,  1645.  RUPERT.1 


1  For  this  letter  I  am  indebted  to  Lord  John  Fitzroy.  It  ap- 
pears from  the  following  one  that  Goring  endeavoured  to  dissuade 
Prince  Rupert  from  venturing  to  see  the  Prince  of  Wales  : — 

SIR, 

Upon  certain  notice  of  the  enemy's  approach,  with  above  two 
thousand  horse  and  eleven  hundred  foot,  out  of  Lyme,  to  relieve 


1645.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.          125 

Here  follows  a  very  remarkable  letter  from  Lord 
Digby ;  it  is  very  characteristic  at  once  of  his  sub- 
tle and  intriguing,  yet  generous  and  gallant  nature, 
which  was  full  of  contradictions.  He  endeavours 
very  ingeniously  to  win  over  Legge  to  his  side  of 
the  quarrel,  as  regarded  Prince  Rupert,  at  the  same 
time  that  he  bears  handsome  testimony  to  the  false- 
ness of  assertions  against  Prince  Rupert's  conduct  at 
Naseby.  This  absolution  from  an  enemy,  compared 
with  Rupert's  own  expression  to  Will  Legge,  a  few 
pages  back,  is  very  interesting;  there  the  Prince 
says,  "  Doubtless  the  fault  will  be  laid  on  me." 
But  Lord  Digby  speaks  for  himself: — 

MY  DEAR  GOVERNOR, 

I  thank  you  for  your  kindness  of  the  22nd  of  June,  and 
I  joy  much  to  find  that  our  late  misfortune  works  no  more 
dejection  amongst  you,  but  that  it  rather  quickens  you  in 
his  Majesty's  service.  Our  levies  here  in  Wales  go  on 
cheerfully,  as  I  have  acquainted  my  brother  secretary 
more  particularly,  to  whom  I  refer  you :  and  I  make  no 


Taunton,  we  are  forced  to  draw  off,  and  endeavour  to  intercept 
their  joining  by  lying  at  Chard,  so  that  your  Highness's  passage 
to  Barnstaple  will  not  be  safe  by  Bridgewater,  nor  any  other  way 
but  by  sea  or  by  this  army.  If  we  could  have  the  honour  to  see 
your  Highness  here,  we  should  be  all  very  much  rejoiced  at  that 
happiness,  assuring  your  Highness  faithfully  there  is  not  a  crea- 
ture here  that  is  not  of  your  devotion,  and  amongst  them  none 
in  the  world  more  than 

Your  Highness's  most  humble,  faithful,  and  obedient  servant, 

GEORGE  GORING. 
Sunday,  June  29,  1645. 

I  do  passionately  desire  the  honour  to  wait  upon  your  High- 
ness ;  if  it  cannot  be  here,  I  beseech  you  direct  me  where  I  will 
send  my  despatch  of  business  after  this  to  your  Highness. 


126          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

question,  if  God  bless  us  but  with  probable  success  in  the 
West,  we  shall  quickly  see  ourselves  in  as  good  a  condi- 
tion as  ever.  I  cannot  but  understand  it  as  a  respect  to 
me,  that  you  permitted  not  my  servant  Felton  to  be  mo- 
lested before  you  acquainted  me  with  the  occasion  :  but 
now  you  have  done  so,  if  he  have  played  the  fool  in  that 
kind,  let  him  suffer  for  it :  but  I  believe  him  too  discreet 
a  man,  and  he  swears  the  contrary  in  a  letter  to  one  of  my 
secretaries,  where  he  takes  notice  of  such  a  report  raised 
upon  him,  as  he  believes,  in  malice  to  me.  I  am  sure  that 
Prince  Rupert  hath  so  little  kindness  for  me,  as  I  daily 
find  he  hath,  it  imports  both  to  me  and  mine  to  be  much 
the  more  cautious  not  to  speak  anything  that  may  be 
wrested  to  his  prejudice.  I  can  but  lament  my  misfortune 
that  Prince  Rupert  is  neither  gainable  nor  tenable  by  me, 
though  I  have  endured  it  with  all  the  industry  and  just- 
ness unto  him  in  the  world,  and  I  lament  your  absence 
from  him.  Yet,  at  least,  if  Prince  Rupert  cannot  be 
better  inclined  towards  me,  that  yet  you  might  prevail 
with  him  so  far  as  that  his  heats  and  misapprehensions  of 
things  may  not  wound  his  own  honour,  and  prejudice  the 
King's  service.  I  am  very  unhappy  that  I  cannot  speak 
with  you,  since  the  discourse  that  my  heart  is  full  of  is 
too  long  for  a  letter,  and  of  a  nature  not  fit  for  it.  But  I 
conjure  you,  if  you  preserve  that  justice  and  kindness  for 
me  which  I  will  not  doubt,  if  you  hear  anything  from 
Prince  Rupert  concerning  me,  suspend  your  judgment. 
As  for  the  particular  aspersion  upon  him  which  you  men- 
tion, t&fghting  against  advice,  he  is  very  much  wronged  in 
it,  whether  you  mean  in  the  general  or  in  the  particular 
of  that  day.  For  in  the  general,  when  contrary  to  the  ad- 
vice of  so  many  it  was  once  resolved  that  we  should  march 
that  way  we  did,  it  was  then  the  unanimous  opinion  of  all 
that  if  Fairfax  should  follow  us  near,  we  ought  to  turn 
upon  him  and  fight  with  him,  before  he  could  join  with 
the  Scots :  and  for  the  particular  time,  place,  and  circum- 


1045.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        127 

stance  of  our  fighting  that  day,  his  Highness  cannot  be 
said  to  have  gone  against  my  Lord  Astley,  or  any  other 
advice  :  for  I  am  confident  no  man  was  asked  upon  the 
occasion, — I  am  sure  no  council  was  called.  I  shall  only 
say  this  freely  to  you,  that  I  think  a  principal  occasion  of 
our  misfortune  was  the  want  of  you  with  us ;  for  had  you 
been  there,  I  am  persuaded  that  when  once  we  have  come  up 
so  near  them  as  that  they  could  not  go  from  us,  you  would 
at  least  have  asked  some  questions,  whether,  having  store 
of  provisions  with  us,  we  should  not  rather  have  tried  to 
bring  them  to  our  post,  than  to  have  assaulted  them  in- 
stantly in  theirs.  That  if  it  were  resolved  we  must  assail 
them,  you  would  have  asked  the  question  whether  it  had 
not  been  fit  rather  to  have  advanced  to  or  gained  some 
place  where  our  cannon  might  have  been  of  some  use,  than 
to  have  drawn  up  hill  against  them,  so  as  never  to  make 
use  of  one  piece.  And  lastly,  that  before  we  joined  battle, 
whether  it  would  not  have  been  convenient  to  have  viewed 
the  enemy's  strength  and  posture,  rather  than  to  have  left 
it  to  this  hour  in  dispute  whether  the  enemy  had  not  three 
thousand  men  in  reserve  more  than  those  we  fought  with  ; 
which  Sir  William  Vaughan,  who  charged  quite  through 
those  bodies  which  were  in  our  eye,  positively  affirms.  I 
make  no  doubt  but  you  would  also  have  asked  some  mate- 
rial questions  concerning  a  reserve,  and  the  placing  of  the 
King's  person  first  where  it  should  not  have  been  suddenly 
involved  in  the  confusion.  But  really,  dear  Will,  I  do 
not  write  this  with  reflection,  for  indeed  we  were  all 
carried  on  at  that  time  with  such  a  spirit  and  confidence  of 
victory  as  though  he  that  should  have  said  "  consider"  would 
have  been  your  foe ;  and  so  did  your  fate  lead,  as  scarcely 
one  of  us  did  think  of  a  queer  objection,  which,  after 
the  ill  success,  every  child  could  light  on.  Well,  let  us 
look  forward  ;  give  your  Prince  good  advice  as  to  caution, 
and  value  of  counsel,  and  God  will  yet  make  him  an 
instrument  of  much  happiness  to  the  King  and  kingdom, 


128          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JUNE, 

and  that  being,  I  will  adore  him  as  much  as  you  love  him, 
though  he  should  hate  as  much 

Your  faithfullest  friend  and  servant, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 

[No  date.] 

To  this  letter  we  fortunately  find  the  answer ;  it  is 
manly,  high  spirited,  and  true-hearted;  such  as  any 
honourable  man  would  be  proud  to  have  written  by 
a  friend,  and  arguing  such  a  friend  as  none  but  an 
honourable  man  could  have.  "Honest  Will  Legge," 
an  epithet  in  itself  of  the  highest  honour,  thus 
writes  in  reply  to  the  diplomatic  Lord. 

COLONEL  LEGGE  TO  LORD  DIGBY. 

MY  DEAR  LORD, 

I  have  received  your  Lordship's  letter  of  June  30th, 
with  the  duplicate  thereof,  for  which  I  am  bound  to  give 
your  Lordship  most  humble  thanks ;  as  also  for  that 
comfort  you  gave  me  in  His  Majesty's  hopeful  condition, 
whereby,  by  God's  help,  he  may  recover  his  late  losses. 
I  do  assure  your  Lordship  it  was  out  of  great  respect  to 
you  that  your  servant,  Felton,  did  not  feel  a  reward  for 
his  folly.  Your  Lordship  may  hold  him  discreet,  and 
so  did  I  by  many  years'  knowledge  of  him  ;  yet,  my  Lord, 
what  I  accused  him  of  in  my  letter  to  you,  were  no  more 
than  what  he  confessed  himself  to  me  he  reported  ;  which 
was,  that  Prince  Rupert  did  that  day l  fight  contrary  to  the 
opinions  of  my  Lord  Astley ;  and  these  words  were  not 
all  he  spoke  by  the  information  I  had,  but  so  much  of  it 
as  he  confessed  to  me,  and  all  that,  as  I  remember,  I 
accused  him  of  to  you.  With  people  much  distracted  for 
the  great  loss,  these  words  went  far  to  the  Prince's  preju- 

1  At  Naseby. 


1645.]     PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        129 

dice  ;  and  though  he  writes  to  your  Secretary  that  this 
report  was  raised  on  him  out  of  malice  to  you,  he  assures 
your  Lordship  it  will  not  be  beaten  out  of  the  heads  of 
many  that  his  report  was  out  of  malice  to  the  Prince.  I 
am  extremely  afflicted  to  understand  from  you  that  Prince 
Rupert  and  yourself  should  be  upon  so  unkindly  terms, 
and  I  protest  I  have  cordially  endeavoured,  with  •  all  my 
interest  in  his  Highness,  to  incline  him  to  a  friendship 
with  your  Lordship  conceiving  it  a  matter  of  advantage  to 
my  master's  service,  to  have  good  intelligence  between 
persons  so  eminently  employed  in  his  affairs ;  as  likewise 
the  great  obligation  and  inclination  I  had  to  some  either 
of  you  in  particular.  But,  my  Lord,  I  often  found  this  a 
hard  matter  to  hold  between  you  ;  and  truly,  my  Lord, 
your  last  letter  to  me  gives  me  some  cause  to  think 
your  Lordship  not  altogether  free  from  what  he  often 
accused  you  of  as  the  reason  of  his  jealousies;  which 
was,  that  you  did  both  say  and  do  things  to  his  pre- 
judice contrary  to  your  professions,  not  in  an  open  and 
direct  line,  but  obscurely  and  obliquely;  and  this  way, 
under  your  Lordship's  pardon,  I  find  your  letter,  in  my 
understanding,  very  full  of.  For,  where  your  Lordship 
would  excuse  him  of  the  particular  and  general  aspersions, 
yet  you  come  with  such  objections  against  the  conduct  of 
that  business,  as  would,  to  men  ignorant  of  the  Prince, 
make  him  incapable  of  common  sense  in  his  profession. 
For  my  part,  my  Lord,  I  am  so  well  acquainted  with  the 
Prince's  way,  that  I  am  confident  all  his  General  Officers 
and  Commanders  knew  beforehand  how  or  in  what  manner 
he  intended  to  fight ;  and  when,  as  you  say,  all  mankind 
were  of  opinion  to  fight,  his  part  was  to  put  it  in  execu- 
tion. Were  any  man  in  the  army  dissatisfied  in  his  direc- 
tions, or  in  the  order,  he  ought  to  have  informed  the 
General  of  it,  and  to  have  received  further  satisfaction. 
And,  for  the  not  calling  of  a  Council  at  the  instant,  truly, 
the  Prince  having  before  laid  his  business,  were  there  need 
VOL.  III.  K 


130          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JUNE, 

of  it,  the  blame  must  be  as  much  yours  as  any  man's, 
either  in  not  considering  how  fit  it  were  to  be  called,  or 
having  conceived  it  fit,  at  least  in  not  moving  of  it.  I 
cannot  but  conceive  it  the  partiality  of  your  Lordship's 
wonted  favours  towards  me,  that  you  impute  the  misfor- 
tune of  the  day  to  my  absence.  But  I  cannot  have  the 
vanity  to  pretend  I  should  have  done  wiser  than,  as  you 
confess,  the  wisest  among  you  had  thought  of.  And,  I 
am  very  well  assured,  by  my  own  experience  at  other 
times,  and  the  report  of  divers  in  that  action,  divers  of  the 
questions  you  put  would  have  been  impertinent ;  as  the 
questioning  whether  we  should  not  endeavour  their  coming 
to  our  post,  much  more  would  be  alleged  against  it  than 
for  it.  And  the  resolution  being  taken,  to  endeavour  the 
gaining  a  ground  of  advantage,  to  make  use  of  our  cannon  : 
by  the  report  of  divers  officers  that  served  that  day,  both 
sides  laboured  so  earnestly  for  that  ground,  as  rendered  the 
cannon  of  either  side  useless;  by  which  the  rebels  had 
the  same  disadvantage  ours  had.  And,  for  viewing  the 
enemy,  to  be  satisfied  in  their  numbers  and  posture,  I  will 
not  say  but,  could  it  be  done,  it  would  have  been  very  fit 
before  both  armies  were  engaged  face  to  face.  I  am  sure 
it  might  have  been  too  late  then  to  have  stood  upon  the 
ceremony.  For  the  reserve,  I  am  told,  and  do  believe 
there  was  a  reserve,  though  I  cannot  warrant  their  per- 
formance of  their  duties  ;  having  divers  times  known  a 
failure  of  that  kind  when  the  General  was  not  in  fault. 
And,  for  placing  the  King's  person  ;  truly,  I  conceive,  if 
that  were  not  enough  considered,  the  fault  must  be  more 
in  his  Council,  and  the  attendants  of  his  person,  than  in 
one  who  had  the  care  and  management  of  an  army  in  his 
head  upon  a  day  of  battle.  But  your  Lordship  says,  you 
write  none  of  these  things  with  reflection ;  yet,  let  me 
frankly  tell  your  Lordship,  no  impartial  man  that  reads 
your  letters  to  me  and  others,  will  free  you  from  that,  nay, 
charge  you  with  it  in  a  very  great  measure  :  and  this 


1645.]    PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        131 

truth  you  must  pardon  me  in  declaring  to  you.  And 
assure  yourself  you  are  not  free  from  great  blame  towards 
Prince  Rupert ;  and  no  man  will  give  you  this  free 
language  at  a  cheaper  rate  than  myself,  though  many 
discourse  of  it. 

From  Colonel  Legge,  in  answer  to  Lord  Digby's, 
from  Hereford,  June  30,  1645. 

The  two  next  letters  from  the  King  are  illustra- 
tive of  what  has  been  already  stated: — 

NEPHEW, 

I  shall  not  cross  your  orders  by  any  directions  of 
mine  ;  yet  I  would  have  you  consider,  if  both  your  Bro- 
ther and  Washington  be  drawn  out  of  Worcester,  if  that 
place  will  be  safe  : .  for  I  hear  that  Sam.  Sandys  is  at  pre- 
sent highly  discontent,  having  not  yet  worn  his  sword 
since  his  restraint :  and  I  have,  divers  ways,  intelligence, 
that  the  Northern  rebels  are  likely  shortly  to  besiege  that 
town.  I  likewise  desire  your  opinion,  how  soon  I  shall 
pass  the  water  [from  Cardiff  to  Bristol,  or  into  Devon- 
shire], because  all  the  forces,  which  are  already  levied,  I 
believe  will  be  transported  within  the  five  or  six  days, 
and  it  will  be  these  ten  days,  at  'soonest,  before  the  rest 
can  be  at  the  water-side.  Now,  I  would  be  loath  to  stay 
for  these  last,  because,  before  then,  it  is  likely  that  there 
will  be  some  action  of  moment :  and  yet  I  know  not 
whom  to  leave  beyond  me,  to  bring  up  the  last  re- 
cruits :  and  if  I  leave  none,  I  shall  certainly  have  a  very 
ill  account  of  them.  So,  desiring  your  answer  as  soon  as 
you  can,  I  rest, 

Your  loving  Uncle  and  most  faithful  friend, 

CHARLES  R. 

[Not  dated  ;  must  be  "Cardiff."] 
Saturday,  July  1,  1645. 

NEPHEW, 

I  received  your  despatch  and  advice,  by  Culpepper, 
all  which  I  so  fully  approve,  that  I  have  sent  all  your 

K  2 


132   MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF        ^ 

orders,  according  to  their  several  directions,  and  will  take 
care  that  they  be  obeyed.  Desiring  to  hear  speedily  from 
you,  that  our  men  may  not  be  delayed  in  their  transporta- 
tion ;  for  I  much  fear  that  the  rebel  ships  may  much 
hinder  us,  if  we  be  not  diligent.  I  have  fair  promises  for 
the  new  levies,  which  I  will  hasten  as  much  as  may  be. 
So  I  rest,  your  loving  Uncle,  and  most  faithful  friend, 

CHARLES  R. 

Abergavenny,  3rd  July,  1645. 

Upon  my  word,  I  find  Culpepper  extremely  well  satis- 
fied with  you ;  and  for  your  proportion,  his  expression  is, 
that  he  concurs  with  it  as  fully  as  if  it  were  his  own,  but 
that  you  must  have  the  honour  of  it ;  there  being  no  other 
way  but  this  to  recover  our  misfortunes. 

Subjoined  there  is  an  extract  from  M.  de  Sabran, 
then  French  minister,  or  rather  spy  upon  both 
the  King  and  the  Parliament.1  Prince  Maurice  is 


1  M.  de  Sabran  a  M.  de  Brienne : — "  L'on  renvoye  fort  1'eschec 
dernier  que  le  Roy  a  re£u  sur  Goring  [at  Lamport]  lequel  on  dit 
avoir  opiniatre  le  siege  de  Taunton,  malgre  le  command ement 
ritere  que  sa  Majeste  lui  avait  fait,  de  s'approcher  de  lui."  Then 
follows  the  narration  of  the  divisions  in  Parliament,  and  of  sus- 
picions arising  from  the  discovery  of  a  letter  written  from  Ox- 
ford to  the  Earl  of  Sussex,  warning  him  against  communicating 
certain  intelligence  to  Mr.  Holies,  a  member  of  the  House  of  Com- 
mons, as  he  was  in  correspondence  with  Digby ;  upon  which  Holies 
had  informed  on  Sussex,  was  himself  committed  to  the  Tower,  and 
called  to  account  for  what  he  had  done  in  the  service  of  Par- 
liament, though  without  its  sanction,  promising  to  Goring  ten 
thousand  pieces  if  he  would  surrender  himself,  and  everything 
under  his  command,  to  the  Parliament. 

Sabran  states  that  the  King  caused  the  guard  who  had  charge 
of  his  cabinet,  taken  at  Naseby,  to  be  hung,  July  6th,  1645. 
MSS.  British  Museum,  5461.  He  expresses  great  satisfaction 
that  nothing  appeared  in  this  correspondence,  by  which  the  neu- 
trality that  France  professed  was  compromised  in  the  eyes  of  the 
English  Parliament,  who  deputed  to  him  their  compliments  for 


1645.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         133 

now  at  Worcester,  when  he  writes  thus  on  the  7th 
of  July : — 

TO  PRINCE  RUPERT. 
DEAR  BROTHER, 

I  have  appointed  Sir  William  Vaughan,  with  yours, 
mine,  and  his  own  regiments,  with  Colonel  Maxwell's 
troop  of  horse,  to  attend  your  commands  at  Bristol,  and 
would  have  been  there  myself,  according  to  your  second 
orders  that  I  received  this  day ;  but  the  Scots  being 
advanced  very  near  us,  with  an  intention,  as  is  conceived, 
to  besiege  this  place,  I  could  not  remove  from  hence 
without  putting  this  town  into  a  great  distraction  ;  be- 
sides the  dishonour  that  would  thereby  reflect  on  me.  I 
hope,  when  you  have  duly  considered  my  engagement 
herein,  you  will  be  pleased  to  excuse  me,  in  not  observing 
your  orders  to  be  personally  with  you.  Even  now,  fresh 
intelligence  is  brought  me,  that  the  enemy  is  within  four 
miles  of  us.  By  your  cipher,  you  may  observe,  that  15, 
26,  342,  148,  136,  13,  325,  162,  84,  212,  26,  334,  61, 
340,  199,  39,  328,  353,  149,  49,  329,  26,  351,  397,  150, 
100,  148,  212,  66,  336,  156,  217,  28,  229,  355,  82,  16, 
15,  194,  229,  214,  84,  324,  131,  293,  252,  355,  150,  293, 
148,  231,  22,  194,  228,  293,  323,  151,  351.  Garrison,  6, 
15,  148,  64,  229,  354,  37,  323,  217,  41,  398,  373,  150, 
172,  170,  48,  227,  214,  293,  148,  66,  84,  270,  361.  Ac- 
cordingly,  151,  244,  229,  149,  213,  324,  239,  274,  185, 
12,  15.  I  am,  your  loving  Brother, 

MAURICE. 

Worcester,  7th  July,  1645. 

For  his  Majesty's  special  service. 

To  my  dear  brother  Prince  Rupert, 

Prince  Palatine,  &c. 
Haste,  haste,  post  haste  ! 


the  candour  of  Versailles  in  relation  to  the  affairs  of  England. 
The  most  important  negotiations  with  foreign  States  were  those 
between  the  King  and  the  Envoy  of  Portugal. — Addit.  MS. 
British  Museum. 


134        MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JULY, 

Sir  Edward  Hyde  writes  next,  as  usual  as  if  he 
were  writing  history  ;  Goring  is  vapouring  near  Lam- 
port, in  a  strong  position,  but  almost  always  drunk, 
as  was  his  fashion ;  especially  when  the  enemy  was 
near : — 

FROM    SIR    EDWARD    HYDE    TO    PRINCE    RUPERT. 
MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

I  received  your  Highness's  of  the  4th,  this  morning, 
and  shall  with  great  devotion  pray  for  your  safe  and  speedy 
march  to  these  parts,  where  I  hope  General  Goring  will 
he  ahle  to  expect  your  coming.  We  heard  this  day  from 
Bridgewater,  for  from  himself  we  have  nothing,  that  he  is 
like  to  defend  his  quarters  well  against  any  attempt  of  the 
enemy ;  and  we  are  making  all  possible  provision  of  vic- 
tual to  send  to  him.  The  thousand  muskets  which  Marsh 
hath  sent,  are  the  Bristol  muskets,  so  that,  except  you 
have  otherwise  disposed  of  them,  he  hath  still  two  thou- 
sand which  were  sent  him  hence  of  those  which  Hadscombe 
brought  over,  and  are  no  worse  that  those  your  Highness 
had  when  you  were  here.  I  hope  my  Lord  Hawley  hath 
satisfied  you  of  the  hundred  barrels  of  powder,  for  which 
we  have  his  receipt :  I  presume  he  sent  it  to  ....  The 
garrison  of  Bridgewater  will  be  able  to  assist  you  with  a 
reasonable  proportion,  for  I  am  confident  there  are  not  so 
few  as  an  hundred  barrels  there.  We  expect  every  day 
to  hear  that  some  good  quantities  are  landed,  though  the 
last  despatch  we  made  from  France  hath  miscarried,  the 

ship  being  taken  and  carried  into For  God's 

sake,  sir,  prevent  any  accidents  that  may  make  us  less 
at  unity  amongst  ourselves,  and  then  I  am  confident  the 
enemy  will  not  prevail.  You  will  receive  no  less  honour 
by  well  tempering  those  affections,  than  by  your  conduct 
in  the  war. 

The  Prince  intends  on  Friday  to  go  for  Cornwall :    as 


1645.]      PRINCE    RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      135 

soon  as  I  hear  your  Highness  is  in  these  parts,  you  shall 
be  frequently  and  particularly  informed  by 

Your  Highness's  most  dutiful  and  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HYDE. 

Barnstaple,  8th  July,  12  at  noon. 

The  King,  once  more  enjoying  the  comfort  and 
magnificence  of  Ragland  Castle,  is  sanguine  about 
his  new  army ;  nor  is  it  very  clear  why  Fairfax  has 
left  his  Majesty  at  leisure  so  long  to  raise  it.  Lord 
Digby  thus  writes  to  Lord  Jermyn  :  his  letter  gives 
us  some  insight  into  various  matters. 

FROM  LORD  DIGBY  TO  LORD  JERMYN. 

We  shall  have  an  army  fit  to  fight  for  a  kingdom, 
and  the  King  promises  that  his  nephew  shall  content  him- 
self with  the  honour  of  action,  and  take  all  military  reso- 
lutions from  counsel  and  debate,  which,  could  it  have 
been  sooner  obtained,  we  should  not  have  been  now  put 
to  such  an  unhappy  after-game.  You  have  often  con- 
jured me  to  endeavour  a  good  correspondence  with  Prince 
Rupert,  which  I  have  industriously  obeyed,  and  I  thought 
myself  very  well  with  him,  until  of  late,  without  ever 
taking  notice  to  me  that  he  was  dissatisfied  at  anything, 
he  is  fallen  to  a  greater  distance  with  me,  and  a  more  pro- 
fessed enmity  against  me  than  ever.  The  cause,  as  I  am 
told  by  others,  is  my  advice  to  the  King  to  have  gone 
to  Oxford  from  Daintry,  instead  of  going  back  to  Har- 
borough,  and  my  advising  the  King  to  write  a  letter  to 
the  Prince  of  Wales,  contrary  to  Prince  Rupert's  opinion, 
though  urged  unto  it  by  my  own  reason  and  the  unani- 
mous pressure  of  all  the  Prince's  council,  even  to  a  degree 
of  quitting  all  without  it,  although  in  both  cases  I  went, 
not  underhand,  but  declared  unto  Prince  Rupert  what  I 
thought  myself  bound  to  do,  and  as  I  understood  it  to  his 


136          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

satisfaction.  I  shall  instruct  this  bearer  at  large  with  the 
particulars,  being  a  discreet  youth  fit  to  be  encouraged  by 
you,  and  I  think  much  of  Prince  Rupert's  servant.  Really, 
my  lord,  if  I  have  either  temper  or  truth,  I  have  not 
failed  in  any  point  of  application  to  that  Prince,  as  far  as 
the  King's  service  could  possibly  allow  me  ;  now  that  we 
are  going  into  the  West,  where  there  will  be  more  of  the 
King's  council,  and  of  more  valuable  judgment  than  my- 
self, I  believe  I  shall  be  able  to  hold  the  duty  of  my 
place  in  the  King's  service,  without  making  it  suffer  by 
his  animosities  against  me,  but  should  his  Majesty  have 
continued  with  Prince  Rupert,  and  I  only  attending  him 
as  a  Minister  of  State,  I,  who  have  long  since  resolved  to 
serve  him  no  longer  than  I  may  be  useful  to  him,  I  should 
have  thought  it  my  duty  to  have  betaken  myself  to  other 
course  than  where  I  was,  inconsistent  with  one  so  much 
more  necessary  to  the  conduct  of  his  affairs,  and  in  the 
way  wherein  we  are  now  going,  trust  me  that  nothing 
shall  provoke  me  to  disserve  Prince  Rupert,  whilst  he  is 
judged  capable  to  serve  the  King. 

[My  Lord  Digby  was  resolved  that  reservation  should 
not  long  continue.  The  letter  breaks  off  abruptly  at  the 
last  sentence.] 

Ragland  Castle,  10th  July,  1645. 

On  the  llth  of  July  Sir  Edward  Nicholas  writes 
an  almost  undecipherable  letter  to  Prince  Rupert, 
stating  that  the  Scots  approach  Worcester  in  num- 
ber about  five  or  six  thousand  fighting  men,  together 
with  two  thousand  Englishmen  under  Gell  and 
Brereton,  with  twenty  guns.  I  have  merely  men- 
tioned that  Goring  was  beaten  at  Lamport ;  here  is 
his  own  account  of  the  matter :  it  is  only  from  the 
laboured  length  and  somewhat  humbled  tone  of  the 


1645.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     137 

document,  that  we  may  gather  he  was  somewhat 
ashamed  of  the  transaction  : — 


MY  LORD, 

Since  your  letter,  which  I  sent  on  "Wednesday,  at 
night,  to  the  Governor  of  Bridgewater,  to  acquaint  your 
Lordship  with  the  disorder  that  happened  in  our  horse- 
quarters,  we  could  not  disengage  ourselves  from  the 
rehels  without  the  certain  loss  of  our  cannon  and  hazard 
of  the  army,  if  we  had  retreated  that  night ;  the  enemy 
having  heen  close  about  us  on  every  side  ;  our  horse  having 
been  very  much  shattered,  with  the  disorder  that  day; 
the  way  being  passable  for  our  cannon  that  side,  and  there 
having  been  not  one  day's  provision  in  Lamport.  We 
passed,  therefore,  our  horse  over  the  river  next  day,  en- 
deavouring to  make  our  retreat  to  Burrowe ;  but  the 
enemy  drew  up  too  fast  against  us,  that  we  were  forced 
to  face  them,  and  endeavour  to  keep  a  pass,  through 
which  they  were  to  come  towards  us.  This  gentleman 
will  tell  your  Lordship  the  particulars.  Upon  the  whole 
matter,  they  forced  the  pass,  and  routed  our  horse,  which 
only  made  one  seasonable  charge,  till  our  foot  got  into 
Lamport,  which  way  my  Lord  Wentworth  retired,  with 
some  of  our  horse ;  and  he  and  Sir  Joseph  Wagstaff 
brought  off  all  our  foot  to  Bridgewater,  without  the  loss 
of  two  hundred.  There  was  only  two  pieces  of  cannon 
lost.  The  rest  of  our  horse  ran  another  way  towards 
Bridgewater,  and  could  never  be  brought  to  rally,  but 
in  small  and  disorderly  bodies.  Our  loss  was  not  great, 
for  we  are  told  by  one  of  the  enemy,  there  were  not  three 
hundred  prisoners,  and,  I  am  very  confident,  we  had  not 
twenty  men  killed.  But  the  consequence  of  this  blow  is 
very  much ;  for  there  is  so  great  a  terror  and  dejection 
amongst  our  men,  that  I  am  confident,  at  this  point,  they 


138          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

could  not  be  brought  to  fight  against  half  their  number. 
It  is  very  much  to  be  feared,    that  the  clubmen  will  take 
the  strongest  side.      They  stopped  provisions  from  our 
army,  and  killed  some  of  our  men.     Fairfax  is  most  cer- 
tainly eighteen   thousand   horse   and   foot.      One    of  his 
captains,  that  is  prisoner,  saith,  he  will  certainly  follow  us 
with  his  whole  body  ;  pretending  that  Gell  and  Brereton 
are  able  to  follow  the  King.     We  have  between  three  and 
four  thousand   foot,  besides    Prince  Rupert's   regiment, 
which  is  left  in  Bridgewater,  and  almost  two  hundred  in 
Burrowe  ;  some  two  thousand  five  hundred  horse,  besides 
some  that  took  their  course  towards  Bristol,  and  besides 
Sir  Lewis  Dives's  horse,  which  were  to  attend  the  enemy 
upon  their  rear  ;    most  of  the  Western  horse  are  gone 
home  of  their  own  accord.     And  now  I  have  done  my 
duty,  in  representing  to  his  Majesty,  the  true  state  of  our 
condition  here,  I  shall  first  beseech  your  Lordship,  to 
be  assured,  that  whatsoever  his  Majesty  shall  please  to 
command  us  to  undertake,   I  will  attempt  it,  what  diffi- 
culties soever  are  in  our  way.     My  humble  opinion  is, 
that  the  forces  before   Plymouth,   the   trained  bands   of 
Cornwall,  the  forces  that  were  at  Autry,  all  that  can  be 
out  of  Devonshire,  be  drawn  speedily  into  a  body,  with 
these  I  have  to  secure  Devonshire  and   Cornwall ;    and 
the  greatest  magazines  of  victuals  that  can  be  raised  with 
all  possible  speed.      If  this  can  be  done  before  Fairfax 
marches  to  us  with  his  army,  I  hope  we  shall  be  able  to 
oppose  him  :  if  not,   or,  at  least,  if  the  Cornish  trained 
bands  will  not  join  with  us,  for   the    defence    of  their 
country ;  and  have  no  way  left  to  preserve  these  men, 
but  to  put  them  into  garrisons  ;  to  which  effect  I  have 
written  to  the  Prince :  and  shall  dispose  of  these  troopers 
according  to  his  Highness's  order.       But   I  hope  these 
counties  are  so  loyal  and  honest,  that  they  will  unite  all 
their  force  and  power,   to   oppose  these  villains.     I  shall 
beg  your  Lordship's  pardon,  if  I  make  one  humble  suit 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE  CAVALIERS.        139 

to  the  King,  by  your  Lordship.  That  if  the  King  finds 
he  cannot  get  a  body  together,  I  may  know  it  speedily  : 
for  I  have  a  way  propounded  of  getting  an  army  very 
quickly,  which  appears  very  probable.  My  dear  Lord, 
let  me  hear  from  you  as  soon  as  you  can,  and  be  assured 
I  am  perfectly 

Your  most  humble,  faithful  servant, 

GEORGE  GORING. 
Dunster,  July  12,  1645,  1  at  morning,  Saturday. 

The  following  letter  shews  vividly  the  anxious 
state  of  the  King's  Council  at  Ragland.  It  also 
alludes  to  Lord  Glamorgan's  celebrated  mission  into 
Ireland,  and  to  the  fruits  of  it.  When  it  had  ap- 
peared that  this  nobleman's  zealous  efforts  to  serve 
the  King  were  neutralized  by  his  being  a  Roman 
Catholic,  Charles  diplomatically  determined  to  send 
him  to  Ireland,  certain  that  his  faith  would  be  a 
recommendation  there  instead  of  the  reverse  :  more- 
over, his  natural  sense  of  injury  on  finding  bimself 
untrusted  in  his  own  Principality,  was  atoned  for  by 
this  commission  into  Ireland.1  How  far  that  com- 


1  The  following  letter  from  Lord  Glamorgan  to  his  father,  the 
Marquis  of  Worcester,  is  interesting  as  illustrating  the  reverential 
style  of  sons  in  addressing  their  fathers  at  this  period ;  it  also 
throws  some  light  on  the  private  character  of  its  remarkable 
writer  : — 

MAY    IT   PLEASE   YOUR   LORDSHIP, 

Amongst  other  memorable  expressions  which  have  taken 
deep  root  in  my  heart,  I  assure  your  Lordship,  that  those  you 
were  pleased  to  use  towards  me  on  Sunday  last  shall  never  be 
defaced  out  of  my  memory ;  for  you  were  pleased  so  to  interlace 
terror  and  comfort,  as  that  I  knew  not  whether  joy  or  fear  pos- 
sessed me  most,  or  whether  you  shewed  more  justice  or  clemency ; 
but  at  last  a  tender  fatherly  affection  appeared  to  steer  your 


140         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

mission  really  extended  I  have  no  means  of  ascer- 
taining. Among  the  papers  which  the  Duke  of 
Beaufort  has  kindly  entrusted  to  my  examination  I 
can  find  no  trace  of  any  further  power  than  that 
of  levying  troops  for  the  King's  service.  It  ap- 
pears, from  the  following  letter,  that  Lord  Glamor- 
gan was  as  successful  in  the  raising  of  armies  in 
Ireland  as  in  his  own  country.  For  the  rest,  I 
must  refer  to  his  Lordship's  curious  and  important 
written  speech  in  the  Appendix.  I  regret  very 
much  that  its  length  does  not  allow  me  to  introduce 
it  here.1  Even  the  following  letter  is  almost  too 


words  and  deeds,  which  shall  be,  God  willing,  answered  with  a 
filial  duty  and  tenderness,  and  your  unparalleled  goodness  shall 
not,  with  God  Almighty's  grace,  undo,  but  strengthen  me  in  my 
duty  to  God  and  your  Lordship,  with  as  much  zeal  and  true- 
hearted  devotion  as  can  be  witnessed,  with  the  uttermost  endea- 
vours of  thought,  word,  and  deed  lying  in  the  power  and  uttermost 
abilities  which  I  can  at  any  time  attain  unto,  whose  ambition  is 
not  greater  to  anything  in  this  world  than  really  and  entirely  to 
appear,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordship's  most  dutifully  obedient  son, 

and  most  devoted  servant, 
August  13, 1645.  ED.  HERBERT. 

1  The  following  document  proves  the  pecuniary  difficulties  that 
the  King  found  himself  placed  in  at  the  very  commencement  of 
the  war;  it  also  shews  something  of  his  Majesty's  diplomatic 
dealings  : — 

MEM. — The  effect  of  the  message  your  Majesty  desireth  I  should 
deliver  to  my  father  from  your  Majesty  at  Nottingham,  the 
9th  of  September,  1642.  [Lord  Glamorgan  seems  to  have 
written  this  down  when  it  was  delivered,  and  shewn  it  to 
the  King.] 

That  your  Majesty,  with  many  thanks,  expressed  yourself  most 
"  sensible  of  the  great  expense  and  charge  his  lordship  had  been 
at  for  your  service,  far  more  than  any  man  else,  considering  what 


1G45.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      141 

lengthy,  but  it  is  too  important  to  this  crisis  to  be 
passed  over : — 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

I  have  received  this  day  the  enclosed  account  from 
General  Goring  of  his  last  ill  success  and  present  condi- 
tion ;  as  also  a  letter  from  your  Highness,  containing  your 
resolutions  as  to  Bristol.  His  Majesty  hath  had  a  debate 


I  [i.  e.  his  Majesty]  have  had,  as  well  as  Sir  John  Byron.  That 
it  is  most  true  all  this  time  much  lieth  at  stake,  both  of  your 
Majesty's  honour  and  power,  for  want  of  a  little  money,  since 
20,000£.  with  what  you  have  would  further  your  Majesty's  de- 
signs to  a  most  hopeful  condition  ;  for  want  whereof  your  Majesty 
is  enforced  to  dally,  though  you  will  never  yield,  and  at  this  present 
you  offer  that  which  is  worth  100,OOOZ.  for  50,000?.,  besides  my 
Lord  Capel,  Sir  William  Saville,  and  others  of  good  estates  do  also 
offer  theirs  for  security ;  yet  no  want  nor  occasion  can  make  your 
Majesty  to  press  my  lord,  who  hath  already  done  so  much,  but  if 
he  and  his  friends  could  procure  10,000£,  your  Majesty  would 
suddenly,  if  it  please  God  to  restore  you,  see  it  repaid,  and  would 
presently,  in  token  of  thankfulness,  send  my  father  the  Garter,  to 
be  put  on  when  he  pleased,  and  also,  having  the  Great  Seal  in 
your  Majesty's  own  custody,  you  would  pass  a  patent  of  Marquis 
of  what  title  my  father  should  desire,  and  keep  it  private  as  long 
as  he  thought  fitting  [as  was  afterwards  done  concerning  the 
Dukedom]  ;  and  to  shew  that  this  proposition  is  far  from  urging 
him  to  his  inconvenience,  and  so  much  doth  your  Majesty  ac- 
knowledge yourself  already  beholding  to  him,  as  that,  even  without 
procuring  your  Majesty  this  unspeakable  advantage,  your  Majesty 
is  graciously  pleased  that  if  he  desire  either  or  both  these,  your 
Majesty  at  my  return  unto  you  will  vouchsafe  them ;  but  if  this 
could  be  possibly  performed,  then  the  Crown,  which  hitherto  your 
Majesty  confesseth  to  stay  upon  your  head  by  his  assistance,  will  be 
then  confirmed  by  him ;  and  your  Majesty  esteemeth  so  much  of 
his  understanding  as  well  as  passionate  zeal  to  your  service,  that 
if  he  will  send  your  Majesty  his  advice,  upon  the  relation  of  the 
state  of  businesses  which  your  Majesty  hath  commanded  me  to 
make  unto  him,  your  Majesty  will  as  soon  follow  it  as  any 
man's,  &c.* 

*  For  this  curious  paper  I  am  indebted  to  his  Grace  the  Duke 
of  Beaufort. 


142          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JULY, 

here  in  council  upon  the  whole  matter  of  his  affairs ;  and 
commands  me  to  state  unto  your  Highness  his  opinion  in 
all  particulars  resulting  from  it ;  which,  if  it  concur  with 
your  Highness's  judgment,  you  will  be  pleased  to  apply 
yourself  and  your  orders  where  you  shall  judge  them 
necessary  accordingly ;  but  if  your  Highness  shall  differ 
in  opinion,  your  Highness  is  earnestly  desired  by  his  Ma- 
jesty to  hasten  over  hither  to  him,  that  his  Majesty  may 
take  a  clearer  and  fuller  review  of  his  business  by  your 
Highness's  presence  and  assistance,  and  that  resolution 
upon  the  whole  may  be  settled  with  your  approbation. 
There  are  three  things  of  principal  consideration  in  our 
business  : — One,  what  to  be  done  in  the  West  in  order  to 
the  resisting  Fairfax  ;  another,  what  to  be  done  in  Wales 
in  order  to  the  preserving  of  it,  and  to  the  forming  of 
a  new  force  here  ;  and  how  the  King  should  dispose  of  his 
own  person.  For  the  first,  it  is  the  unanimous,  and  as  his 
Majesty  conceives,  indisputable  opinion,  that,  as  the  case 
stands  in  the  West,  there  is  nothing  else  to  be  done  but 
what  General  Goring  proposes  :  that  is,  to  draw  all  the 
forces  that  persuasion  and  the  Prince  of  Wales's  authority 
can  prevail  with,  out  of  Devonshire,  Cornwall,  and  from 
before  Plymouth,  and  to  join  with  Goring,  wherewith  he 
may  be  able  to  give  them  battle,  or  at  least  to  defend  the 
passes  into  the  heart  of  Devonshire,  so  as  that  the  rebel 
army  may  be  wearied  out  and  distressed  for  provisions, 
whilst  we  make  the  greatest  magazines  we  can  in  Exeter 
and  Barnstaple  ;  the  latter  of  which  places  we  shall  take 
care  to  supply  in  the  best  measure  we  can  from  this  side 
the  water :  and  to  this  effect  pressing  letters  are  sending 
unto  the  Prince  of  Wales's  Council.  In  case  we  cannot 
draw  a  considerable  body  together  to  effect  either  of  these, 
there  remains  then  nothing  to  be  done,  but  as  General 
Goring  says,  to  draw  into  garrison ;  but  it  is  hoped  we 
shall  not  be  reduced  to  that.  To  the  second,  concerning 
Wales,  it  is  thought  absolutely  necessary  that  it  be  not 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         143 

abandoned,  but  that  the  horse,  with  General  Gerrard,  ac- 
cording to  your  Highness's  directions,  be  drawn  back  and 
disposed  of  to  the  best  advantage  for  the  defence  of  it,  to 
which  purpose  his  Majesty  hath  sent  him  orders  to  stop  his 
march  round  to  the  West,  and  to  command  his  attendance 
on  his  Majesty  to  advise  of  the  rest.  It  is  conceived  that 
if  Wales  be  well  managed,  and  let  see  that  we  intend  the 
defence  of  it,  far  greater  levies  may  yet  be  made  here ; 
especially  if  it  be  found  fit  for  the  King  to  stay  in  these 
countries,  and  that  the  news  be  true  which  was  yesterday 
brought  us  very  positively  by  a  Major  from  Carnarvon, 
that  my  Lord  of  Glamorgan  is  landed  in  Anglesea  with  a 
very  great  body  of  Irish  ;  and  he  that  brought  the  news 
swears  that  he  met  with  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale  himself 
going  with  his  horse  to  join  with  them.  To  the  third 
point,  which  concerns  the  King's  own  person,  it  is  con- 
ceived that  General  Goring  being  now  so  far  retreated  into 
Devonshire,  and  the  enemy  following,  it  is  not  possible  for 
any  more  forces  from  hence,  or  for  any  of  those  on  the 
other  side  not  yet  joined,  to  pass  to  him  ;  and  that  for  the 
King's  person  it  cannot  be  conveyed  thither  without  infi- 
nite danger  ;  and  that  were  that  practicable,  it  would  be 
very  imprudent  to  engage  both  his  and  his  son's  person  in 
the  same  corner  upon  such  uncertainties  before  so  power- 
ful an  enemy,  whereas  probably,  his  person  cannot  con- 
tribute much  more  to  the  strengthening  of  General  Go- 
ring out  of  Devonshire  and  Cornwall  than  the  Prince  of 
Wales's  will  do  without  him,  so  that  it  is  unanimously 
understood  here  to  be  the  safest  and  most  effectual  course 
for  his  Majesty  to  cherish  these  parts  with  his  presence — 
to  endeavour  new  levies  here  and  out  of  them,  and  what 
may  be  hoped  from  Ireland,  to  form  a  new  army,  where  in 
the  interim  it  is  hoped  that  what  with  these  new  levies  of 
the  15th,  with  Charles  Gerrard's  remaining  foot  and  with 
his  horse  recalled,  it  will  be  safe  enough  for  him,  yea 
though  the  Scots  should  come  into  Wales  ;  for  we  should 


144          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

be  able  to  starve  a  great  army  and  beat  a  little  one,  espe- 
cially if  your  Highness  should  think  fit  to  send  back 
hither  those  men  that  went  over  with  Sir  Bernard  Astley, 
which  is  only  proposed  unto  your  Highness,  to  do  therein 
as  you  shall  think  fit.  As  for  your  Highness's  resolution 
concerning  Bristol,  his  Majesty  is  extremely  well  pleased 
with  your  Highness's  great  care  of  that  important  place. 
I  have  only  one  thing  more  to  add,  which  is,  earnestly  to 
desire  your  Highness  to  cause  what  muskets  can  be  had 
to  be  sent  over  for  the  army  of  our  new  levies  on  the  15th ; 
and  to  repeat  unto  your  Highness  that  in  case  you  shall 
not  approve  of  these  opinions,  his  Majesty  expects  you 
suddenly  here,  to  advise  him  as  to  new  resolutions.  I  rest 
Your  Highness's  most  humble  faithful  servant, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 

Ragland  Castle,  July  13,  1645. 

At  this  period  I  find  a  letter  of  some  importance, 
but  it  is  provokingly  unintelligible  from  its  ciphers. 
The  endorsement,  which  I  transcribe,  is  the  only 
legible  part  of  it.  It  will  be  observed,  that  Rupert 
has  complained  of  want  of  provisions  for  Bristol, 
and  that  the  King  had  thoughts  of  seeking  in  Ire- 
land the  security  which  his  own  land  denied  him ; 
"  hunted  "  as  he  was,  and  as  he  expressed  himself, 
with  David,  "  like  a  partridge  on  the  mountain." 

The  following  is  the  endorsement  that  I  have 
alluded  to,  with  the  date  of  "  Ragland  :"- 

The  King's  intention  to  go  for  Ireland  does  much 
shake  his  party.  He  wonders  why  any  provisions  should 
be  denied  to  be  sent  for  Bristol.  Great  divisions  in  the 
King's  Court  and  Camp.  [cipher]. 

For  your  Highness. 

The  Prince  now  determined  to  visit  the  King  at 


1045.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        145 

Cardiff,  and  endeavour  to  learn  his  true  intentions. 
I  find  the  following  remarkable  note  in  the  Prince's 
Diary  : — "July  21,  "  He  went  to  meet  the  King  at 
Blackrock,  not  far  from  Cardiff.  Ashburnham  told 
the  Prince  that  Bristol  (Lord  Digby  he  was  then) 
would  ruin  him"  The  ensuing  letters  will  shew 
how  often  the  King  changed  the  plans  that  were  at 
this  time  agreed  upon  between  him  and  his  nephew. 
Meanwhile  the  levies  and  contributions  go  on  a- 
pace,1  as  do  the  quarrels  and  jealousies  of  the  Cava- 

1  TO  THE  COMMISSIONERS  OF  CARNARVON,  ANGLESEA,  ETC. 

GENTLEMEN, 

Understanding  that  at  a  meeting  at  Denbigh  of  the  Lord 
Byron  and  you,  the  Commissioners  of  Carnarvon,  Aylesbury,  and 
Merioneth,  the  contributions  of  these  respective  counties  were 
mutually  agreed  upon  and  settled.  In  pursuance  thereof,  I  shall 
hereby  desire  you  that  the  said  contributions  may  be  levied  and 
paid  over  unto  the  Lord  Byron,  in  such  proportions  and  at  such 
times  as  was  there  concluded  upon,  who  is  to  give  a  discharge  for 
what  is  received,  which  that  it  may  be  the  better  effected,  I  do 
desire  and  require  that  his  orders  therein  may  be  obeyed.  Wherein, 
not  doubting  of  your  ready  compliance,  I  remain, 

Your  very  loving  friend, 
Bristol,  17th  July,  1645.  RUPERT.* 

FROM   LORD    ASTLEY   TO    PRINCE   RUPERT. 
MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

Moving  the  King  to  come  speedily  unto  your  Highness,  he 
replied  he  could  not  spare  me,  but  would  make  my  excuses  unto 
your  Highness.  I  perceive  the  King  intends  not  to  put  over  the 
river  these  last  raised  men,  seeing  they  cannot  come  to  General 
Goring,  and  he  believes  he  may  have  use  of  them  here.  Therefore 
he  is  now  here  to  deal  with  the  Commissioners  of  this  county,  to 
put  all  or  part  of  the  new  raised  men  of  their  county  into  this 
place  in  garrison,  and  so  the  rest  into  Newport,  Chepstow,  Car- 
leon,  Monmouth,  and  Abergavenny ;  so  that  if  these  men  may  be 


*  From  Mr.  Ormsby  Gore's  MSS. 
VOL.  III. 


146         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

Hers.  Take  a  letter  from  the  zealous  Lord  Lough- 
borough  as  an  instance  of  the  spirit  that  began  to 
prevail.  He  had  long  been  at  feud  with  Colonel 
Bagot,  the  Governor  of  Lichfield.  The  latter  had 
fallen  at  Naseby,  but  his  Lordship's  quarrel  with 
him  still  survives.1  Indeed,  the  Prince's  corre- 


armed,  and  the  officers  put  them  to  do  duty,  they  may  be  in  a 
short  time  disciplined.  To-morrow  the  King  hath  appointed  all 
the  Commissioners  of  Monmouthshire  to  meet  him  at  Ragley  for 
this  end  also.  And  thus,  in  all  humbleness,  I  rest, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

JAS.  ASTLEY. 
Cardiff,  17th  July,  1645. 
For  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert  at  Bristol,  these. 

1    MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

I  received  your  letter  by  Adjutant  Schrimshaw,  whereby  I 
understand  your  intention  of  giving  him  a  command  here,  and 
therefore  am  bold  to  present  these  my  humble  desires  and  reasons 
against  it.  First,  Colonel  Lyle  takes  it  as  granted  to  him  by  your 
Highness  to  have  the  next  power  to  mine  in  this  garrison,  and 
hath  writ  to  me  to  that  purpose,  not  doubting  of  your  Highness's 
favour  to  him.  Secondly,  upon  the  expressions  of  some  gentle- 
men of  this  county,  to  give  me  their  best  assistance  in  his  Ma- 
jesty's service  if  I  would  combine  with  them  :  I  have  made  them 
that  promise,  and  hope  you  will  suddenly  hear  that  this  garrison 
is  in  a  better  condition  than  ever.  In  the  third  place,  I  beseech 
you,  sir,  give  me  leave  to  tell  you  that  I  own  Adjutant  Shrim- 
shaw  was  the  chief  assistant  Colonel  Bagot  used  in  his  opposition 
against  me,  and  our  minds  both  too  high  to  acknowledge  a  supe- 
riority, his  present  expressions  declaring  an  impossibility  of  our 
agreement,  which  must  needs  be  destructive  to  the  King's  service. 
Sir,  now  I  have  presumed  to  open  my  thought  to  you,  I  shall  with 
all  humility  submit  to  your  pleasure,  and  not  desire  to  continue 
in  this  or  any  other  command  you  have  honoured  me  with  longer 
than  I  am  happy  in  your  good  opinion,  which  I  have  ever  prized 
more  than  the  greatest  employment.  Sir,  how  unfortunate  soever 
I  may  be  made  by  the  report  of .  others,  yet  my  endeavours  shall 
ever  be  to  approve  myself 

Your  Highness's  constant  and  faithful  servant, 

F.    LOUGHBOEOUGH. 

Lichfield,  25th  July,  1645. 


1045.]        PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      147 

spondence  at  this  moment  presents  little  that  is 
cheerful.  The  following  despatch  is  from  the 
"  Scoutmaster "  of  the  Roundheads :  it  was  inter- 
cepted by  Sir  Lewis  Dives,  and  by  him  forwarded 
to  Prince  Rupert: — 

FROM  GENERAL  WATSON  TO  COLONEL  ROE. 
SIR, 

I  hope  you  have  received  my  last,  touching  the  taking 
of  the  north  side  of  Bridgewater,  since  then  we  made  all 
things  ready  for  the  storming  of  the  other  side,  and 
thought  to  have  fallen  on  this  night  about  one  o'clock.  As 
a  preparative  thereto  we  endeavoured  to  fire  the  town  this 
afternoon,  which  we  effected  so  fully,  the  wind  blowing  in 
the  right  quarter,  the  enemy  struck  with  a  panic  fear,  not 
being  able  to  endure  any  longer,  about  four  o'clock  sent 
for  a  parley,  demanding  to  go  away,  leaving  all  things  be- 
hind them,  but  the  General  would  hearken  to  nothing  but 
a  submission  to  mercy,  which  by  nine  o'clock  this  night 
they  assented  to,  delivering  Sir  Hugh  Wyndham,  and 
seven  other  considerable  hostages  for  the  performance  of 
the  agreement,  by  eight  o'clock  to-morrow  morning.  One 
thing  I  must  not  omit,  the  General's  pity  and  commisera- 
tion of  the  women  and  children,  sending  them  a  free  offer, 
before  they  began  to  fire,  that  as  many  as  would  come  out 
should  have  free  liberty,  upon  which  there  came  out  a 
whole  regiment  of  women  and  children.  Sir,  I  cannot  but 
take  notice  how  God  blesses  us  in  a  series  of  successes.  I 
pray  God  make  us  humble  and  thankful ;  certainly,  this 
town,  in  respect  of  the  strength  and  situation  of  it,  there 
being  in  it  fifty  pieces  of  ordnance,  two  hundred  barrels  of 
powder,  is  not  inferior  to  any  in  the  West  of  England, 
this  is  all,  sir,  I  have  at  present.  I  remain,  sir, 
Your  affectionate  friend  and  servant, 

LIEUTENANT  WATSON. 

Bridgewater,  July  22,  1645. 

L  2 


148        MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JULY, 

p.S. — You  may  be  pleased  to  move  the  militia,  that  this 
bearer  may  have  some  extraordinary  gratuity,  certainly  the 
news  deserves  it.  This  is  the  Scoutmaster-General's 
letter  of  their  army,  the  messenger  that  carried  it,  I  took 
prisoner,  and  have  him  here  in  Sherborne. 

LEWIS  DIVES. 

The  King  is  now  at  Newport,  having  changed 
his  plans  since  Prince  Rupert  visited  him  at  Cardiff. 
He  was  now  determined  to  join  Montrose  in  Scot- 
land : — 

FROM  THE  KING  TO  PRINCE  RUPERT. 
NEPHEW, 

I  have  taken  a  resolution  which  is  differing  from  what 
I  was  most  inclined  to  when  I  saw  you  last  [viz.,  going  to 
Bristol],  I  have  thought  it  most  necessary  to  advertise  you 
of  it,  albeit  I  cannot  say  that  the  affirmative  is  so  abso- 
lutely concluded  on  as  the  negative  :  the  particulars  being 
of  some  length  and  greatest  secrecy,  I  have  commanded 
Digby  to  write,  I  not  having  time  myself  to  do  it,  and 
therefore  have  chosen  that  part  which  I  care  not  who 
reads,  to  wit,  my  affection  to  you  and  confidence  in  you. 
I,  needing  no  other  conjuration  of  service  to  you,  than  that 
if  I  knew  you  not  secret,  I  would  not  at  this  time  impart 
my  resolution  to  you. 

I  heartily  thank  you  for  the  care  you  have  taken  in 
sending  over  the  arms  and  powder,  they  being  already 
come.  As  for  your  two  regiments  of  foot  that  I  promised 
you,  you  shall  see  that  I  do  not  forget  my  word,  which 
after  to-morrow,  I  will  make  more  plainly  appear  that  I 
am,  Your  loving  Uncle  and  most  faithful  friend, 

CHARLES  R. 
Newport,  24th  July,  1645. 

In  this  letter,  with  the  King's  usual  reserve,  he 
does  not  say  one  word  of  going  into  Scotland ;  but, 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.       149 

as  usual,  every  one  about  his  Majesty  who  ought 
not  to  know  his  intentions,  easily  learned  them ;  and 
so  the  report  reached  Rupert,  who  thereupon  writes 
this  manly  remonstrance  to  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond : — 

MY  LORD, 

It  is  now  in  everybody's  mouth,  that  the  King  is 
going  for  Scotland.  I  must  confess  it  to  be  a  strange 
resolution  ;  considering  not  only  in  what  condition  he  will 
leave  all  behind  him,  but  what  probability  there  is  for  him 
to  get  thither.  If  I  were  desired  to  deliver  my  opinion 
what  other  ways  the  King  should  take,  this  should  be 
my  opinion,  which  your  Lordship  may  declare  to  the  King. 
His  Majesty  hath  now  no  way  left  to  preserve  his  posterity, 
kingdom,  and  nobility,  but  by  a  treaty.  I  believe  it  a 
more  prudent  way  to  retain  something,  than  to  lose  all. 
If  the  King  resolve  to  abandon  Ireland,  which  now  he 
may  with  honour,  since  they  desire  unreasonably ;  and  it 
is  apparent  they  will  cheat  the  King,  having  not  five  thou- 
sand men  in  their  power.  When  this  has  been  told  him, 
and  that  many  of  his  officers  and  soldiers  go  from  him  to 
them,  if  he  have  no  more  consideration  of  such  as  stay,  I 
must  extremely  lament  their  condition,  being  exposed  to 
all  ruin  and  slavery.  One  comfort  will  be  left ;  we  shall 
all  fall  together.  When  this  is,  remember  I  have  done  my 
duty.  Your  faithful  Friend, 

RUPERT. 

Bristol,  July  28,  1645. 

On  the  3rd  of  August  the  Duke  of  Richmond 
writes  to  the  Prince,  in  answer,  from  Cardiff,  in  a 
cipher  letter,  almost  unintelligible:  its  purport  is 
as  follows :  "  that  his  Grace  shewed  the  King 
Prince  Rupert's  letter  with  as  much  care  for  the 


150         MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JULY, 

interest  of  the  latter  as  was  possible ;  that  the  former 
read  it  graciously,  and  seemed  to  think  the  difficulty 
lay,  not  in  consenting  to  a  treaty,  but  in  asking  for 
one:"  that  "anywise  it  is  a  bitter  draught,  the 
worse  for  having  been  previously  tasted :"  that "  dear 
Rupert "  was  right  to  use  perfect  freedom,  and  that 
he  had  expressed  "  himself  with  the  same  generosity 
that  appears  in  all  his  actions,"  &c. 

Almost  at  the  same  time  the  King  writes  to  Ru- 
pert a  long  letter  in  further  reply  to  the  Prince's 
communication,  through  the  Duke  of  Richmond.  In 
this  his  Majesty  says :  "  speaking  rather  as  a  mere 
soldier  or  statesman,  I  confess  there  is  no  proba- 
bility of  my  ruin.  If  I  had  any  other  quarrel  but 
the  defence  of  my  religion,  crown,  and  friends,  you 
had  full  reason  for  your  advice. — As  a  Christian, 
however,  I  must  tell  you  that  God  will  not  suffer 
rebels  to  prosper,1  or  this  cause  to  be  overthrown ; 
and  whatsoever  personal  punishment  He  shall  please 
to  inflict  upon  me,  must  not  make  me  repine,  much 
less  give  over  this  quarrel.  As  for  the  Irish,  I  as- 
sure you  they  shall  not  cheat  me  ;  but  it  is  possible 
they  may  cozen  themselves.  I  am  sending  to 
Ormond  such  a  despatch  as  I  am  sure  will  please 
you  and  all  honest  men,  &c.,  C.  R."2  This  letter 


1  The  democrat  may  exult  in  this  vain  passage,  as  it  appears  : 
but  whether  the  "rebels"  did  prosper  may  be  held  doubtful  by 
those  who  consider  their  end,  individually  as  well  as  collectively, 
politically  as  well  as  morally. 

2  Parl.  Hist.,  xiv.  p.  95 ;  also  Clarendon,  v.  225. 


1645.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.      151 

was  intercepted  by  the  Parliament,  who  appear  to 
have  had  the  secret  of  obtaining  all  the  King's  most 
secret  papers. 

The  same  day  Rupert  thus  writes  to  Will. 
Legge  :— 

DEAR  WILL., 

I  wonder  that  Stevens  should  give  you  so  many  false 
alarms.  We  never  were  in  better  condition  than  now. 
All  our  officers  and  soldiers  are  paid  and  billeted  in  town. 
Fairfax  engaged  before  Sherborne,  and  now  the  King  is 
come.  Let  me  but  know  when  your  convoys  will  meet  us, 
and  we  will  come  as  far  as  Chester,  rather  than  fail  to 
bring  you  your  materials  for  powder.  If  you  do  not  in- 
tend, Rupert  will,  however,  go  into  Gloucestershire,  to  get 
subsistence  for  my  Horse.  Pray  let  me  have  an  answer 
before  Monday  next,  else  I  cannot  stay  for  it.  You  should 
not  wonder  at  our  stay  here,  before  you  know  that  this 
town  had  been  lost  as  Bridgewater  was,  and  that  the  King 
did  resolve  to  come  to  us. 

Since  that,  he  altered  his  resolution,  without  my  know- 
ledge. He  did  send  me  no  commands ;  and,  to  say  truth, 
my  humour  is  to  do  no  man  service  against  his  will. 
They  say  he  is  gone  northward.  I  have  had  no  answer 
to  ten  letters  I  wrote  ;  but  from  the  Duke  of  Richmond, 
to  whom  I  wrote  plainly,  and  bid  him  be  plain  with  the 
King,  and  desire  him  to  consider  of  some  way  which 
might  lead  to  a  treaty,  rather  than  undo  his  posterity. 
How  this  pleases  I  know  not ;  but,  rather  than  not  do  my 
duty,  and  speak  my  mind  freely,  I  will  take  his  unjust 
displeasure.  I  know  not  what  to  do  with  Lord  Grandi- 
son.  If  your  brother  will  come,  he  shall  have  his  desires. 

Your  most  faithful  friend, 
Bristol,  28th  July,  1645.  RUPERT.1 

1  From  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth's  MSS. 


152          MKMOIHS    AND    COIUM-SPON  WWK    OF        IJI-I.Y, 

Scarcely  were  these  two  letters  written,  when 
the  following  affectionate  reply  was  sent  by  tin 
King. 

Nl-.IMIKW, 

If  1  had  as  much  time  as  I  have  matter,  this  should 
be  a  very  long  letter.     But  vh.it    I   want,  I  haw    mm 

manded    others    |(,    supply;    for    I    have   commanded    Jack 

A.shhurnham  to  give  you  a  full  account,  both  of  our  pro- 
ceedings and  resolutions  here,  with  all  the  reasons  of  them, 
as  likewise  Colepepper  being  newly  come  from  my  son. 

I  have  commanded  liini  to  acquaint  you  with  those  affairs, 
concerning  vvhich  to  deal  freely  with  you.  I  find  that  you 
might  do  so  great  good  there.  lh.it  it'  it  were  u«»i  for  the 
danj-;er  of  I  he  passage,  and  lhal  1  know  not  how  Hristol 
ran  l»e  yet  without  von,  I  would  wish  you  were  with  my 
•.•MI  :  hut,  as  it  is,  I  think  »iii\  lit  to  n.nue  it,  .md  no 
more:  so  lea\  iu:;  it  wholly  to  you.  As  l\>r  the  oaths  \ou 
ha\e  j)roposed  to  lie  taken,  I  not  only  approve  them,  lint 
thank  you  t\>r  the  motion;  only,  that  clause'  which  con- 
''iii-  the  pnhlie  meetings  m.i\  he  left  out.  hccausc  it  \\ill 
urcillrsslx  exasperate  the  eluhmen  :  all  theiesi  1  do\ery 

much  like.    And  now,  because  it  is  possible  that  it  "Ml 

he  a  long  tilUC  hclorc  1  sec  Noil.  I  earn<  -ll\  diMi(  \  »u  l(> 
have  an  implicit  i'aith  in  my  friendship  and  allection  to 
\ou.  tor  1  assure  \  on  1  hold  m\selt'  interested  ei|iiall\  to 
protect  \ou  .is  one  of  m\  childr.  .  ili.it  \  on  shall  share 

largely  with  me,  if  ever  it  sh.dl  please'  Cod  tos,  nd  happN 

il.i\s  unto 

1,  !  ,    , 

C'llMU.IS     K. 


1    hayc    \ullinj;ly    done    Uarnwell's    business,  hut    desire 
you  to  excuse  me  from   Andover. 

Bristol  is  now   besUured,  or   rather  blockaded. 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        153 

Sherborne  Castle  has  been  taken  by  storm.  Fairfax 
and  Cromwell  were  too  strong  for  the  "inexpug- 
nable" Sir  Lewis  Dives ;  and  these  two  generals  soon 
afterwards  [22nd  August],  sat  down  before  Bristol. 
Meanwhile  the  Prince  had  made  some  forays  into 
Gloucestershire :  he  had  been  riding  to  Bath  with  only 
his  own  pages  and  attendants,  about  twenty  persons, 
when  he  was  set  upon  by  a  troop  of  the  enemy's 
cavalry;  he  drove  them  away  with  some  slaughter; 
attended  some  hostile  and  some  friendly  meetings 
of  clubmen ;  learned  the  near  approach  of  Fairfax, 
and  drove  all  the  surrounding  cattle  into  Bristol ; 
ordered  every  inhabitant  to  lay  in  provisions  for  six 
months,1  and  wrote  thus  to  Nicholas : — 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  SIR  EDWARD  NICHOLAS. 
SIR, 

I  sent  you  word  by  Colonel  Terringham,  that  I  had 
received  your  letter  by  this  woman,  so  also  the  unfor- 
tunate loss  of  Bridgewater ;  since  which  I  hear  no  cer- 
tainty of  the  enemy's  motions.  There  is  a  ship  landed 
at  Dartmouth,  laden  with  two  hundred  barrels  of  powder 
and  store  of  arms.  [The  rest  is  in  cipher,  to  the  purport 
that  "  if  Fairfax  advance,"  the  Royalists  would  be  obliged 
to  "  leave  Bath,"  for  want  "  of  men  and  victuals."]  I 
hear  little  from  General  Goring.2  Prince  Charles  is  at 

1  The  number  of  families  was  found  to  be  2500,  which,  count- 
ing five  for  a  family,  would  give  12,500  as  the  number  of  inha- 
bitants ;  1500  of  these  were  ascertained  to  be  without  the  means 
of  support,  and  the  Prince  ordered  2000  measures  of  corn  to  be 
sent  into  them  from  Wales. 

2  He  had  been  defeated  by  Fairfax  on  the  10th,  near  Bridge- 
water,  which  was  honourably  surrendered  by  Colonel  Wyndham 
to  Parliament  on  the  23rd.     It  was  this  Cavalier  who  said  he  had 


154         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

Pendennis  Castle.  It  is  reported  that  Sir  John  Berkeley 
has  given  five  hundred  to  somebody.  [Cipher  :  I  know ; 
for,  to,  stop ;  50 ;  27 ;  from  coming,  66,  to  Exeter.]  I 
doubt  we  shall  shortly  see  the  mystery  of  this. 

Sir  Richard  Grenville,  the  only  soldier  in  the  West,  is 
discontented.1  [more  cipher,  concerning  some  "  specula- 
tion" of  the  "  King's"  not  yet  brought  to  "  projection."] 
Pray  God  this  prove  well.  Just  as  I  am  writing,  I  hear 
that  the  Scotch  army  is  past  between  ....  Monmouth 
....  and  Abergainy  [Abergavenny].  This  enclosed,  is 
concerning  the  Commissioners  of  Excise,  who  are  so  bound 
up  by  the  members  at  Oxford,  that  nothing  can  be  issued 
without  their  consent.  If  they  were  but  so  far  trusted  as 
that,  in  such  case  as  we  are  now  in,  when  we  need  powder 
and  provisions,  money  might  be  issued  to  such  uses  as 
shall  be  most  necessary  for  His  Majesty's  service  in  the 
garrison.  I  shall  be  accountable  that  none  shall  be 
required  by  me,  without  great  necessity.  I  pray,  let  me 
have  a  speedy  answer,  which  will  infinitely  oblige 
Your  most  faithful  Friend, 

RUPERT. 

Bristol,  July  27,  1645. 

On  the  29th  we  have  another  letter  from  Prince 
Rupert  to  Sir  E.  Nicholas, 

SIR, 

As  I  told  you   our  resolution   in   my   last   by    the 
woman,  we  are  forced  to  quit  Bath.     The  King  intends 

been  taught  by  his  father  "  to  stick  by  the  Crown  if  he  found  it 
hanging  on  a  bush." 

1  He  was  also  the  most  truculent  and  unprincipled.  How- 
ever, he  was  proposed  soon  after  to  command  the  foot  in  the 
army  of  the  West,  when  Lord  Wentworth  had  provoked  a  mutiny 
therein  by  his  misconduct.  Sir  Richard  refused  to  act,  and  was 
sent  to  prison  to  the  Castle  in  Mount's  Bay,  till  the  approach  of 
the  Parliament  army  induced  the  Prince  to  allow  him  to  escape 
to  the  Continent. 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE  CAVALIERS.        155 

for  a  fine  design ;  you  may  be  sure  that  I  have  no  hand  in 
it,  for  I  hear  of  this  from  others.  This  is  all  our  news. 
Pray  write  often  to  us :  we  have  received  but  one  express 
from  you,  the  rest  were  by  messengers  of  my  own. 

I  rest,  your  most  faithful  friend, 

RUPERT.1 

Bristol,  July  29,  1645. 

By  the  same  post  he  writes  thus  to  his  trusted 
friend  Will  Legge.  His  suspicions  of  Digby  were 
not  ill-founded  ;  within  a  month  that  deferential 
and  smooth-spoken  nobleman  had  almost  succeeded 
in  obtaining  an  accusation  of  high  treason  against 
the  Prince.2 


1  Both  these  letters  are  taken  from  Evelyn,  vol.  v. 

2  The  following  letter  from  Lord  Digby  contains  no  matter  of 
historical  interest,  but  it  displays  so  vividly  the  writer's  false  and 
unscrupulous  nature,  that  I  insert  it  in  justice  to  Prince  Rupert's 
antipathy  towards  this  clever  and  dangerous  coxcomb  : — 

CAPTAIN  BECKMAN, 

Returning  hither  to  Oxon,  I  understand,  with  very  much 
grief,  that  you  are  still  a  prisoner  at  Abingdon,  and  used  with 
great  inhumanity,  and  it  doth  very  much  aggravate  my  trouble  at 
it  that  I  am  told  Brown*  endeavours  to  persuade  you  that  I  am 
the  cause  of  your  greater  suffering,  and  that  he  will  not  please  you 
till  I  have  declared  that  he  had  no  hand  in  your  former  escape. 
I  cannot  believe  it  any  other  but  a  pretence  to  colour  his  cruelty ; 
for  every  man  that  sees  that  letter  of  mine  to  Brown,  wherein  I 
mentioned  your  name,  and  sees  Brown  continued  in  his  command, 
cannot  but  know  that  his  masters  are  very  well  satisfied  what  was 
the  intention  of  the  letter  of  mine,  and  that  he  lies  under  no  sus- 
picion for  it.  But  lest  I  should  be  thought  to  omit  anything  on 
my  part  that  might  conduce  to  your  liberty,  I  have  thought  fit  to 
send  you  this,  with  permission  to  shew  it  to  Brown,  wherein  I  do 
declare  that  that  letter  written  to  him,  wherein  I  mentioned  your 
escape  in  such  a  way  as  might  be  conjectured  that  he  had  a  hand 


*  General  under  Fairfax  ;  formerly  "  a  woodmonger." 


156         MEMOTRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  WILL.  LEGGE. 

DEAR  WILL., 

We  were  forced  back,  but  I  believe  they  will  not 
advance  any  further  :  if  they  do,  you  shall  have  timely 
notice.  If  92,  352  will  let  me  know  the  day  he  shall  be 
at  Charleton,  I  will  bring  his  Majesty  safe  from  thence. 
The  Scots  are  about  Monmouth.  The  King,  as  I  hear, 
intends  for  Scotland  with  the  horse,  which,  in  my  opinion, 
is  a  strange  undertaking.  You  do  well  to  wonder  why 
Prince  Rupert  is  not  with  the  King,  but  when  you  know 
the  Lord  Digby's  intentions  to  ruin  him,  you  will  then  not 
find  it  strange.  But  all  this  shall  not  hinder  me  from 
doing  my  duty  where  I  am,  and  that  which  shall  become 
your  friend  RuPERT.1 

Bristol,  July  29,  1645. 

The  siege  of  Bristol  has  now  set  in  ;  the  Parlia- 
ment forces  determine  upon  a  blockade  ;  they  have 
no  fancy  for  a  storm.  Rupert  holds  a  council  of 
war ;  his  officers  don't  at  all  like  the  appearance  of 
affairs.  They  have  not  heard  from  the  King  for  a 
long  time ;  there  is  no  prospect  of  relief  for  the  be- 
sieged. Provisions  and  powder,  too,  run  short ;  the 
posts  are  numerous,  the  lines  extensive,  and  the 


in  it,  was  merely  an  invention  whereby  in  some  measure  to  punish 
his  perfidy  to  me,  and  to  let  him  and  the  world  see  that  it  is  hard 
for  any  man  to  traffic  in  matter  of  treachery  but  somewhat  will 
stick  by  them  that  practise  it,  let  them  think  themselves  never  so 
cunning.  This,  I  hope,  will  suffice  to  clear  that  point,  and  to 
assure  you  that  I  am 

Your  affectionate  friend  to  serve  you, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 
Oxford,  Aug.  29,  1645. 

1  From  the  Earl  of  Dartmouth's  MSS. 


1645.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     157 

garrison  few :  above  all,  there  is  no  hope  of  better 
things.  There  is  no  money ;  provisions  can  only  be 
obtained  by  violence  from  the  most  loyal  districts ; 
contributions  are  only  another  word  for  plunder.  A 
soldier's  life  is  nowhere  safe  outside  the  walls  of  any 
country  town.  All  feel  that  the  great  game  has 
been  played  out  and  lost.  Every  morning  brings 
intelligence  of  some  town  or  fortress  rendered ; 
some  deserted  body  of  Cavaliers  put  to  the  sword. 
Nevertheless,  the  garrison  does  its  duty  as  yet. 
Bedminster  was  first  burned,  then  assaulted  by  a 
sally.  The  works  are  daily  strengthened,  the  fire 
kept  hotly  up. 

The  particulars  of  this  eventful  siege  are  detailed 
in  "  Prince  Rupert's  Declaration ; "  I  shall,  therefore, 
proceed  with  the  examination  of  his  papers,  still 
omitting  very  many.  The  following  confidential 
letter  from  Lord  Digby,  "  breathing  out  his  soul  to 
his  dearest  friend,"  is  full  of  interest.  It  gives  a 
deplorable  picture  of  the  King's  affairs,  but  still 
more  of  the  negotiation  with  Ireland.  A  "peace 
was  obtained"  with  that  unhappy  country  at  the 
grievous  price  of  repealing  Poyning's  atrocious  law, 
and  allowing  "  the  Papists  some  private  place  for 
the  exercise  of  their  religion,"  but  it  is  much  to  be 
hoped  that  the  Digby  interest  may  "  haply  obtain  a 
better  bargain." 

MY  DEAR  LORD, 

It  is  a  great  comfort  to  us  to  hear,  by  this  express, 
that  Her  Majesty  preserves  her  health,  notwithstanding 


158         MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF         [AUG. 

that  trouble  of  mind  which  our  misfortunes  must  needs 
have  given  her;  and  that,  instead  of  disparaging,  her 
Majesty  now  does  rather  approve  your  diligence  to  procure 
us  aid.  God  send  that  your  hopes  may  succeed  !  For 
my  part,  I  think  there  is  more  probability  in  that  of  Den- 
mark for  men,  now  the  peace  is  concluded  with  the 
Swedes  ;  and  for  money,  from  Rome,  than  any  other  way. 
The  business  of  Ireland  hath  hung  long  in  suspense, 
although  the  King  hath  long  since  given  my  Lord  Ormond 
power  to  conclude  the  peace  there,  upon  the  very  utmost 
concession  that  can  possibly  be  yielded  unto,  without 
causing  a  revolt,  not  only  of  all  his  party  here,  but  also 
such  a  one  of  his  army,  and  all  his  Protestant  subjects 
there,  as  would  make  it  impossible  for  the  Irish  to  afford 
us  any  aids ;  they  would  have  so  much  to  do  within  them- 
selves against  those  that  would  not  submit  to  peace  upon 
such  terms.  The  truth  of  it  is,  the  Irish  have  proceeded 
hitherto  as  if  they  had  no  good  intention,  having  not 
been  content  with  the  offers  of  more  than  their  agent,1  did 
profess  to  expect,  and  insisted  upon  those  demands,  the 
granting  of  which  they  could  not  but  see  would  be  abso- 
lutely destructive  to  His  Majesty :  that  is,  the  granting 
unto  them  the  Protestant  Churches  in  such  parishes  where 
the  number  of  Catholics  was  greater ;  that  is,  in  effect,  all 
through  Ireland.  And  whereas  you  write  that  perhaps  my 
Lord  Ormond  is  not  the  fit  person  to  conclude  that  business, 
but  that  the  management  of  it  should  be  remitted  to  the 
Queen  ;  I  am  much  afraid,  that  the  expectation  of  that  in 
the  Irish  hath  much  retarded  the  hoped  for  issue  of  the 
business.  But,  God  be  thanked,  we  receive  even  now  the 
certain  news  that  the  peace  there  is  concluded,  and  that 
an  express  from  my  Lord  Ormond  is  upon  his  way  from 
Chester  with  all  the  particulars.  The  utmost  extent  of 
my  Lord  of  Ormond's  power  to  grant,  was  the  suspension 

1  Was  this  Lord  Glamorgan  ? 


1645.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.         159 

of  Poyning's  Act ;  also  the  passing  of  such  bills  as  should 
be  first  agreed  on,  the  repeal  of  the  Penal  Laws,  and  the 
allowing  the  Papists  some  chapels  in  private  places,  for 
the  exercise  of  their  religion.  But  you  may  not  take 
notice  that  he  had  so  large  a  power,  for  happily  he  may 
have  obtained  a  peace  upon  a  better  bargain.  Thus  much 
for  that  business.1 

His  Majesty  approves  very  well  of  the  course  proposed 
by  you,  for  such  aid  as  may  be  obtained  from  Denmark ; 
but,  above  all  things,  let  the  matter  of  money  be  laboured 
in,  for,  without  some  competent  stock  of  that  against  the 
next  spring,  it  will  be  impossible  for  us  ever  to  have  a 
resource  again.  My  former  letters  will  have  acquainted 
you  with  our  progress  since  our  retreat  from  Wales,  and  the 
reasons  of  it ;  and  I  make  no  doubt  but  you  will  be  satis- 
fied that  the  King's  business  hath  been  as  well  conducted 
in  that  retreat  from  Wales,  and  since,  as  the  desperateness 
of  our  condition  could  admit  of;  and  that,  in  fine,  we 
are  likely  to  have  gained  the  only  thing  we  could  hope 
for,  which  was,  to  preserve  His  Majesty's  person  safe,  till 
the  season  of  the  year  should  secure  him  in  any  of  his 
principal  garrisons  from  the  danger  of  a  siege.  It  is  true, 
I  could  have  wished  that  the  rebels  had  given  us  some 
leisure,  either  in  the  North  or  at  Huntingdon,  where  we 
have  done  them  some  mischief,  and  gained  some  reputa- 
tion, and  not  obliged  us  to  go  to  Oxford  yet  this  fortnight, 
but  pressing  us  as  they  have  done,  and  do,  it  is  not  to  be 
avoided.  But  I  hope  it  is  not  possible  that  they  can  any- 
wise endanger  Oxford  before  the  winter  relieve  it.  You 
write  to  me  to  tell  you  freely  our  condition  without  flatter- 
ing you,  or  myself.  You  will  find  in  my  letters  of  late, 
especially  by  Porter,  that  I  have  not  been  guilty  of  that 


1  A  curious  and  faltering  sort  of  letter  from  the  King  to 
Secretary  Nicholas  concerning  this  matter  may  be  read  in  Evelyn's 
"Memoirs,"  4to,  vol.  ii.  p.  105. 


160         MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

fault,  nor  shall  I  now  ;  but  the  freedom  which  I  shall  at 
this  time  use  in  stating  to  you  the  greatest  mystery  of  our 
misfortunes,  I  desire  may  be  received  by  you  as  the 
breathings  out  of  my  soul  into  my  dearest  friend  by  way 
of  prediction. 

It  is  most  true,  that,  desperate  as  our  condition  seems, 
I  have  no  apprehension,  but  that  having  got  thus  far  in 
the  year,  we  shall  be  safe  till  the  next  from  any  further 
great  mischiefs ;  and  that  probably  by  helps  from  Denmark 
and  Ireland,  and  monies  from  you,  our  quarters  being  well 
managed  for  the  preservation  and  recruit  of  our  remain- 
ing forces,  we   may  possibly  have  a   fresh  and   hopeful 
resource  the  next  spring.     These  hopes  I  am  confident 
the  condition  of  our  business  itself  will  bear,  would  the 
humours  of  our  own  party  bear  them  with  patience.    But, 
alas  !  my  Lord,  we  must  not  expect  it,  there  is  such  an 
universal  weariness  of  the  war,  despair  of  a  possibility  for 
the  King  to  recover,  and  so  much  of  private  interest  grown 
from  these  upon  everybody,  that  I  protest  to  God  I  do 
not  know  four  persons  living  besides  myself  and  you  that 
have  not  already  given  clear  demonstrations  that  they  will 
purchase  their  own,  and,  as  they  natter  themselves,  the  king- 
dom's quiet, —  at  any  price  to  the  King — to  the  Church — to 
the  faithfulest  of  his  party ;  and,  to  deal  freely  with  you,  I  do 
not  think  it  will  be  in  the  King's  power  to  hinder  himself 
from  being  forced  to  accept  such  conditions  as  the  rebels  will 
give  him ;  and  that  the  next  news  that  you  will  hear,  after 
we  have  been  one  month  at  Oxford,  will  be,  that  I  and 
those  few  others,  who  may  be  thought  by  our  counsels  to 
fortify  the  King  in  firmness    to  his  principles  shall  be 
forced  or  torn  from  him ;  and  you  will  find  [names  blotted 
out]  the  prime  instruments  to  impose  the  necessity  upon 
the  King  of  submitting  to  what  they,  and  most  of  the 
King's  party  at  Oxford,  shall  think  fit.     Truly,  I  have 
great  confidence  in  the  King's  virtue  and  steadiness,  and  I 
am  much  improved  in  it  by  this  enclosed  letter  which  he 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        161 

wrote  [name  blotted  out]1  in  his  great  distress  in  Wales, 
upon  occasion  of  [Rupert]  declaring  unto  him  that  there 
was  nothing  left  for  him  to  do,  but  to  seek  conditions.  I 
protest  to  God,  I  knew  nothing  either  of  the  letter  or  of 
the  occasion  till  a  good  while  after  it  was  sent ;  but  having 
then  gained  a  sight  of  it,  I  got  leave  to  communicate  a 
copy  of  it  only  to  the  Queen  and  to  yourself.  My  dear 
Lord,  I  shall  add  no  more  at  this  time,  but  only  to  conjure 
you,  first,  to  believe  that  if  I  have  any  truth  or  honour  in 
me,  I  have  not  the  least  unfriendly  thought  in  the  world 
towards  any  mentioned  or  pointed  at  in  this  letter,  more 
than  purely  in  relation  to  the  King's  service  ;  and  in  the 
next  place,  though  I  stand  single  against  all  the  world,  I 
shall  not  vary  a  tittle  from  those  foundations  of  justice 
and  right  to  the  honour  and  interest  of  my  gracious  mas- 
ter and  mistress,  which  I  have  professed  myself  built 
upon,  and  that  I  will  in  sight  of  the  world  carry  to  my 
grave  the  honour  of  a  servant  entirely  faithful  and  un- 
biassed, and  being  worthy  of  that  happy  relation  to  you 
of 

Your  best  friend  and  faithful  servant, 

DlGBY. 

Ascot,  Aug.  27,  1645.8 

The  next  letter  of  moment  in  this  correspond- 
ence is  one  to  startle  those  who  take  an  interest 
in  the  impetuous  but  true-hearted  Prince  whose 
life  I  have  endeavoured  to  illustrate.  It  is  from 
the  King,  too,  but  in  a  very  altered  tone  from  the 
last. 


1  Probably  "  Prince  Rupert." 

2  This  Ascot  is  not  the  scene  of  races,  but  a  place  of  Lord 
Carnarvon's  near  Wing. 


VOL.  III.  M 


162          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [AUG. 

CHARLES  R. 

WHEREAS  by  several  respective  commissions  from  us 
and  from  our  dearest  son,  the  Prince  of  Wales,  our 
nephew  Prince  Rupert  hath  been  constituted  General  of 
all  our  forces  within  this  kingdom,  under  our  said  dear  son, 
we  have  thought  fit  and  do  by  these  presents,  upon  weighty 
considerations  moving  us  thereunto,  revoke  and  disannul 
all  commissions  investing  our  said  nephew  Prince  Rupert 
with  any  military  authority  whatsoever,  within  our  do- 
minions ;  and  of  this,  all  commanders,  officers,  and  soldiers 
are  required  to  take  notice. 

Given  at  our  Court  at  Ragland,  the  14th  of  Septem- 
ber, 1645. 

Bristol  was  indeed  surrendered ;  on  the  most 
favourable  conditions  it  is  true,  and  it  is  also  true 
that  its  further  defence  would  only  have  involved 
the  slaughter  of  the  garrison,  and  the  destruction  of 
the  town.1  Nevertheless,  the  Castle  might  doubt- 
less have  held  out  for  another  fortnight ;  and,  judg- 
ing the  Prince  by  his  own  standard,  he  ought  to 
have  maintained  it  as  long  as  he  had  life  enough  to 
answer  the  Roundhead  summons  by  a  loyal  defiance. 
But  even  such  men  as  Rupert  have  occasionally  had 
intervals  of  unprofessional  reflection  and  dispassion- 
ate thought.  He  had  nothing  on  earth  but  his 
honour,  and  he  consented  to  compromise  that,  in 
order  to  save  the  lives  of  his  tried  and  devoted  fol- 
lowers. It  must  have  been  a  bitter  sacrifice ;  a  yet 

1  Sir  Edward  Walker,  an  enemy  of  Rupert's,  admits  that  the 
"  relief "  that  the  King  spoke  of  was  quite  theoretical ;  see  his 
"  Historical  Discourses,"  p.  129. 


1645.]       PRINCE  RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      163 

greater  was  remaining  in   the   town,  to  share  his 
comrades'  fate,  and  to  pass  under  the  yoke  of  a  ca- 
pitulation.    For  a  moment  he  indulged  the  thought 
of  sounding  once  more  "  to  Horse ! "  of  once  more 
heading  his  resistless  guards,  and  breaking  through 
the  Roundheads'  leaguering  host;  a  deed  he  only 
had  to  will,  in  order  to  perform.     The  storm  of  the 
town,  and  the  slaughter  of  the  remaining  garrison 
would  have  been  the  consequence.     Rupert  made 
the  sacrifice ;  and  that  with  a  conviction  of  being 
misunderstood,  and  with  the  triumph  of  Digby,  and 
the  court  minions,  staring  him  in  prospect.   As  to  the 
mere  military  expediency  of  the  surrender,  it  was 
insisted  on  by   his   whole   Council   of  war,  whose 
decision  left  the  Prince,  in  fact,  no  option.     That 
Council  was  composed  of  the  most  daring  and  gal- 
lant men  that  the  war  had  spared.   Hawley,  Russell, 
Tillier  and  others  who  had  dared  death  in  a  hundred 
fights.      In   fine,  the   terms  of  capitulation   were 
signed  on  the  10th  of  September,  and  instantly  such 
a   storm   of   reprobation  arose,   that   even   Prince 
Rupert  thought  it  necessary  to  publish  his  defence. 
It  is  only  just  to  his  memory,  and  to  that  of  the 
Cavaliers,  to  let  them  speak  for  themselves ;  to  and 
for  this  reason  I  have  not  given  any  account  of  the 
siege  from  other  sources.     The  Prince's  preface  is 
characteristically  bold,  terse,  and  soldier-like ;  not 
without  eloquence  and  even  elegance  ;  chivalrous  in 
its  appeal  to  the  highest  motives  and  the  noblest 
natures. 

M  2 


164         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

"  A  Declaration  of  His  Highness  Prince  Rupert  with 
a  Narrative  of  the  State  and  Condition  of  the 
City  and  Garrison  of  Bristol,  when  his  Highness 
Prince  Rupert  came  thither :  of  the  actions  there 
during  the  siege,  of  the  treaties,  and  rendition 
thereof." 

"  A   Declaration   of  His    Highness    Prince  Ru- 
pert. 

"Not  that  his  Highness  thinks  to  justify  himself 
to  those  who  by  that  must  condemn  themselves,  nor 
that  he  believes  any  thing  he  hath  done  needs  a 
declaration,   does  he  publish  this  to  the  world  :  but 
he  thought  it  might  not  be  unnecessary  to  the  ser- 
vice of  his  Majesty,  (in  order  to  which  all  his  actions 
have  been  directed,)  to  let  the  world  see  that  he 
hath  faithfully  served  him,  and  that  his  enemies  had 
no  other  reason  for  accusation  than  that  they  found 
it  necessary  for  their  defence.     His  Highness  is  not 
ignorant  how  great  a  difficulty  he  hath  undertaken 
in  satisfying  the  people,  who  are  as  severe  in  the 
actions  of  others  as  they  are  partial  in  their  own, 
and  who  censure  all  by  success;  which  judgment, 
how  unjust  it  is,  the  meanest  understandings,  even 
those  brought  against  him,  must  confess.     Yet  with 
these   disadvantages  must  he  now  appear ;  and  he 
is  confident  that  through  them  all  he  shall  let  the 
misinformed  kingdom  see  that  his  honour  is  as  much 
above  the  malice  of  his  enemies  as  their  competi- 
tion.    His  Highness  will  not  go  back  to  the  begin- 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      165 

ning  of  these  times,  nor  particularly  mention  his 
actions  in  this  war,  although  he  believes  he  may 
without  vanity  say,  that  neither  integrity  nor 
industry  hath  been  wanting  in  any  of  them ;  nor 
that  there  hath  scarce  been  any  service  where  he 
hath  not  appeared  in  his  person  and  his  care ;  which 
how  successful  it  hath  been  in  several  occasions  the 
kingdom  will  be  his  witness,  and  where  the  event 
hath  been  contrary,  his  Majesty  and  the  armies  will 
acquit  him  of  his  part  in  it.  And  he  esteems  it  his 
happiness  to  have  served  the  King  in  difficult  times, 
where  he  hath  appeared  with  him  in  good  and  ill 
fortune,  assisted  by  the  gallantry  of  those  gentlemen 
who  neither  in  danger  nor  disfavour  have  forsaken 
him,  of  whose  affections  he  shall  ever  make  a  just 
and  proportioned  acknowledgment.  But  since,  as 
it  is  the  fate  of  those  in  the  condition  of  his  High- 
ness, he  hath  had  his  actions  imperfectly,  if  not  ma- 
liciously related,  examined  at  a  distance,  and  accord- 
ingly censured  :  since  he  is  become  the  subject  of 
every  one's  passion,  how  unjust  soever,  and  of  every 
opinion,  although  never  so  weak ;  his  Highness 
thought  it  was  a  right  he  owed  the  King's  service 
and  himself,  whom  he  will  ever  consider  last,  to 
publish  in  the  following  narrative  the  integrity  and 
reasons  of  his  proceedings ;  that  it  might  appear,  that 
as  his  Highness  hath  faithfully  served  the  King,  he 
hath  not  served  him  unadvisedly,  but  like  a  soldier 
as  well  as  a  man  of  honour.  And  all  the  world, 
even  his  enemies  shall  see,  that  his  actions,  to  say 


166         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

no  more,  have  been   as  far  from  injuring  his  Ma- 
jesty's cause,  as  theirs  from  defending  it." 

A  Narrative  of  the  State  and  Condition  of  the  City  and 
Garrison  of  Bristol,  when  His  Highness  Prince 
Rupert  came  thither  ;  of  the  actions  there  during 
the  Siege ;  of  the  Treaties  and  Rendition  thereof. 

His  Majesty,  after  the  Battle  of  Nasehy,  retreating 
towards  Hereford,  intending  to  recruit  his  army  hy  new 
levies  in  those  parts.  His  Highness,  Prince  Rupert, 
crossed  the  Severne-sea,  to  visit  His  Highness  the  Prince 
of  Wales,  and,  by  his  personal  presence,  to  inform  him 
more  fully  of  the  condition  of  His  Majesty's  forces  in  the 
Western  parts.  In  his  return,  he  passed  through  the 
Lord  Goring's  army,  thereby  to  settle  and  order  things  so 
there  as  might  most  advantage  His  Majesty's  future 
service.  And,  immediately  after,  His  Highness  intending 
to  provide  for  a  train  of  artillery,  and  other  necessaries  for 
His  Majesty's  army,  repaired  to  Bristol,  where  the  then 
present  constitution  of  the  garrison  had,  by  the  establish- 
ment contribution  settled  for  three  thousand  six  hundred 
men,  for  that  and  the  subordinate  garrisons,  as  Nuney, 
Portland  Point,  etc.  But  at  his  coming  thither,  the  pre- 
sidiary  soldiers,  which  went  by  reputation  for  eight  hun- 
dred or  nine  hundred  men  (and,  for  some  reasons  unknown 
to  his  Highness,  it  was  not  thought  fit  or  convenient  by 
them  who  took  upon  them  the  power  to  have  them  called 
to  a  muster),  were  really  in  the  judgment  of  honest  and 
judicious  persons,  whose  safeties  were  concerned  in  it, 
betwixt  five  hundred  or  six  hundred  effective.  The  aux- 
iliary and  train-bands,  by  interruption  of  trade  and  com- 
merce, by  the  pestilence  then  raging  there,  by  their  poverty 
and  pressures  laid  upon  them,  were  reduced  to  eight 
hundred  ;  and  the  mariners,  for  want  of  employment,  be- 
took themselves  to  other  ports,  or  to  the  enemy. 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       167 

The  Commissioners  entrusted  for  the  contribution  and 
support  of  the  garrison,  upon  the  enemy's  approach,  aban- 
doned the  town,  and  many  considerable  persons  had 
liberty  given  them  and  quitted  the  town,  which  much 
weakened  and  disheartened  the  rest. 

For  the  securing  of  that  place,  His  Highness  drew  in  so 
many,  that  made  the  garrison  two  thousand  three  hundred 
men  upon  sight.  But  after  the  enemy  approached,  His 
Highness  could  never  draw  upon  the  line  above  one  thou- 
sand five  hundred,  and  it  was  impossible  for  His  High- 
ness to  keep  them  from  getting  over  the  works  :  and 
many  of  those  were  new-levied  Welsh,  and  unexperienced 
men. 

The  line,  which  was  to  be  defended,  was  above  four 
miles  in  compass,  the  breast- work  low  and  thin,  the  graff 
very  narrow,  and  of  no  depth ;  and,  by  the  opinion  of  all 
the  Colonels,  whose  judgments  and  votes  were  required 
upon  all  important  occasions,  not  tenable  upon  a  brisk  or 
vigorous  assault. 

The  great  fort,  which  had  the  reputation  of  strength, 
lay  open  to  Brandon-hill  Fort,  which,  being  taken,  would, 
from  its  height  with  the  cannon,  command  the  whole  plain 
within  it ;  and  that,  wanting  water,  was  not  to  be  kept 
many  days.  For  the  like  consideration  of  danger  to  the 
line  from  another  part,  His  Highness  built  a  redoubt  with- 
out, which  on  that  side  prevented  the  enemy  from  erecting 
a  battery,  as  likewise  three  others  during  the  siege,  and 
drew  a  line  of  five  hundred  feet. 

After  the  misfortune  which  happened  to  the  Lord 
Goring's  army,  the  loss  of  Bridgewater  and  Sherborne, 
and  upon  His  Majesty's  sudden  recess  out  of  Wales,  His 
Highness,  not  having  received  any  command  or  intimation 
to  follow  him,  he  thought  it  might  be  more  conducible  to 
His  Majesty's  affairs  for  him  to  remain  there :  and,  con- 
ceiving that  the  enemy's  design,  after  their  former  successes, 
might  be  for  Bristol,  gave  express  orders  for  all  inhabi- 


168          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

tants  to  victual  themselves  for  six  months.  And,  upon  a 
strict  survey,  there  were  two  thousand  five  hundred  families 
then  remaining  in  the  City,  whereof  one  thousand  five 
hundred,  through  indigence  and  want,  could  not  provide 
for  themselves.  To  supply  this  defect,  His  Highness 
caused  two  thousand  bushels  of  corn  to  be  imported  out  of 
Wales.  For  further  supply,  His  Highness,  upon  the  certain 
approach  of  the  enemy's  whole  army,  commanded  out 
parties  to  drive  in  all  the  cattle  thereabouts,  of  which  there 
was  an  indifferent  number. 

The  ammunition  was  scant,  considering  that  in  the  forts, 
castle,  line,  and  streets,  there  being  above  one  hundred 
cannon  mounted,  the  quantity  of  powder  not  exceeding  one 
hundred  and  thirty  barrels.  And,  at  His  Highness's  first 
coming  thither,  there  was  not  in  the  public  magazine 
musket-balls  for  three  hours'  fight ;  wherefore  he  caused 
immediately  great  quantities  of  lead  to  be  cast  into  bullets, 
and  the  manufacture  of  match  was  quite  down,  and  set  up 
by  His  Highness  during  the  siege. 

His  Highness  having  made  all  possible  preparations, 
consulted  with  us  all,  the  Colonels  of  posts,  for  our  opinion 
concerning  the  tenableness  of  the  line.  Our  judgment 
generally  was,  that,  notwithstanding  the  works  and  line 
were  very  defective,  the  circuit  large,  our  numbers  few, 
yet  if  we  could  repel  one  general  storm,  the  enemy  would 
ba  discouraged  from  attempting  the  second  time  ;  and  the 
season  of  the  year  might  advantage  us,  and  inconimode 
them. 

Upon  this  uncertainty  His  Highness  made  offer, 
that,  for  his  own  person,  he  would  attempt  to  break 
through  with  his  Horse,  with  such  officers  as  could  be 
spared,  leaving  such  as  were  requisite  for  the  fort  and 
castle. 

This,  by  all  us  the  Colonels  of  posts  and  Officers,  was 
thought  neither  safe  nor  honourable.  In  the  second  place, 
he  offered  to  put  himself  upon  the  defence  of  the  castle 


1645  ]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE    CAVALIERS.      169 

and  fort.  All  the  Officers  were  clear  of  opinion  against 
this ;  that,  in  regard  of  the  nobility  and  gentry,  and  such 
of  the  town  as  had  appeared  well-affected,  and  the  horse 
and  foot  which  the  fort  and  castle  could  not  receive,  had 
been  thereby  left  to  the  sword  of  the  enemy  ;  and  in  regard 
the  fort  and  castle,  in  our  opinions,  were  not  tenable 
against  their  army. 

In  the  third  place,  seeing  that  neither  of  the  former 
ways  could  be  taken,  we  were  all  resolved  to  fall  upon 
the  best  general  defence  that  could  be  made  of  the  whole, 
wherein  we  might  all  share  alike.  These  were  the  resolu- 
tions of  all  we  Colonels  and  Officers  of  the  posts,  castle, 
and  fort,  His  Highness  leaving  the  free  debate  unto  us 
(himself  not  being  by)  upon  our  own  desires. 

(Signed)     JOHN  RUSSELL,      SOMERSET  Fox, 

WILL.  MURRAY,     HENRY  OSBURNE, 
HENRY  TILLIER,   MATTHEW  APPLEYARD. 

These  were  the  results,  at  a  Council  of  War,  only  I  do 
not  remember  that  the  weakness  of  the  castle  and 
fort  was  at  that  instant,  while  I  was  present,  taken 
into  consideration. 

(Signed)  F.  HAWLEY. 

The  state  and  condition  of  the  line  of  fortifications  about 
the  city  of  Bristol,  as  likewise  of  the  great  fort,  as 
appears  by  the  subscriptions  of  the  engineers,  who  had 
taken  an  exact  survey  of  them,  were  as  follows. 

The  line,  generally,  was  three  feet  thick. 

The  height  of  it,  five  feet,  where  it  was  highest. 

The  graft7  commonly  six  feet  broad,  and,  where  it  was 
widest,  but  seven. 

The  depth,  in  most  parts,  four  feet,  and  five  where 
deepest. 

Between  Prior-hill  Fort,  Stokes  Croft-gate,  and  beyond 


170         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

the  little  river,  towards  Lafford's-gate,  in  which  places  the 
enemy  entered,  not  five  feet  high. 

The  graff  five  feet  broad,  and  all  that  part  of  the  line 
much  decayed. 

The  ditch  of  the  great  fort,  on  the  right  hand,  the  gate 
before  the  face  of  the  bulwark,  was  not  four  feet  deep, 
and  eighteen  feet  broad,  so  that  horses  did  go  up  and 
down  into  it. 

The  highest  work  of  the  fort  was  not  twelve  feet  high, 
and  the  curtains  but  ten. 

Within  one  hundred  feet  of  the  fort,  there  was  a  deep 
hollow  way,  where  the  enemy  might  lodge  what  numbers 
he  pleased,  and  might  be  in  the  graff  the  first  night,  and 
in  that  part  the  fort  was  minable. 

Brandon-hill  fort  was  about  twelve  feet  above  the  level 
of  the  great  fort ;  and  that  being  not  able  to  make  any 
long  resistance,  the  enemy  gaining  it,  would  command 
the  other. 

The  hedges  and  ditches,  without  the  line,  were  neither 
cut  nor  levelled,  so  that  they  lodged  their  men  securely 
near  our  works,  at  their  first  approach. 

We  do  here,  under  our  hands,  attest  the  particulars 
above-written  to  be  true, 

B.  DE  GOMME,  Engineer-General. 
JOHN  MANSFIELD,  Engineer. 

The  resolution  being  then  taken  for  a  general  defence, 
his  Highness  disposed  all  the  colonels  to  their  several 
posts  and  forts  upon  the  line.  His  Highness  being  thus 
solicitous  for  the  securing  of  the  place.  The  enemy, 
upon  the  twenty-second  of  August,  appeared  before  the 
town,  upon  Pine-hill,  to  the  south  side.  To  encounter 
them,  his  Highness  sent  a  party  of  horse,  commanded  by 
Sir  Richard  Crane,  who,  in  that  action,  received  his  death- 
wound  ;  a  little  before  that,  Bedminster  was  fired,  upon 
intelligence  the  enemy  intended  that  night  to  quarter  two 


1645.]       PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE  CAVALIERS.       171 

thousand  men  in  it;  and,  notwithstanding  the  fire,  the 
enemy  drew  thither,  and  plied  their  small  shot  all 
night. 

August  23  :  His  Highness  caused  a  traverse,  or  blind 
of  earth,  to  be  made  within  the  drawbridge,  without  Tem- 
ple-gate ;  and,  the  same  day,  a  battery  was  raised  in  the 
marsh,  for  securing  the  river,  and  scouring  the  fields 
beyond  it.  The  enemy  began  some  breastwork,  and  a 
battery,  on  the  hill  without  Temple-gate,  with  a  traverse 
cross  the  way,  to  hinder  our  sallies. 

In  this  time,  the  enemy  omitted  no  opportunity  to 
solicit  the  minds  of  the  inhabitants,  trained  bands,  and 
auxiliaries  ;  and,  to  that  purpose,  sent  secretly  in  these 
lines  following,  signed  and  sealed  by  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax 
and  Oliver  Cromwell ;  as  likewise,  further  instructions  to 
the  citizens  of  Bristol,  for  the  delivery  of  Bristol  to  the 
Parliament. 


"  We  do  hereby  promise  and  engage  ourselves,  that  all 
such  citizens  of  Bristol,  now  inhabiting  within  the  said 
city,  which  shall  from  henceforth  forbear  to  resist  the 
army  under  our  command,  in  the  attempting  to  enter  the 
said  city,  and  the  lines  of  defence,  and  forts  made  about 
it ;  and  shall  appear  to  do  their  best  endeavour  for  the 
delivering  in  of  the  same  into  our  hands,  for  the  use  of 
the  Parliament,  shall,  in  case  the  said  city  be  delivered 
into  our  hands,  be  secured  and  protected  by  the  autho- 
rity of  the  Parliament,  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  lives, 
liberties,  and  estates,  as  freely  "as  in  former  times,  and  as 
any  other  persons  under  the  obedience  of  the  Parliament, 
notwithstanding  any  past  acts  of  hostility,  or  any  other 
thing  by  them  done,  in  the  former  delivering  up  of  the 
said  city  to  the  enemy,  or  maintaining  of  it  against  the 
Parliament,  or  otherwise,  in  assistance  of  the  enemy. 
For  assurance,  and  in  testimony  whereof,  we  have  here- 


172         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG. 

unto  set  our  hands  and  seals,   this  twenty-fifth  of  August, 
1645.     Subscribed  and  sealed  by 

"  THOMAS  FAIRFAX. 

"  OLIVER  CROMWELL." 

Upon  the  interception  of  which  paper,  his  Highness 
caused  several  suspected  and  active  persons  to  be  re- 
strained, which  prevented  the  design,  and,  withal,  by  his 
personal  presence,  secured  the  great  fort  from  surprisal. 

In  the  meantime,  his  Highness,  to  interrupt  the  ene- 
my's working,  made  several  sallies,  all  which  succeeded 
according  to  design. 

August  26 :  Soon  after,  a  storm  being  expected  by  the 
enemy's  drawing  great  bodies  of  horse  and  foot,  his  High- 
ness double-manned  the  line,  but  nothing  followed. 

August  28 :  Five  Parliament's  ships  entered  Kingsroad, 
and  forced  Captain  Boone,  who  commanded  the  Tenth 
Whelp  [a  ship  of  war]  to  run  up  the  Severn  for 
security. 

August  29  :  The  enemy  was  making  a  bridge  over  Avon, 
to  conjoin  their  quarters. 

September  3 :  His  Highness  began  a  work,  or  cutting- 
off,  within  the  line,  by  Lafford's-gate. 

SIR  THOMAS  FAIRFAX'S  SUMMONS. 
SIR, 

For  the  service  of  the  Parliament  I  have  brought  this 
army,  before  the  City  of  Bristol,  and  do  summon  you  in 
their  names  to  surrender  it,  with  all  the  forts  belonging 
to  the  same  into  my  hands  to  their  use.  Having  used  this 
plain  language,  as  the  business  requires,  I  wish  it  may  .be 
as  effectual  with  you  as  it  is  satisfactory  to  myself  that  I 
do  a  little  expostulate  with  you  about  the  surrender  of  the 
same,  which  I  confess  is  a  way  not  common,  and  which  I 
should  not  have  used,  but  in  respect  to  such  a  person,  and 
to  such  a  place.  I  take  into  consideration  your  Royal 


1045.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        173 

birth,  and  relation  to  the  Crown  of  England,  your  honour, 
courage,  and  the  virtue  of  your  person,  and  the  strength  of 
that  place  which  you  may  think  yourself  bound  and  able 
to  maintain. 

Sir,  the  Crown  of  England  is  and  will  be  where  it  ought 
to  be,  we  fight  to  maintain  it  there  ;  but  the  King,  misled 
by  evil  counsellors  or  through  a  seduced  heart,  hath  left 
his  Parliament  and  his  people,  under  God  the  best  assu- 
rance of  his  crown  and  family.  The  maintenance  of  this 
schism  is  the  ground  of  this  unhappy  war  on  your  part,  and 
what  sad  effects  it  hath  produced  in  the  three  kingdoms  is 
visible  to  all  men.  To  maintain  the  rights  of  the  Crown  of 
England  jointly,  a  principal  part  whereof  is  that  the  King 
in  supreme  acts  concerning  the  whole  State  is  not  to  be 
advised  by  men  of  whom  the  law  takes  no  notice,  but  by 
his  Parliament — the  great  Council  of  the  kingdom ;  in 
whom,  as  much  as  man  is  capable  of,  he  hears  all  his  peo- 
ple, as  it  were  at  once,  advising  him,  and  in  which  multi- 
tude of  counsellors  lies  his  safety,  and  his  people's  interest ; 
and  to  set  him  right  in  this,  has  been  the  constant  and 
faithful  endeavour  of  the  Parliament ;  and  to  bring  those 
wicked  instruments  to  justice  that  have  misled  him,  is  a 
principal  ground  of  our  fighting. 

Sir,  if  God  makes  this  clear  to  you  as  he  has  to  us,  I 
doubt  not  but  he  will  give  you  a  heart  to  deliver  this 
place,  notwithstanding  all  the  other  considerations  of  ho- 
nour, courage,  fidelity,  &c.,  because  their  consistency  and 
use  in  the  present  business  depend  upon  the  right  and 
wrongfulness  of  this  that  has  been  said.  And  if,  upon 
such  conviction  you  should  surrender  it,  and  save  the  loss 
of  blood  or  hazard  of  spoiling  such  a  city,  it  would  be 
an  occasion  glorious  in  itself  and  joyful  to  us,  for  the 
restoring  of  you  to  the  endeared  affection  of  the  Parlia- 
ment and  people  of  England — the  truest  friends  to  your 
family  it  hath  in  the  world. 

But  if  this  be  hid  from  your  eyes,   and  that  through 


174         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [AUG. 

your  wilfulness,  this  so  great,  so  famous,  and  ancient  a 
city,  and  so  full  of  people,  be,  by  your  putting  us  to  force 
the  same,  exposed  to  ruin  and  the  extremity  of  war, 
which  yet  we  shall  in  that  case  as  much  as  possible 
endeavour  to  prevent,  then  I  appeal  to  the  righteous 
God  to  be  judge  between  you  and  us,  and  to  requite  the 
wrong. 

And  let  all  England  judge  whether  the  burning  of  its 
towns,  ruining  its  cities,  and  destroying  its  people  be  a 
good  requital  from  a  person  of  your  family,  which  hath 
had  the  prayers,  tears,  purses,  and  blood  of  its  Parlia- 
ment and  people  ;  and,  if  you  look  on  either  as  now 
divided,  which  hath  ever  had  that  same  party  both  in  Par- 
liaments and  amongst  the  people  most  zealous  for  their 
assistance  and  restitution,  which  you  now  oppose  and  seek 
to  destroy,  and  whose  constant  grief  has  been  that  their 
desires  to  serve  your  family  have  been  ever  hindered  or 
made  fruitless  by  that  same  party  about  his  Majesty, 
whose  counsels  you  act,  and  whose  interests  you  pursue  in 
this  unnatural  war. 

I  expect  your  speedy  answer  to  the  summons  with  the 
return  of  the  bearer  this  evening,  and  remain 

Your  Highness's  humble  servant, 

Sept.  4,  1645.  THOMAS    FAIRFAX. 

His  Highness's  reply  was  only  to  know  whether  he 
would  give  leave  for  a  messenger  to  go  to  his  Majesty  to 
know  his  pleasure,  which  occasioned  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax 
to  return  this  answer. 

SIR, 

The  overture  of  sending  to  the  King  to  know  his 
pleasure  I  cannot  give  way  to,  because  of  delay ;  I  confess 
your  answer  doth  intimate  your  intention  not  to  surrender 
without  his  Majesty's  consent.  Yet  because  it  is  but  im- 
plicit, I  shall  send  again  to  know  a  more  positive  answer 


1645.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.        175 

from  yourself,  which  I  desire  may  be  such  as  may  render 
me  capable  to  approve  myself, 

Your  Highness's  humble  servant, 

Sept.  5,  1645.  THOMAS    FAIRFAX. 

Whereupon  his  Highness  sent  him  these  following  pro- 
positions ;  for  during  a  treaty  we  might  strengthen  our 
works  within,  hear  from  the  King,  and,  had  he  assented 
unto  our  demands,  we  should  have  required  a  confirmation 
of  them  by  the  Parliament,  which  protraction  of  time 
would  have  been  our  advantage. 

At  the  Council  of  "War,  present : 

Prince  Rupert,  Lord  Hawley,  Lord  Lumley,  Colonel 
John  Russell,  Sir  Matthew  Appleyard,  Colonel  Tillier, 
Colonel  Fox,  Colonel  Robert  Slingsby,  Colonel  Walter 
Slingsby,  Colonel  Murray,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Osborne. 

[This  Council  of  War  proposed  terms  of  their 
own,  accordingly,  and  a  lengthy  correspondence  fol- 
lows between  Fairfax  and  Rupert.  At  length  the 
patience  of  the  former  is  exhausted.] 

Upon  the  tenth  of  September  the  enemy  stormed  the 
line  generally,  about  two  in  the  morning,  and  his  High- 
ness having  received  intelligence  a  little  before  of  it,  all 
were  in  a  readiness  to  receive  them,  they  entered  the  line 
where  the  townsmen  and  new  Welsh  were,  as  at  Stokes- 
croft  gate,  where  the  Officer-in- Chief,  who  was  Major  of 
the  town,  was  slain  in  the  place,  and  at  Laiford's  gate, 
where  many  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  were  taken  and 
killed,  and  at  the  same  time  they  stormed  Prior-hill  fort, 
and  took  it,  which  was  the  loss  of  the  whole  line,  they 
being  beaten  off  in  the  other  parts  of  the  town,  then  the 
day  breaking  we  found  them  in  full  possession  of  the  line 


176          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [AUG. 

and  fort,  which  caused  our  horse  and  foot  to  retreat  to  the 
great  fort,  who  were  presently  commanded  into  the  city 
to  make  that  good,  leaving  the  other  works  sufficiently 
manned,  as  Golfon's-fort,  Brandon-hill,  and  the  new 
redoubt  without  the  line.  Finding  ourselves  in  this  con- 
dition, and  considering  the  engagement  of  those  within 
the  city  and  castle,  and  that  the  Lord  Hawley,  Sir  Mat- 
thew Appleyard,  and  Colonel  Slingsby,  with  their  men, 
were  in  danger  to  be  cut  off,  the  enemy  being  between  us 
and  them,  his  Highness  was  moved  by  the  officers  to  en- 
tertain a  treaty  in  time,  before  those  were  lost,  his  High- 
ness condescending  thereunto,  sent  a  trumpet  to  Sir 
Thomas  Fairfax  to  know  whether  he  would  treat  or  not, 
who  accepting  it,  commissioners  were  nominated  on  our 
part,  Sir  William  Vavasour,  Sir  John  Mennes,  and 
Colonel  Henry  Tillier.  The  first  thing  proposed  was  a  cessa- 
tion of  arms,  and  in  the  meantime  every  one  to  keep  his 
post.  They  first  proposed  his  Highness's  former  proposi- 
tion, but  our  condition  being  then  altered,  and  they  sensi- 
ble of  their  own  success,  would  not  admit  them,  but  would 
treat  upon  new  propositions.,  which  after  long  debate  were 
offered  as  below.1 


1  Articles  of  agreement  between  the  Commissioners  appointed  on 
behalf  of  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert  and  his  Excellency  Sir 
Thomas  Fairfax  for  the  surrender  of  the  City  of  Bristol. 
September  10,  1645. 

1.  That  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert,  and  all  noblemen,  com- 
manders, officers,  gentlemen,  and  soldiers,  and  all  other  persons 
whatsoever  now  residing  in  the  City  of  Bristol  and  the  castle  and  forts 
thereof,  shall  march  out  of  the  said  city,  castle,  and  forts  thereof, 
with  colours,  pikes,  and  drums,  bag  and  baggage ;  the  Prince's 
Highness,  all  noblemen,  gentlemen,  officers  in  commission,  with 
their  horses  and  arms,  and  their  servants  with  their  horses  and 
swords,  and  common  soldiers  with  their  swords,  the  Prince's  life- 
guard of  horse  with  their  horses  and  arms,  and  two  hundred  and 
fifty  horse  besides  to  be  disposed  of  by  the  Prince,  and  his  life- 
guard of  firelocks  with  their  arms,  and  each  one  of  them  one 


1645.]      PRINCE    RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      177 

But  in  that  particular  point  of  laying  down  our  fire- 
arms, there  could  be  no  conclusion  made  without  his 
Highness's  pleasure  first  being  known,  who  thereupon 
called  all  the  commanders  to  deliver  their  opinions  there- 
in ;  and,  upon  full  debate,  they  concluded  as  by  their  sub- 
scriptions appears,  that  if  better  conditions  could  not  be 
obtained,  then  to  accept  of  these  : — 

"  It  is  our  general  opinion  that  if  better  conditions  cannot 


pound  of  powder  and  a  proportion  of  bullet,  and  that  none  of  the 
persons  who  are  to  march  out  upon  this  article  shall  be  plun- 
dered, searched,  or  molested. 

2.  That  such  officers  and  soldiers  as  shall  be  sick  or  wounded 
in  the  city,  castle,  and  forts,  shall  have  liberty  to  stay  until  their 
recovery,  and  then  have  safe  conduct  to  go  to  his  Majesty,  and  in 
the  interim  be  protected. 

3.  That  the  persons  above-mentioned  who  are  to  march  away 
shall  have  a  sufficient  convoy  provided  for  them,  for  their  security, 
to  any  such  garrison  of  the  King's  as  the  Prince  shall  name,  not 
exceeding   fifty  miles  from  Bristol,  and  shall  have  eight  days 
allowed  for  their  march  thither,  and  shall  have  free  quarter  by  the 
way,  and  shall  have  two  officers  appointed  to  attend  them  for 
their  accommodation,  and  twenty  waggons  for  their  baggage  if 
they  have  occasion  to  use  the  same. 

4.  That  all  the  citizens  of  Bristol,  and  all  noblemen,  gentlemen, 
clergymen,  and  all  other  persons  residing  in  the  said  city  and 
suburbs  of  the  same,  shall  be  saved  from  all  plunder  and  violence, 
and  be  secured  in  their  persons  and  estates  from  the  violence  of 
the   soldier,  and  shall  enjoy  those   rights   and   liberties   which 
other  subjects  enjoy  under  the  protection  and  obedience  of  the 
Parliament. 

5.  That  in  consideration  hereof,  the  City  of  Bristol,  with  the 
castle  and  all  the  forts  and  fortifications  thereof,  without  any 
slighting  and  defacing  thereof,  and  all  the  ordnance,  arms,  ammu- 
nition, and  all  other  furniture  and  provisions  of  war,  excepting 
what  is  before  allowed,  shall   be  delivered  up   to  Sir  Thomas 
Fairfax  on  Thursday,  the  eleventh  of  this  month,  by  three  o'clock 
in  the  afternoon,  without  any  diminution  or  embezzlement,  his 
Highness  Prince  Rupert  then  naming  to  what  army  or  garrison  of 
the  King's  he  will  march. 

6.  That  none  of  the  persons  who  are  to  march  out  on  this 

VOL.  III.  N 


178          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT- 

be  granted,  we  assent  to  the  leaving  of  the  fire-arms  of  the 
private  soldiers. 

"  Rupert,  Horatio  Carey,  John  Steward,  Edward  Manwar- 
ing,  Thomas  Leigh,  William  Powell,  John  Russell, 
William  Munday,  Thomas  Daniell,  Mer  Touchet,  B.  de 
Gomme,  Ed.  Hutchinson,  Theo.  Kirton,  William  Pret- 
ty, Thomas  Coningsby,  Francis  Radcliffe,  H.  Ventris? 
W.  Symonds,  Richard  Price." 

And  thereupon  there  was  a  full  conclusion  of  the 
treaty.  The  next  day,  upon  some  insolencies  of  the 
soldiers,  his  Highness  sent  to  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax  that 
the  articles  were  violated,  and  that  if  there  was  not  a 
present  redress,  he  would  stand  upon  his  own  defence, 
and  rather  die  than  suffer  those  injuries,  and  thereupon 


agreement  shall  plunder,  hurt,  or  spoil  the  town  or  any  person  in 
it,  or  carry  out  anything  but  what  is  properly  their  own. 

7.  That  upon  signing  these  articles,  Colonel  Okey  and  all  per- 
sons now  in  prison  in  the  City  of  Bristol,  the  castle,  or  forts  of  the 
same  shall  immediately  be  set  at  liberty. 

8.  That  sufficient  hostages,  such  as  he  shall  approve,  be  given 
to  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax  this  night,  who  are  to  remain  with  him 
until  the  city  be  delivered  unto  him. 

9.  That  neither  the  convoy  nor  officers  sent  with  the  Prince 
shall  receive  any  injury  in  their  going  or  coming  back,  and  shall 
have  seven  days  allowed  for  their  return. 

10.  That  upon  delivery  of  the  town  sufficient  hostages  be  given 
for  performance  of  the  articles  on  both  parts. 

Signed  by  us,  the  Commissioners  appointed  on  the  behalf  of  his 
Highness  Prince  Rupert, 

WILLIAM  VAVASOUR. 
JOHN  MENNES. 
HENRY  TILLIER. 

Signed  by  us,  the  Commissioners  appointed  on  the  behalf  of  his 
Excellency  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax, 

E.  MONTAGUE. 
THOMAS  RAINSBOROW. 
I.  PICKERING. 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        179 

for  his  Highness's  satisfaction,  we  had  liberty  to  march 
with  our  arms  unto  our  quarters. 

For  some  days  before  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  and 
during  the  whole  siege,  his  Highness  received  not  any  let- 
ter from  his  Majesty  nor  from  the  Prince  of  Wales,  nor 
from  any  general,  or  minister  of  state,  until  his  coming  to 
Cirencester ;  only  the  Governor  of  Hereford  signified  the 
rising  of  the  Scots,  and  their  marching  towards  Glouces- 
ter, and  a  desire  to  have  some  ammunition  from  him ;  not- 
withstanding his  Highness  made  several  despatches  by  all 
the  convenient  means  he  could. 

The  well  in  the  great  fort  was  not  half  finished,  the 
water  scant  and  troubled,  and  far  insufficient  for  the  use 
of  the  numbers  that  were  there. 

It  may  be  objected,  that  notwithstanding  the  enemy's 
power  and  force,  and  their  entering  the  line,  yet  the 
castle  and  great  fort  might  have  held  out  so  long  that  pro- 
bably relief  might  have  come ;  and  that  therefore  there 
was  not  any  pressing  necessity  to  precipitate  the  rendition 
of  those  places. 

To  which  this  is  replied,  that  any  timely  relief  was 
utterly  improbable,  considering  that  during  the  whole 
siege  his  Highness  never  received  any  intelligence  from 
his  Majesty,  nor  from  the  West ;  and  though  his  Highness 
well  knew  in  what  condition  his  Majesty's  army  was,  yet 
if  his  Majesty  could  have  drawn  together  all  the  power 
he  expected,  the  enemy  could  have  blocked  up  the  castle 
and  fort,  and  have  advanced  twelve  thousand  men  to  have 
fought  a  battle,  or  else  have  secured  themselves  within  the 
line  against  all  opposition  ;  besides,  they  were  so  abso- 
lutely masters  of  all  the  passes,  and  had  so  barricaded  up 
the  ways,  that  a  small  force  might  have  hindered  a  great 
army.  And  at  that  time  General  Poyntz  so  closely  ob- 
served his  Majesty's  motions,  that  relief  was  as  improbable 
to  be  expected  as  easy  to  be  desired.  And  his  Highness 
could  not  promise  himself  any  more  likelihood  of  succours 

N  2 


180         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

from  the  West ;  Bridgewater,  Sherborne,  and  other  inter- 
jacent garrisons  being  already  reduced  by  the  enemy,  and 
Colonel  Massey  lying  with  a  considerable  body  of  horse 
and  foot  in  places  of  advantage,  ready  to  intercept  and 
stop  the  Lord  Goring.  Moreover,  had  there  been  any 
probability  of  relief  in  any  reasonable  time,  yet  the  line 
being  forced,  Prior  Hill  Fort,  an  important  place,  lost — 
the  officer  to  whose  trust  it  was  committed  deserting  it, 
who  never  since  that  time  appeared — the  city  had  thereby 
been  exposed  to  the  spoil  and  fury  of  the  enemy,  so  many 
gallant  men  who  had  so  long  and  faithfully  served  his  Ma- 
jesty, whose  safeties  his  Highness  conceived  himself  in 
honour  obliged  to  preserve  as  dearly  as  his  own,  had  been 
left  to  the  slaughter  and  rage  of  a  prevailing  enemy. 

Nevertheless,  although  these  reasons  were  of  that  va- 
lidity, that  his  Highness  could  not  but  despair  of  relief,  yet 
another  important  consideration  was,  in  itself,  singly  suf- 
ficient to  exclude  all  credence  of  possibility ;  which  was, 
that  the  Scots,  upon  removal  from  Hereford,  marched  to 
Gloucester,  where  their  whole  body  was,  the  eighth  of 
September  ;  an  intermediate  place,  near  which  his  Ma- 
jesty must  have  marched ;  and  can  any  rational  man 
imagine  them  so  stupidly  inactive,  as  to  suffer  his  Majesty 
to  pass  so  near  them  without  opposition,  considering  what 
effective  forces  they  had,  and  their  commanders  neither 
ignorant  or  idle  to  entertain  opportunities  for  action. 

The  remainder  of  this  story  may  be  told  in  the 
following  extracts  from  a  Parliamentary  Journal, 
and  from  one  of  those  nondescript  "  letters  of  news  " 
that  abounded  at  that  time,  and  still  abound,  moul- 
dering in  the  British  Museum. 

Yesterday,  according  to  the  articles,  Prince  Rupert 
marched  out  in  this  manner,  having  first  drawn  all  his  foot 
into  the  Royal  Fort  and  Castle,  his  horse  standing  on  the 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      181 

green,  under  the  fort,  within  the  line,  those  waggons  ap- 
pointed for  him  being  laden  with  his  baggage,  in  all  not 
above  eight.  He  drew  out  part  of  his  foot  and  horse  be- 
fore his  waggons,  and  part  following,  himself  next,  with  his 
Life  Guard  of  fire-locks  came  forth,  all  in  red  coats  before 
him,  and  his  Life  Guard  of  horse  following,  accompanied 
with  some  Lords,  viz.,  Cromwell,  Grandison,  &c.,  Colonel 
Hammond's  regiment  of  foot  standing  at  the  port  to 
receive  the  keys  of  the  fort,  and  march  in.  Lieutenant- 
General  Cromwell,  Colonel  Montague,  Colonel  Ranis- 
borough,  and  some  other  officers,  waited  at  the  port  of 
the  fort  for  his  coming  out,  and  waited  upon  him  to  the 
General,  who  stood  with  the  convoy  of  horse  without  the 
line,  and  accompanied  him  over  Durdham  Downs,  being 
two  miles.  The  Prince  was  clad  in  scarlet,  very  richly 
laid  in  silver  lace,  mounted  upon  a  very  gallant  black  Bar- 
bary  horse ;  the  General  and  the  Prince  rode  together, 
the  General  giving  the  Prince  the  right  hand  all  the  way ; 
the  number  of  the  Prince's  foot  was  about  two  thousand. 
The  horse,  with  the  assigned  number  of  two  hundred  and 
fifty,  and  the  Life  Guard,  altogether  made  about  four  hun- 
dred ;  and  I  think  there  might  be,  of  noblemen  and  gentle- 
men, at  the  least,  three  hundred  more.  The  Prince,  upon 
the  Green,  then  named  the  place  to  which  he  would  march, 
which  was  to  Oxford,  and  quartered  at  Westbury  the  last 
night.  Colonel  Baker,  with  his  regiment,  and  Major 
Hemington,  with  the  Lord  -  General's  regiment,  waited 
on  him  as  convoy.  The  General,  upon  his  return,  received 
the  Royal  fort,  which  is  one  of  the  finest  citadels  in  Eng- 
land ;  in  it  twenty -four  pieces  mounted  on  five  bastions, 
powder  in  quantity,  victuals  in  abundance,  of  all  sorts, 
eighty  or  a  hundred  tons  of  beer,  bread  sufficient  to  serve 
almost  100,000  men  a  day  ;  upon  the  line,  castle  and  forts, 
might  be  in  all  about  two  hundred  pieces  of  ordnance 
mounted,  two  or  three  hundred  barrels  of  powder,  two 
great  magazines  of  arms,  some  say,  three  or  four  thousand, 


182         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

the  city  itself  being  the  next  to  London  in  the  kingdom ; 
all  this  success  is  the  Lord's  doing,  which  ought  to  be 
marvellous  in  our  eyes.1 


We  had  the  happy  news  of  the  taking  and  surrender  of 
Bristol, — we  say  thus,  for  part  was  taken  by  assault. 

Prince  Rupert,  either  from  his  strength  within,  or  to 
gain  time  to  raise  the  siege  by  relief  from  abroad,  stood 
upon  extreme  high  terms.  Sir  Thomas  would  not  endure 
this,  and  gave  orders  for  a  general  assault  on  the  east  and 
west  sides.  All  the  lines  from  the  Royal  fort  down,  and 
the  suburbs  were  taken,  with  Prior's  fort,  in  which  only 
two  Royalist  were  left  alive !  Then  Prince  Rupert  sur- 
rendered, to  save  blood,  upon  high  terms  .... 
But  is  Bristol  taken,  and  in  less  than  three  weeks  ?  forti- 
fied four  times  as  well  as  when  Colonel  Fiennes  was  in  it, 
and  more  men,  and  the  cream  of  the  Royal  army.  Poor 
Prince  Rupert !  "  the  sentence  of  death  must  surely  pass 
on  you !"  Why  not  retreat  to  the  castle ;  the  King  on 
one  side  and  Goring  on  the  other,  within  sixty  miles  of 
you !  .  .  .  .  Endymion  Porter  had  better  carry  this 
news  to  the  Queen,  for  the  slower  the  better.  "  But, 
why  did  Sir  Thomas  give  such  good  conditions  ?"  Prince 
Rupert  might  have  escaped  with  five  hundred  horse, 
hazard  of  weather,  sickness,  firing  the  city,  and  the  Royal 

fort   being   made    good   against   us Goring 

still  about  Exeter,  more  inclined  to  drink  and  plunder 
than  to  relieve  Bristol.  On  the  1st  of  September,  1645, 
Rupert  marched  for  Oxford,  with  a  thousand  foot,  five 
hundred  horse,  one  hundred  nobles  and  gentlemen.  .  .  . 
Fearing  the  clubmen,  he  asked  for  muskets,  promising  to 
deliver  them  up  to  the  convoy  at  parting,  which  every  one 


1  Printed  at  London,  Sept.  10,  1645.      King's  Col.   Pamph 
226,  No.  3. 


1645.]    PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        183 

believes  he  will  perform.  All  fair  respects  between  him 
and  Sir  T.  Fairfax ;  much  respect  from  the  Lord-General 
Cromwell.  He  gave  this  gallant  compliment  to  Major 
Harrison,  "  That  he  never  received  such  satisfaction  in 
such  unhappiness,  and  that  if  ever  in  his  power  he  will 
recompense  it." 1  .  .  . 

Then  follows  some  news,  and  articles  of  impeach- 
ment against  Rupert  for  high  treason  ! 2 — 

September  22,  1645.— The  King  is  still  about  Worcesr 
ter,  endeavouring  to  come,  with  all  speed,  to  Oxford, 
which  he  doth  the  rather  desire  to  hasten;  1.  Because 
of  taking  an  account  of  Rupert,  about  Bristol ;  and,  2, 
because  his  brother  Maurice  is  very  sick,  at  Worcester, 
of  the  plague — some  say  he  is  dead ;  and  the  Malignants 
are  very  sorrowful  at  the  news.  But,  for  certain,  Rupert 
hath  a  guard  of  musketeers  before  his  chamber.  Colonel 
Legge,  the  Governor  of  Oxford,  is  displaced,  and  Colonel 
Glenham  is  made  Governor  in  his  stead,  at  least  for  the 
present.  The  Lord  Digby  hath  drawn  up  articles  of 
high  treason  against  Rupert,  and  swears  he  shall  have  his 
head,  or  it  shall  cost  him  a  fall.  The  substance  of  the 
articles  of  high  treason  against  Rupert : — 

1.  That  he  hath,  several  times,  traitorously  undermined 


1  Moderate  Intelligencer,  Eriday,  Sept.  12,  1645. 

2  All  sorts  of  calumnies  of  course  were  rife  :  those  who  take 
an  interest  in  political  gossip  may  consult  M.  de  Sabran's  vo- 
luminous   and    amusing    correspondence   with   M.  de   Brienne, 
reporting  the  ephemeral  falsehoods  of  the  day  as  pabulum  for 
diplomatic  digestion.     His  French   Excellency's   letters  are  to 
be  found  among  the  "  additional  MSS."  in  the  British  Museum. 
One  of  them  of  this  date  mentions  that  the  Parliament  presented 
Rupert  with  eight  thousand  gold  Jacobuses  for  the  surrender  of 
Bristol.     He  cautiously  adds,  when  late  enough  not  to  spoil  his 
story,  that  "  perhaps  it  was  his  brother,  the  Elector  Palatine,  who 
received  this  sum." 


184         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

the  designs  of  the  King  and  his  Council,  to  the  hazard  of 
his  Majesty's  person,  and  loss  of  his  army. 

2.  That  he  hath,  several  times,  betrayed  his  Majesty's 
forces  to  the  enemy  (meaning  the  Parliament),  by  engag- 
ing them  wilfully,  to  their  destruction. 

3.  That  he  hath  traitorously  delivered   the   fort   and 
castle  of  Bristol  to  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax. 

4.  That  he  himself   declared,    that   he   did  worse   in 
losing  Bristol,  than  Colonel  Fiennes  did,  in   delivering  it 
up  to  the  King. 

5.  That  he  made  promise  to  the  enemy,  to  seduce  his 
Majesty  to  come  into  the   Parliament ;  promising  never 
to  fight  more  for  the  King  against  the  Parliament,1  &c. 

The  King  felt  the  loss  of  Bristol  very  heavily ; 
he  was  wounded,  not  only  in  what  he  conceived 
to  be  his  most  vital  interest,  but  in  his  confidence 
in  his  nephew's  devotedness.  "  Tell  my  son,"  he 
writes  to  Nicholas,  in  speaking  of  the  Duke  of  York, 
"  Tell  my  son,  that  I  shall  less  grieve  to  hear  that 
he  is  knocked  on  the  head,  than  that  he  should  do 
so  mean  an  action  as  the  rendering  of  Bristol  Castle 
and  Fort  upon  the  terms  it  was."2  Such  feelings  as 
these  were  aggravated  by  the  loss  of  Devizes,  Win- 
chester, Basing-House,  Berkeley  Castle,  and  Chep- 
stow ;  tbey  all  fell  as  if  struck  by  the  same  blow. 
It  is  scarcely  to  be  wondered  at  that  Charles  should 
then  have  listened  to  the  triumphant  Digby's  elo- 
quent denunciation  against  bis  fearless  but  unhappy 
nephew :  it  was  in  such  a  mode  that  he  consented 

1  Perfect  Passages  of  Proceedings  in  Parliament. 

2  Evelyn  (Svo.)  v.  149. 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      185 

to  dismiss  Rupert,  without  a  hearing,  from  the  king- 
dom, and  wrote  the  following  letter,  with  the  ac- 
companying passport : — 

NEPHEW, 

Though  the  loss  of  Bristol  he  a  great  hlow  to  me, 
yet  your  surrendering  it  as  you  did  is  of  so  much  affliction 
to  me,  that  it  makes  me  not  only  forget  the  consideration 
of  that  place,  but  is  likewise  the  greatest  trial  of  my  con- 
stancy that  hath  yet  befallen  me.  For  what  is  to  be  done 
after  one  that  is  so  near  me  as  you  are,  both  in  blood  and 
friendship,  submits  himself  to  so  mean  an  action  ?  (I  give 

it  the  easiest  term)  such I  have  so  much  to  say 

that  I  shall  say  no  more  of  it :  only,  lest  rashness  of  judg- 
ment be  laid  to  my  charge,  I  must  remember  you  of  your 
letter  of  the  twelfth  of  August,  whereby  you  assured  me 
that  if  no  mutiny  happened,  you  would  keep  Bristol  for 
four  months.  Did  you  keep  it  four  days  ?  Was  there 
anything  like  a  mutiny  ?  More  questions  might  be  asked, 
but  now,  I  confess,  to  little  purpose.  My  conclusion  is, 
to  desire  you  to  seek  your  subsistence  until  it  shall  please 
God  to  determine  of  my  condition,  somewhere  beyond 
seas  :  to  which  end  I  send  you  herewith  a  pass ;  and  I 
pray  God  to  make  you  sensible  of  your  present  condition, 
and  give  you  means  to  recover  what  you  have  lost ;  for  I 
shall  have  no  greater  joy  in  a  victory,  than  a  just  occasion 
without  blushing  to  assure  you  of  my  being 

Your  loving  uncle  and  most  faithful  friend, 

C.R.i 

Hereford,  14th  Sept.  1645. 

This  letter  must  have  been  a  bitter  draught  to 
the  proud  young  Palatine  ;  there  is  something  very 
pathetic  and  eloquent  in  it  too.  The  full  meaning 

1  Clarendon's  Rebellion,  v.  252-3. 


186          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

it  contains  was  only  developed  in  the  following 
revocation  of  all  the  unhappy  Prince's  commands; 
and  the  passport  that  told  him  he  was  to  "  seek  his 
subsistence  "  wheresoever  he  could  find  it. 

PASSPORT  TO  PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  LEAVE  THE  KINGDOM. 

CHARLES  R. 

Charles,  by  the  grace  of  God,  King  of  England, 
Scotland,  France,  and  Ireland,  Defender  of  the  Faith,  &c. 
To  all  admirals,  vice-admirals,  governors,  and  captains,  of 
ports,  ships,  and  forts ;  mayors,  sheriffs,  justices  of  the 
peace,  customers,  comptrollers,  searchers,  bailiffs,  consta- 
bles, headboroughs,  and  all  other  our  officers,  ministers, 
and  loving  subjects  whom  it  may  concern,  greeting. 

Whereas  we  have  granted  our  licence  unto  our  nephew, 
Prince  Rupert,  to  pass  from  these  dominions  into  the  part 
beyond  the  sea.  These  are  therefore,  to  will  and  com- 
mand every  of  you,  not  only  to  permit  him,  with  all  his 
servants,  horses,  and  all  his  necessaries  to  pass  by  you  and 
embark  at  any  of  the  ports  within  our  dominions,  and 
thence  to  transport  himself  accordingly,  but  likewise  to 
afford  him  all  assistance  and  fitting  accommodation  in  his 
said  journey,  whereof  you  are  not  to  fail ;  and  for  so  doing 
this  shall  be  your  warrant.  Given  at  our  Court  at  .... 
By  his  Majesty's  command, 

GEORGE  DIGBY. 

To  this  letter,  and  for  this  passport  signed  by  his 
mortal  enemy,  the  Prince  sent  the  following  manly 
and  temperate,  though  not  very  well  expressed, 
reply  : — 

TO  THE  KING. 
SIRE, 

I  have  received  both  your  letters  of  the  same  tenor, 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE    CAVALIERS.      187 

from  Ragland,  September  14th,  with  the  other  intimations 
of  your  pleasure  of  the  same  date,  which,  as  far  as  my  power 
can  make  them,  are  already  obeyed :  my  not  having  any 
command,  or  meddling  in  your  service,  rendering  it  very  easy 
for  me  to  comply  with  your  will  to  have  it  so  ;  for  no  other 
motive  or  consideration  first  or  last  made  me  an  actor  but  to 
do  you  service,  and  that  as  you  desired.  How  I  have  be- 
haved myself,  from  the  beginning  until  the  misfortune  of 
your  commands  engaged  me  in  Bristol,  from  inferior  per- 
sons I  shall  not  desire  greater  justification  or  applause  than 
that  which  I  have  received  from  your  Majesty,  therefore  I 
pass  all  former  times  without  mention,  and  come  to  this  ;  of 
which  I  only  say,  that  if  your  Majesty  had  vouchsafed  me 
so  much  patience  as  to  hear  me  inform  you  before  you  had 
made  a  final  judgment — I  will  presume  to  present  this 
much — that  you  would  not  have  censured  me  as  it  seems 
you  do :  and  that  I  should  have  given  you  as  just  satis 
faction  as  in  any  former  occasion,  though  not  so  happy. 
But  since  there  is  so  great  appearance  that  I  must  suffer 
that  it  is  already  decreed ;  what  otherwise  I  should  have 
desired  to  have  given  your  Majesty  an  account,  now  I  am 
obliged  to  seek  for  my  own  clearing  :  that,  what  you  will 
have  me  bear,  may  be  with  as  much  honour  to  me  as 
belongs  to  integrity.  If  your  Majesty  will  admit  me  to  that 
opportunity,  I  desire  to  wait  on  you  to  that  end  as  soon 
as  I  can,  when  I  know  I  have  your  leave  for  it,  which  I 
humbly  desire  to  have.  If  I  must  be  so  unfortunate  not 
to  be  allowed  (if,  since  the  first  duty  that  I  owe,  which  is 
to  your  Majesty,  is  not  suffered  me,  to  perform  wherein 
else  I  should  rest)  in  the  next  place  I  owe  myself  that 
justice  as  to  publish  to  the  world  what  I  think  will  clear 
my  erring,  in  all  this  business  now  in  question,  from  any 
foul  deed  or  neglect,  and  vindicate  me  from  your  desert  of 
any  prevailing  malice,  though  I  suffer  it.  Your  commands 
that  I  should  dispose  of  myself  somewhere  beyond  seas,  be 
pleased  to  consider  of,  whether  it  be  in  my  power  (though 


188         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

you  have  sent  me  a  pass),  as  times  now  are,  to  go  by  it. 
Wherever  I  am,  or  how  unhappy  soever,  and  by  your  will 
made  so,  yet  I  shall  ever  retain  that  duty  to  your  Majesty 
which  I  have  ever,  as 

Your  Majesty's  most  humble,  and  most  obedient 
Nephew,  and  faithful  humble  servant, 

RUPERT. 

September,  1645. 

Calmer  thoughts  soon  allowed  the  memory  of 
his  nephew's  former  services,  to  refute  present 
accusations  against  him  ;  the  King  was  ever  faithful 
in  his  affections,  however  incompatible  fidelity  may 
seem  to  be  with  want  of  truthfulness.  I  have  hith- 
erto reluctantly  admitted  many  hard  accusations 
from  others,  and  from  his  own  letters,  against  this 
most  unhappy  King :  henceforth  I  find  nothing  to 
reproach  his  memory  with,  except  that  fatal  infirmity 
of  purpose  which  only  his  memorable  trial  and  his 
heroic  death  redeemed. 

The  following  letter  to  Prince  Maurice  expresses 
the  bitterness  of  the  writer's  feelings,  but  it  is  the 
bitterness  of  sorrow  rather  than  of  anger.  Maurice 
was  still  lying  on  his  bed  of  sickness  at  Worcester 
when  he  received  this  severe  yet  generous  judgment 
of  his  well-loved  brother  : — 

NEPHEW, 

What  through  want  of  time,  or  unwillingness  to 
speak  to  you  of  so  unpleasing  a  subject,  I  have  not  yet, 
which  I  must  now  supply,  spoken  to  you  freely  of  your 
brother  Rupert's  present  condition.  The  truth  is,  that 
his  unhandsome  quitting  the  castle  and  fort  of  Bristol,  hath 


1645.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.       189 

enforced  us  to  put  him  off  those  commands  which  he  had 
in  my  armies,  and  have  sent  him  a  pass  to  go  beyond 
seas.  Now,  though  I  could  do  no  less  than  this,  for 
which,  believe  me,  I  have  too  much  reason,  upon  strict 
examination,  yet  I  assure  you  that  I  am  most  confident 
that  this  great  error  of  his,  which,  indeed,  hath  given  me 
more  grief  than  any  misfortune  since  this  damnable 
rebellion,  hath  noways  proceeded  from  his  change  of 
affection  to  me  or  my  cause ;  but  merely  by  having  his 
judgment  seduced  by  some  rotten-hearted  villains  making 
fair  pretensions  to  him.  And  I  am  resolved  so  little  to 
forget  his  former  services,  that,  whensoever  it  shall  please 
God  to  enable  me  to  look  upon  my  friends  like  a  King, 
he  shall  thank  God  for  the  pains  he  hath  spent  in  my 
armies.  So  much  for  him.  Now  for  yourself.  I  know 
you  to  be  so  free  from  his  present  misfortune,  that  it 
noways  staggers  [me]  in  that  good  opinion  I  have  ever  had  of 
you  ;  and  so  long  as  you  be  not  weary  of  your  employ- 
ments under  me,  I  will  give  you  all  the  encouragement 
and  contentment  in  my  power.  However,  you  shall 
always  find  me 

Your  loving  Uncle,  and  most  assured  Friend, 

CHARLES  R.1 

Newtown,  Sept.  20,  1645. 

But  Prince  Maurice  warmly  espoused  his  bro- 
ther's part,  and  prepared  to  follow  him  in  all  his 
fortunes.  He  did  so  to  the  death.  Rupert's  error, 
if  such  it  were,  had  been  severely  visited.  Imme- 
diate orders  were  sent  to  Nicholas  to  imprison  Will. 
Legge,  merely  as  being  the  Prince's  friend ;  com- 
mands were  sent  at  the  same  time,  to  place  Rupert 

1  MS.  Harl.  6988,  art.  116  (in  King's  Collection);  Ellis's 
Original  Letters,  iii.  317. 


190         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

himself  in  arrest,  "  if  necessary." l  The  same  Royal 
messenger  who  announced  to  the  Prince  his  depri- 
vation of  all  command  in  the  King's  service,  had 
also  been  the  bearer  of  the  order  to  leave  the  king- 
dom forthwith,  and  furnished  him  with  the  passport 
already  quoted.  The  disgraced  young  Prince  only 
saw  in  all  this  the  hand  of  Digby :  his  "  ruin"  seemed 
at  length  effected ;  and  if  he  would  only  leave  the 
kingdom,  Digby  would  enjoy  in  peace  the  fruit  of 
his  intrigue.  But  the  fiery  Rupert,  who  never 
feared  the  face  of  mortal  man,  had  determined  to 
see  the  King;  and  to  claim  from  him,  at  least,  the 
privilege  of  being  heard — the  right  of  the  meanest 
soldier.  And  surely,  nothing  but  Digby's  intem- 
perance could  have  obtained  an  order  for  the  bravest 
of  the  brave  to  be  expelled  from  the  kingdom  without 
a  hearing,  his  honour  blasted  for  ever  amongst  his 
enemies.  In  this,  at  least,  Rupert  cannot  be 


1  Evelyn,  v.  148.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  Digby  insinuated, 
and  asserted  to  the  Queen,  that  Rupert  had  been  bribed  by  the 
Parliament.  The  following  assertion,  wnich  I  have  not  met  with 
elsewhere,  might  seem  an  additional  cause  to  the  King  for 
his  suspicions.  M.  de  Sabran  also  writes  that  "  Prince  Maurice 
having  surrendered  Shrewsbury  about  the  same  time  caused 
suspicion." 

"  Apres  que  Bristol  fut  rendu  par  le  Prince  Robert,  il  6crivit 
au  Hoi  qu'il  ne  fallait  plus  s'arr£ter  au  point  d'honneur  et  de 
conscience,  qui  1'avaient  empeche  jusques  la,  de  s'accorder  avec 
le  Parlement,  qu'il  fallait  ce*der  a  la  necessite  et  se  rendre  a  la 
destinee.  Le  Roi  trouva  cette  liberte  d'un  si  mauvais  exemple 
qu'il  ota  a  Legge,  ami  du  Prince,  le  gouvernement  d'Oxford,  et 
le  confia  a  Glenham.  Car  Charles,  malgre  ses  nouveaux  dis- 
graces, ne  s'etait  point  abattu." — Revolutions  d'Ang.  par  le  pere 
d' Orleans,  torn.  iii.  p.  125. 


1045.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE  CAVALIERS.        191 

blamed,  that  he  sought  to  justify  himself,  and  re- 
fused to  leave  the  King  he  had  served  so  well, 
without  an  interview. 

The  King  was  at  Ragland  when  he  heard  of  the 
loss  of  Bristol.  His  wanderings  about  the  central 
counties,  and  his  fugitive  career  afterwards  may  be 
best  recalled  to  the  reader's  mind  by  a  few  lines 
from  the  "Carolinum."1 

On  the  18th  of  October,  the  King  had  written  to 
Secretary  Nicholas  from  Newark,  in  answer,  I  pre- 


September,  1645.  Nights  Miles 

Sunday,  the  7th,  to  Ragland  Castle,  supper,  17  :  Mon- 
day, the  8th,  to  Abergain,  dinner ;  Ragland,  supper, 
14  :  Thursday,  the  llth,  to  Ragland,  supper;  Aber- 
gavenny,  dinner,  14  .  .  .  7  45 

Sunday,  the  14th,  to  Monmouth,  dinner,  the  governor's ; 
to  Hereford;  supper  :  Monday,  the  15th,  we  marched 
half-way  to  Bromyard,  but  there  was  Leo  in  itinere, 
and  so  back  to  Hereford  again  .  .  3  10 

Wednesday,  the  17th,  the  rendezvous  was  at  Athurstone, 
there  dined;  ten  miles,  to  Hamlacy,  supper,  Lord 
Scudamore's  .  .  .  .  1  26 

Thursday,  the  18th,  to  a  rendezvous  five  miles  from 
Hamlacy,  with  intention  for  Worcester,  Poins,  and 
Rochester ;  the  enemy  in  the  passage,  whereupon  we 
re-marched  towards  Hereford,  so  to  Leominster,  then 
to  Webley,  thence  to  Prestine,  there  halted ;  at  Mr. 
Andrew's  :  this  march  lasted  from  six  in  the  morning 
till  midnight,  &c.  .  .  .  .  1  28 

Friday,  the  19th,  to  Newton ;  Mr.  Price's  :  a  long  march 

over  the  mountains  .  .  .  .214 

Sunday,  the  21st,  to  Llanvillin,  supper;  dinner,  Mr. 

Price's  .  .  .  .  .  1  20 

Monday,  the  22nd,  to  Chirk  Castle ;  Sir  John  Watts's, 

the  governor's  .  .  .  .  .  1  14 

Tuesday,  the  23rd,  to  Llangollen,  4  ;  to  Wrixham,  8  ; 
to  Chester  :  a  great  fight  between  Chester  and  Tawin, 
the  King  victor,  but  made  no  use  of  it,  leaving  Ches- 


192         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [SEPT. 

sume,  to  a  remonstrance  on  the  part  of  that  honest 
gentleman  in  favour  of  one  who  was  trusted  and 
befriended  by  every  one.  Will.  Legge  here  has 
evidently  experienced  the  consequences  of  his  brave 
letter  to  Lord  Digby  : — 

Nights  Miles 

ter  unrelieved.  This  was  performed  by  the  same 
horse*  that  fled  at  Naseby,  on  Rowton  Heath,  against 
Colonel  Poyntz  and  the  army  under  his  command  .  2  20 

Thursday,  the  25th,  dinner  at  Chester  ;  marched  to  Ha- 
warden  Castle,  halted  there ;  thence  to  Northop,  to 
Skivioge,  to  Petvary,  to  Denbigh  j  William  Salisbury 
of  Bohambed  governor  .  .  .  3  20 

Sunday,  the  28th,  dinner  at  Denbigh  ;t  supper  late  at 

Chirke  Castle  J  .  .  .  .  1  18 

Monday,  the  29th,  dinner  at  Chirke  Castle ;  supper  at 

Halton  in  Montgomeryshire,  Mr.  Lloyd's  .  1  26 

Tuesday,  the  last,  prand.  in  campo,  supper  at  Bridg- 

north,  the  governor's  ..'  .  .  2  30 

October,  1645. 

Thursday,  the  2nd,  dinner  at  Ridgheath,  the  rendezvous; 

supper  at  Lichfield,  the  Close  .  .  1  22 

Friday,  the  3rd,  no  dinner  at  Tongue;  supper,  Mr. 

Sutton's  ....  1  15 

Saturday,  the  4th,  no  dinner  at  Newark  ;  supper,  Lord 

Danecourt's  .  .  .  .  9  26 

Sunday,  the  12th,  to  Tuxford's,  the  White  Hart  .  1  12 

Monday,  the  13th,  dinner  in  the  field  at  Welbeck  ; 

supper,  Marquis  of  Newcastle's  .  .  .112 

Tuesday,  the  14th,  no  dinner  at  Newark  ;  supper,  Lord 

Danecourt's  .  .  .     18     12 


*  "  The  Northern,"  under  Sir  M.  Langdale.  The  Life-guards 
seconded  their  charge,  and  their  gallant  colonel,  Lord  Bernard 
Stuart  (now  Lord  Lichfield),  fell.  He  was  the  third  brother  of 
his  House  who  died  for  the  King  in  this  war. 

t  "  The  castle  is  one  of  the  strongest  and  noblest  looking  I 
ever  saw." — Sir  Edward  Walker.  Here  the  King  learned  the 
defeat  of  Montrose,  his  last  hope,  at  Philiphaugh. 

J  Here  Prince  Maurice  joined  the  King  with  his  own  and  part 
of  Prince  Rupert's  horse. 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE    CAVALIERS.       193 

FROM    THE    KING    TO    SECRETARY    NICHOLAS. 

For  what  concerns  Will.  Legge,  I  have  no  suspicion 
of,  but  what  Lord  Digby  [cipher]  informed  me,  which 
satisfies  me  as  to  what  I  have  done,  but  will  not  believe 
him  guilty  of  [cipher]  trickery  before  I  see  more  particular 
proofs.1 

Newark,  Oct.  10,  1645. 

The  Prince's  own  adventures  will  best  be  described 
in  the  notes  to  his  own  Diary :  I  insert  them  with- 
out comment,  believing  that  their  simplicity,  and  the 
unconscious  pathos  of  some  passages,  will  excuse 
some  repetition,  and  interest  the  reader  :2 — 

NOTES    TO    PRINCE    RUPERT'S    DIARY. 

Copied  verbatim. 

Then  the  Prince  had  a  letter  from  the  King  to  dis- 
charge him  of  the  Generalship,  and  Legge  of  the  govern- 
ment of  Oxford  ;  Bristol  having  made  a  suggestion  that 
he  held  correspondence  with  the  Prince  Elector,  though 
he  never  wrote  one  letter  to  him.  The  King  was  then  at 
Newark,  and  the  Prince  resolved  to  break  through  the 
enemy,  and  go  to  the  King,  and  he  accordingly  took  his 
troop,  about  eighty  in  number,  and  went  to  Banbury, 
where  Prince  Maurice  came  to  him  and  accompanied  the 

1  Evelyn's  Correspondence,  vol.  v. 

2  If  I  should  have  given  the  impression  that  this  Diary  was 
written  by  the  Prince  himself,  I  must  here  observe  that  it  is  not 
in  Rupert's  handwriting.     It  consists  of  a  number  of  notes  chro- 
nologically arranged,  evidently  as  memoranda  for  a  formal  biogra- 
phical history.  These  notes  seem  to  have  been  compiled  partly  from 
the  Prince's  words,  partly  from  the  anecdotes  of  those  who  served 
with  him.     Occasionally  I  meet  with  such  memoranda  as  the 
following  : — "  The  Prince  does  not  recollect  what  happened  here  :" 
"Refer  to  Lord  Gerrard  for  an  account  of  this:"  "Sir  Robert 
Holmes  tells  this  story,  &c." 

VOL.  III.  O 


194         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [NOV. 

Prince,  and  there  laid  Ms  design  to  get  through  North- 
ampton and  came  to  Burghley,  to  the  Duke  of  Bucking- 
ham's house,  which  was  a  Parliament  garrison,  and  as  he 
marched  by  it  the  garrison  came  out,  and  one  that  was 
Governor  there  had  been  formerly  in  his  Highness's  troop. 
The  Prince  drew  his  troop  into  two  divisions,  in  a  broad 

Lord  Gerrard  or  So-  hi£h  wa^  there>  and  the  Governor  had 
merset  Fox  know  the  out  a  small  forlorn  hope,  which  they 
name  of  the  Governor.  beat  in<  The  Qovernor  came  with  tne 

gross  of  his  body,  and  knowing  the  Prince,  he  came  up 
with  his  pistol  and  missed  fire,  and  then  cried  for  quarter, 
but  the  Prince  shot  him  dead.  And  then  in  a  short  time 
the  rest  fled. 

Now  that  the  Prince's  design  of  breaking  through  was 
known  at  London,  they  laid  fifteen  hundred  horse  for  him 
at  several  places.  After  this,  the  Prince  marched  and 
came  to  a  bridge  not  far  from  Belvoir  Castle,  where  there 
were  three  hundred  horse  more.  The  Prince  stood  first 
toward  the  horse,  as  if  he  would  charge  them,  and  then 
upon  a  sudden  turned,  and  the  enemy  followed  him ;  the 
Prince  turned  and  fought  them,  and  beat  them  twice,  by 
which  the  other  forces  of  the  enemy  being  alarmed  they 
came  up  to  the  Prince.  Says  the  Prince  to  his  people, 
"  we  have  beaten  them  twice,  we  must  beat  them  once 
more,  and  then  over  the  pass  and  away,"  which  accord- 
ingly they  did,  then  the  Prince  sent  away  his  papers  and 
baggage  to  Belvoir  castle. 

The  enemy  then  came  upon  them,  and  the  Prince  having 
an  old  memory,  of  a  particular  way,  which  he  had  learned 
Lord  Hawley  was  ten  years  before,  being  at  Belvoir  Cas- 
there,  Prince  Maurice,  tie  in  the  last  King's  reign,  and  hunting 

Wm.  VatS?  and  and  shooting  of  conies>  ^embered  the 
seventeen  or  eighteen  way.  The  enemy  sent  forty  horse  after 
the  Prince,  the  rest  followed  the  gross 
of  the  troop.  When  they  came  near,  they  cried  to  Prince 
Rupert,  "Will  you  have  quarter?'*  The  Prince  com- 


1645.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     195 

manded  his  people  to  come  close  together,  and  to  turn 
when  he  turned.  The  enemy  came  down  the  hill  in  dis- 
order, and  the  Prince  beat  them  and  Lord  Molineux, 
killing  a  man  upon  a  good  mare,  the  Prince  new  mounted 
himself,  and  so  fair  and  softly  went  to  Belvoir.  But 
some  of  the  baggage  the  other  way  was  lost,  and  about 
fourteen  men. 

From  Belvoir  Castle  he  went,  next  day,  to  Newark. 
When  he  came,  the  Governor  drew  out  to  receive  him ; 
and  when  he  came  in,  the  Prince  desired  the  King,  if  he 
would  have  him  go  away,  he  might  be  tried  by  a  Council 
of  War  ;  which  he  was,  and  cleared,  the  Earl  of  Lindsey 
being  present.  The  thing  in  issue  was,  the  yielding  of 
Bristol ;  the  Prince  was  cleared,  and  the  King  signed  an 
instrument  signifying  as  much.  Then  the  Governor  of 
Newark,  Sir  R.  Willis,  having  drawn  out  of  the  town,  as 
aforesaid,  it  was  looked  on  as  a  crime,  and  he  was  turned 
out.  Then  Prince  Rupert  and  Prince  Maurice,  Lord 
Gerrard,  Colonel  Osborne,  and  Sir  John  James,  desired 
leave  of  the  King  to  be  gone ;  and  they  had  leave,  and 
sent  to  the  Parliament  for  a  pass,  and  they  would  give 
none,  except  he  would  engage  never  to  serve  the  King, 
which  he  refused. 

They  went  now  to  Worcester,  and  there  resolved  to 
cross  over  the  Avon,  and  go  to  Woodstock.  The  enemy , 
had  the  pass,  and  refused  him  passage  ;  whereupon,  he  bor- 
rowed some  musketeers  at  Worcester,  and  beat  the  enemy, 
and  he  came  and  got  over  and  got  to  Woodstock.  From 
Woodstock  the  Prince  wrote  to  the  King  to  know  what  he 
should  do  ;  who  sent  him,  by  Colonel  Legge,  a  paper  to 
confess  a  fault,  etc.  Then  the  Prince  sent  a  blank  paper  to 
the  King  by  Colonel  Legge,  with  his  name  subscribed, 
desiring  His  Majesty  would  set  down  what  he  should  do, 
because  he  could  not  go  with  the  Parliament's  leave,  nor 
stay  with  the  King's.  The  King,  with  tears  in  his  eyes, 
took  that  so  well  that  all  was  at  peace. 

o  2 


196          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [APR. 

Now,  that  when  Bristol  [then  Digby]  heard  the  Prince 

was  come,  he  proposes  a  design,  and 

At  Newark  before, 
takes   two   thousand    men,   and    goes 

away.     (Q.  Lord  Gerrard). 

The  Prince  went  to  Oxford,  and  the  King  embraced 
him :  and,  as  has  been  said,  repented    Duchess  of  Rich- 
much  the  ill-usage  of  his  nephew.  mond. 

The  Prince  was  then  desired  to  raise  a  Life-guard  for 
the  King ;  and  he  did  raise,  immediately,  five  troops  of 
horse.  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax,  coming  towards  the  place, 
the  Prince  undertook  to  furnish  the  town  with  provisions 
by  those  troops.  But  the  Lords  of  the  Council  were 
against  it,  and  so  the  Prince's  troops  were  immediately 
dissolved. 

These  troops  were  ready  to  have  attended  the  Prince  in 
convoying  the  King  to  the  Scots. 

About  this  time  [April],  the  King  sent  for  the  Prince, 
and  desired  him  to  go,  with  what  force  he  could,  to  con- 
voy him  to  the  Scots  ;  which  the  Prince  undertook,  but 
would  have  a  command  under  his  Majesty's  hand,  else  not. 
The  King  was  then  in  debate,  whether  to  Ireland  or 
Scotland.  The  Prince  was  rather  for  the  Scots ;  in  re- 
gard the  King  seemed  well  assured  of  their  fidelity  ;  and 
the  King  gave  it,  under  his  hand,  with  some  qualifica- 
tions ;  and  then  the  Prince  undertook  it :  and  one 
night  the  King  came,  with  Ashburnham  and  a  parson, 
and  told  him  he  was  going.  The  Prince  was  willing  to 
have  gone  with  him :  the  King  said  he  would  be  dis- 
covered by  his  tallness.  April  27,  1646.  The  King  went 
away  privately,  in  the  said  company.  Fairfax  came 
before  the  town  of  Oxford,  and  summoned  it ;  and  then 
some  of  his  troops  appeared  before  the  town.  And  the 
Prince,  with  his  brother  and  Lord  Gerrard,  went  out 
and  met  with  the  Scots,  which  drew  up,  and  would  have 
run  with  the  Prince  into  town.  Whereupon  the  Prince 
sent  into  the  town  for  some  musketeers.  They  sent  a  few 


1646.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      197 

out.  The  Prince  was  about  twenty  horse,  in  stockings 
and  shoes.  The  Parliament  forces  sent  three  bodies  of 
horse  against  him,  and  they  fell  upon  the  Prince,  and 
pressed  him.  There  was  some  skirmishing,  and  two  pages, 
Lord  Gerrard  and  Prince  Maurice's  pages,  were  wounded 
by  picketing  ;  whereupon  one  of  the  enemy  called  Lord 
Gerrard,  capon-tail !  and  challenged  him ;  and  a  lieute- 
nant of  the  enemy  shot  the  Prince  in  the  shoulder,  and 
shook  his  hand,  so  that  his  pistol  fell  out  of  his  hand, 
but  it  shot  his  enemy's  horse. 

The  enemy  then  advanced,  and  sent  two  bodies  to  get 
betwixt  the  Prince  and  the  town.  The  Prince  sent  to 
the  town  for  some  force,  and  placed  himself  between  two 
marshes  ;  and  then  the  enemy  came  up,  the  middle  troop 
most  of  them  officers.  The  Prince  brought  his  people 
all  upon  a  front,  and  the  enemy  shot  off  all  their  car- 
bines, and  then  they  fell  in  upon  them,  and  beat  them, 
and  the  other  two  wings  fell  into  bogs  ;  then  some  came 
from  the  town,  and  played  upon  the  enemy,  and  the 
Prince  came  back  again. 

When  the  enemy  summoned,  the  Prince  sent  to  the 
Governor,  Sir  Thomas  Glenham,  to  know  whether  he 
would  defend  the  town.  He  said  he  had  orders  from  the 
King  to  obey  the  Council.  Whereupon  the  Prince  came 
not  there  but  one  day,  and  then  they  were  making  articles  : 
they  would  make  one  for  the  Duke  of  York,  and  then  the 
Prince  demanded  one  particularly  for  himself.  A  certain 
Lord  said  the  Prince  was  in  good  company  ;  but  he  after- 
wards retracted,  and  asked  pardon,  by  the  Lord  Gerrard. 
It  was  then  asked  of  the  Governor,  if  he  would  arrest  the 
Prince  for  that,  but  he  would  not ;  and  then  the  article 
was  passed  for  the  Prince. 

The  King  found  the  garrison  at  Newark  very 
strong  in  numbers,  but  its  effectiveness  much  weak- 
ened by  the  dissoluteness  strangely  incidental  to 


198         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [OCT. 

times  of  great  danger.  These  hardy  men  had  "  held 
their  lives  in  their  hands"  for  many  months,  with- 
out being  roused  by  any  action  with  the  enemy. 
Sir  Richard  Willis  was  then  governor  of  Newark  : 
fancying  himself  in  an  enemy's  county,  he  had  levied 
contributions  almost  at  will  upon  the  surrounding 
county,  and  dwelt  in  the  castle  in  great  state,  assisted 
by  a  staff  of  twenty-four  general  officers.1  The  King 
immediately  employed  himself  in  retrenching  their 
excesses,  or  at  least  their  expenses,  which  were 
highly  injurious  both  to  his  cause,  and  his  conveni- 
ence. The  pampered  Cavaliers  highly  resented  this 
reformation,  and  complained  that  they  alone  had 
been  thus  blamed  and  visited,  while  Goring  and 
Grenville  acted  as  they  pleased,  without  rebuke. 
A  report  now  arrived,  that  Montrose  had  obtained 
another  victory,  by  which  Philiphaugh  was  more 
than  revenged,  and  the  poor  King  once  more  set 
forth  in  search  of  a  conquering  army  that  he  could 
call  his  own.  Lord  Digby  counselled  this  move- 
ment, as  he  had  advised  the  King's  move  to  New- 
ark, and  both  from  private  motives.  He  discovered 
that  the  unworthy  dismissal  of  Rupert  without  a 
hearing,  was  justly  visited  on  his  head ;  that  a  large 
and  powerful  party  had  taken  up  the  Prince's  cause, 
and*  that  a  storm  of  the  most  disagreeable  nature 
impended  over  him.  Lord  Digby  was  a  daring 
man,  but  he  shrank  from  a  contest  which  placed 

1  Walker's  Historical  Discourses,  145. 


1645.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      199 

him  in  such  an  unworthy  light;  above  all,  he 
could  not  summon  resolution  to  meet  the  man  for 
whom  he  had  professed  such  affection  and  devotion, 
now  armed  with  injuries.  For  this  purpose  he  led 
away  his  royal  master  to  Newark,  hoping  to  place 
a  barrier  of  many  dangers  between  him  and  his 
enemy.  But  dangers  were  nothing,  if  not  attrac- 
tive to  the  fiery  young  Palatine  at  any  time. 

"  He  had  not  quailed  at  danger's  brow 
When  high  and  happy — need  he  now'!  " 

Smarting  under  a  sense  of  wrong,  and  burning  to 
confront  himself  with  the  false  Digby  who  had  lied 
away  his  fame,  the  Prince  was  now  on  his  way  to 
seek  the  King.  Commands  came  from  Digby  in 
the  King's  name  forbidding  his  approach ;  but  his 
was  not  a  mood  or  a  case  to  stand  upon  punctilio, 
and  observe  ordinances  concocted  and  even  signed 
by  his  arch-enemy;  then  submissively  to  go  forth 
upon  the  world  "  to  seek  his  subsistence "  with  a 
brand  upon  his  name.  Prince  Maurice,  too,  had 
now  joined  him,  determined  to  take  his  fate  with 
his  brother's,  whatever  might  betide.  The  Diary 
has  told  us  through  what  dangers  the  Princes  passed 
in  their  march,  which  lay  through  the  midst  of  the 
enemy's  country.  Then  it  was  that  Digby  induced 
the  King  to  move  further  northwards  still.1 

Arrived  at  Rotherham,  as  we  have  seen,  the  King 
learned  that  Montrose  was,  like  himself,  a  fugitive : 


1  Sir  Edward  Walker,  p.  145,  and  Clarendon,  who  followed 
him. 


200          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [OCT. 

and  so  he  prepared  to  return,  if  possible,  to  Oxford. 
But  Digby  did  not  dare  to  return :  he  sought 
a  commission  from  the  King  to  march  to  the 
assistance  of  Montrose,  and  it  was  granted.  Lord 
Digby,  with  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale,  and  the 
Northern  Horse,  and  the  title  of  "  General  of  the 
King's  forces  North  of  Trent,"1  went  away  to  seek 
Montrose:  he  had  only  fifteen  hundred  troopers, 
but  they  constituted  the  King's  chief  strength ;  and 
as  it  proved,  they  would  have  been  sufficient  to  con- 
quer all  the  scattered  Roundheads  of  the  North. 
But  the  Secretary-at-War  rode  forth  upon  his  new 
career  in  as  vain-glorious  and  selfish  a  spirit  as  ever 
knight-errant  did  of  old.  In  a  few  days  his  veteran 
troops  were  scattered  to  the  winds,  and  himself  on 
board  a  fishing-smack,  seeking  refuge  in  the  Isle 
of  Man. 

The  King  returned  to  Newark,  and  Rupert  set 
out  from  Belvoir  Castle  to  wait  upon  him.  All  the 
principal  Cavaliers  at  Newark,  with  the  Governor 
at  their  head,  went  out  to  meet  their  gallant  chief, 
and  this  gave  the  umbrage  to  his  Majesty  that  is 
mentioned  in  the  Diary.  The  account  that  Walker 
gives  of  the  Prince's  reception  is  curious.  He 

1  Clarendon's  Rebellion,  v.  288.  The  following  comment  is 
made  by  the  Parliamentary  Journal,  "  Mercurius  Britannicus  "  of 
Nov.  10th,  1645  : — "It  is  remarkable  that  Prince  Rupert,  and 
all  the  Protestant  leaders  should  be  deposed  for  Popish  Digby. 
The  game  is  still  alive ;  Goring  in  the  West,  with  six  or  seven 
thousand  men  is  still  to  be  dreaded,  and  our  Parliament  wants 
money."  Goring  soon  removed  their  fears  as  regarded  his  oppo- 
sition. 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       201 

informs  us  that  the  Prince's  "  train  consisted  of 
one  hundred  and  twenty  noblemen  and  gentlemen," 
with  whom  he  had  fought  his  way  from  Oxford. 
On  arriving  at  Oxford,  Prince  Rupert  "  comes 
straight  into  the  presence,  and  without  any  usual 
ceremony,  tells  his  Majesty  that -he  was  come  to 
render  an  account  of  the  loss  of  Bristol.  His 
Majesty  made  him  but  little  answer,  but  went  to 
supper,  Prince  Rupert  and  his  brother  standing 
by  his  Majesty  addressing  himself  in  discourse  to 
Prince  Maurice."  Rupert,  however,  was  not  to  be 
disposed  of  thus:  he  demanded  and  obtained  a 
court-martial.  There  he  pleaded  the  reasons  that 
have  been  transcribed  in  his  Declaration,  and  the 
verdict  of  the  "  Council  of  War,"  as  it  was  called, 
was  as  follows  : — 

CHARLES  R. 

Whereas,  our  right  dear  and  entirely  beloved  ne- 
phew, Prince  Rupert,  did,  at  a  Council  of  war,  held  by  us, 
at  Newark,  the  eighteenth  of  this  instant,  October, — there 
being  then  present  our  right- trusty  and  wellbeloved  cou- 
sin, and  councillor,  Montague  Earl  of  Lindsey,  Lord 
Great  Chamberlain  of  England ;  our  right  trusty  and 
right  wellbeloved  cousin,  Richard  Earl  of  Cork;  our 
right  trusty  and  wellbeloved  Jacob  Lord  Astley,  Field- 
Marshal-General  of  our  army ;  John  Lord  Bellasis,  Cap- 
tain-General of  our  Horse-guards  :  and  Charles  Lord 
Gerrard,  Lieutenant-General  of  all  our  horse  forces  ;  our 
trusty  and  wellbeloved  Sir  Richard  Willis,  knight  and 
baronet,  governor  of  Newark ;  and  John  Ashburnham, 
esquire,  our  Treasurer  at  war  ;  — desire  to  clear  himself 
for  the  rendering  the  city  and  garrison  of  Bristol,  with 


202         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [OCT. 

the  castle  and  forts  thereof;  and  thereupon  produced  a 
narrative  of  the  matter-of-fact  during  the  siege,  with  the 
articles  for  the  rendering  of  those  places  ;  which  being 
accordingly  read  and  considered,  we  were  then  pleased  to 
say ;  that  we  did  not  believe  our  said  nephew  to  be  guilty 
of  any  the  least  want  of  courage  or  fidelity  to  us,  in  the 
doing  thereof;  but,  withal,  we  believed  that  he  might 
have  kept  the  castle  and  fort  a  longer  time ;  we  having 
absolutely  resolved  speedily  to  have  drawn  together  all 
the  forces  we  possibly  could,  and  to  have  hazarded  our 
own  person  for  his  relief.  Our  design  being  so  laid,  as 
that  in  probability  it  would  have  succeeded.  To  which 
our  said  right  dear  nephew  answered,  that  whatever  he 
did  therein,  was  by  the  advice  of  the  Council  of  war  of 
that  garrison ;  and  that  he  could  not,  in  his  judgment, 
possibly  expect  such  relief.  Besides,  he  alleged,  that  he 
had  not  received  from  us  any  intimation  thereof ;  but  said 
that  if  he  had,  he  would  have  maintained  those  places  to 
the  last  man;  though  the  tender  regard  he  had  to  the 
preservation  of  so  many  officers  and  soldiers,  was  the 
chief  reason  that  induced  him  to  capitulate  for  the  whole  ; 
they  having  so  long  and  faithfully  served  us.  All  which 
our  said  right  dear  nephew  humbly  submitted  to  our 
judgment.  Who,  upon  which,  at  a  second  hearing,  before 
ourself,  this  twenty-first  day  of  October,  the  Lords  and 
others  above-named  being  then  likewise  present,  and, 
upon  a  serious  consideration  of  the  whole  matter,  we 
were  then  pleased  to  declare,  that  we  were  fully  satisfied 
that  our  said  right  dear  nephew,  Prince  Rupert,  is  not 
guilty  of  any  the  least  want  of  courage  or  fidelity  to  us, 
or  our  service,  in  that  action :  and  we  then  gave  leave  to 
the  Lords  and  others,  above  specified,  to  declare  their 
opinions  in  that  point.  Who,  upon  our  leave,  and  a  full 
consideration  of  the  narrative  formerly  delivered,  did  una- 
nimously concur  with  us ;  declaring,  likewise,  that  our 
said  right  dear  nephew  is  not  guilty  of  any  the  least 


1645.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      203 

want  of  courage  or  fidelity  to  us,  or  our  service,  in  that 
action. 

Given  under  our  sign  manual,  at  our  Court,  at  Newark, 
this  twenty-first  of  October,  1645. 

This  verdict  was  a  great  triumph  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert's party ;  and  if  the  King  had  acted  upon  it,  all 
might  still  have  been  well,  and  Rupert  have  been 
spared  the  greatest  error,  if  not  crime,  that  the  his- 
tory of  his  life  contains.  It  was  unwise,  perhaps, 
of  the  King  to  act  in  accordance  with  his  angry 
feelings  rather  than  with  his  judgment ;  and  with 
respect  to  this  business  of  Bristol  we  have  the 
following  observation  from  one  of  Rupert's  severest 
censurers.  Lord  Clarendon  says,1  "  that  the  King's 
'  rigour '  towards  the  Prince  was  thought  to  be  over 
sudden,  that  he  [Rupert]  should  be  made  the  first 
example  of  the  King's  severity,  where  so  many  high 
enormities  and  miscarriages  of  others  had  passed 
without  being  called  in  question."  The  very  reason 
for  that  "  rigour  "  he  now  dismissed  officially,  but  he 
seems  to  have  exhibited  his  discountenance  of  the 
acquitted  Prince  in  a  very  decided  manner.  At 
length  he  determined  to  depart  suddenly  for  Oxford, 
and  resolved  to  supersede  Sir  Richard  Willis  as 
Governor  of  Newark,  and  to  appoint  Lord  Bellasis,2 
Lord  Digby's  friend,  in  his  place. 

"The   King,  at  the   same   time,  appointed    Sir 


1  Hist.  Reb.  v.  253. 

2  Lord  Bellasis  was  afterwards  killed  in  a  drunken  quarrel  in 
Trance. 


204          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [OCT. 

Richard  to  the  command  of  his  Life  Guards  in 
Lord  Lichfield's  1  place.  Sir  Richard,  however,  saw 
only  in  this  appointment  a  pretext  for  his  dis- 
placement as  Governor,  (as,  indeed,  the  King  con- 
fessed,) and  was  grievously  offended.  He  consulted 
his  friends,  at  the  head  of  whom  was  Prince  Rupert, 
and  they  all  agreed  that  he  should  demand  a  trial 
by  a  Council  of  war  for  the  misdemeanour,  of  which 
absolutely  in  our  eyes  he  was  guilty.  With  a  view 
of  making  this  request  the  two  Princes,  Lord  Ger- 
rard,  Sir  Richard  Willis,  and  about  twenty  other 
officers,  went  to  the  King  whilst  he  was  at  dinner. 
The  King  rose  to  receive  them.  Sir  Richard  Willis 
said  that  his  dishonour  was  public,  and  the  talk  of 
the  town ;  Rupert  said  that  he  felt  obliged  to  stand 
by  Sir  Richard,  as  he  had  suffered  through  having 
befriended  him ;  Lord  Gerrard  said  that  the  appoint- 
ment of  Lord  Bellasis  was  Digby's  doing,  that 
Digby  was  a  traitor,  and  that  he  could  prove  him 
so."2  We  are  not  told  what  part  the  King  took  in 
this  extraordinary  conversation,  but  he  expressed  a 
wish  to  speak  to  Sir  Richard  Willis  in  private.  Sir 
Richard,  worked  up  into  passionate  forgetfulness 
of  all  duty  and  decorum,  replied,  that  as  his  injury 
was  public,  so  he  expected  a  public  satisfaction. 
Whereupon  the  King  commanded  his  officers  to  leave 
the  room,  and  they  obeyed.  The  other  general 


1  Better  known  to  us  as   Lord   Bernard    Stuart ;    killed    at 
Chester. 

2  See  Edward  Walker,  p.  149. 


1045.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      205 

officers  of  the  garrison  were  immediately  summoned 
to  the  King,  and  it  was  debated  what  course  to  take 
with  these  wild  Cavaliers.  To  let  them  alone  was 
the  sensible  decision.  In  the  evening  they  forwarded 
the  petition  subjoined,  and  in  return  they  received 
their  passports.1  The  rest  of  the  story  is  thus  told  in  a 


1        COPY    OF    PRINCE    RUPERT'S    PETITION,   &0.    DELIVERED    AT 
NEWARK. 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    MOST    EXCELLENT    MAJESTY, 

Whereas,  in  all  humility,  we  came  to  present  ourselves  this 
day  unto  your  Majesty,  to  make  our  several  grievances  known. 
We  find  we  have  drawn  upon  us  some  misconstruction  by  the 
manner  of  that,  by  reason  your  Majesty  thought  it  appeared  as  a 
mutiny.  We,  therefore,  the  persons  subscribed  with  all  humble- 
ness and  carefulness  present  unto  your  Majesty  that  we,  who 
from  the  beginning  of  this  unhappy  war,  have  given  testimony 
to  your  Majesty  and  the  world,  of  our  fidelity  and  zeal,  do  think 
ourselves  unhappy  to  lie  under  your  Majesty's  censure.  We  do, 
in  all  humility,  present  these  reasons  unto  your  sacred  Majesty 
rather  in  writing  than  personally,  lest  we  should  hazard  a  second 
misrepresentation. 

That  many  of  us  trusted  in  high  commands  in  your  Majesty's 
service,  have  not  only  our  commission  taken  away  without  any 
reason  or  cause  expressed,  whereby  our  honours  are  blemished  to 
the  world,  our  fortunes  ruined,  and  we  rendered  incapable  of 
trust  or  command  from  any  foreign  Prince ;  but  many  others, 
as  we  have  cause  to  fear,  are  designed  to  suffer  in  the  same 
manner. 

Our  intention  in  addressing  ourselves  to  your  Majesty,  and  our 
submission  now  are,  that  your  Majesty  will  be  graciously  pleased 
that  such  of  us  as  now  labour  under  the  opinion  of  unworthiness 
or  incapacity  to  serve  your  Majesty,  may,  at  a  Council  of  War, 
receive  knowledge  of  the  cause  of  your  Majesty's  displeasure,  and 
have  the  justice  of  defence  after  what  can  be  alleged  against  us, 
and,  in  particular,  concerning  this  government  [of  Newark],  and 
if,  upon  the  severest  examination,  our  integrity  and  loyalty  to 
your  Majesty  shall  appear,  that  then  your  Majesty  be  graciously 
pleased  to  grant  us  either  reparation  in  honour  against  our 
enemies,  or  liberty  to  pass  into  other  parts,  which  are  the  hum- 
blest desires  of  your  Majesty's  most  obedient  and  loyal  subjects 
and  servants. — Evelyns  Memoirs,  v.  150. 


206         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF          [OCT. 

Parliamentary  journal.1  It  was  reported  that 
weapons  had  been  drawn  in  the  King's  presence,2 
but  Sir  Edward  Walker,  who  was  present,  does  not 
allude  to  that  outrage. 

1  At  length  the  King  was  enforced  to  rouse  himself,  and  to  inter- 
pose between  their  angry  swords,  and  commanded  peace  to  be  ob- 
served.    The  malady  being  treated  without  but  not  within.    The 
King,  not  many  hours  after,  gent  for  the  two  princes — who,  being 
come  unto  him,  he  assured  them  that,  in  this  present  condition 
wherein  he  was,  it  brought  some  comfort  to  him  to  see  them  with 
him,  which  comfort  he  desired  might  be  continued;  having  of 
late   been   exercised   with   afflictions   upon   afflictions,    that   he 
needed  no  addition  to  them.     For  his  own  part  he  made  no  doubt 
of  their  fidelity,  but  he  said  that,  after  having  made  so  many 
obligations  to  him,  if  they  should  now  nourish  any  secret  design 
to  turn  into  his  adversaries,  either  through  fear  or  hope,  that  he 
was  afraid  would  bring  but  little  credit  to  them.     To  this  Prince 
Rupert  answered,  that  he  honoured  his  Majesty  too  much  to  take 
offence  at  anything  which  he  pleased  to  have  done ;  that  he  was 
well  pleased  if  his  Majesty  would  acknowledge  his  innocency — 
to  which,  we  hear,  that  his  Majesty  made  reply,  he  did.     The 
Princes  being  departed  from  the  presence  of  his  Majesty  repaired 
presently  to  Gerrard,  with  whom  they  took  new  counsel,  and  dis- 
daining to  remain  at  a  Court  wherein  the  Spanish  and  Irish  faction 
did  mingle,  they  called  together  their  friends,  about  four  hun- 
dred, and  marched  to  Worton  House,  fourteen  miles  from  Newark. 
The  King  looking  out  of  a  window,  and  weeping  to  see  them 
as  they  went. — Mercurius  Britannicus,  King's   Pamphlets,  vol. 
ccxxxii.  No.  5. 

2  Pepys,  who  had  no  good  will  towards  Rupert,  as  we  shall 
find  hereafter,  thus  exaggeratingly  relates  an  exaggerated  story  : — 
"  My  Lord  Bellasis  told  us  how  the  King  having  newly  put  out 
Prince  Rupert  of  his  generalship,  upon  some  miscarriage  at  Bristol, 
and  Sir  Richard  Willis  from  his  governorship  of  Newark,  at  the 
entreaty  of  the  gentry  of  the  county,  and  put  in  my  Lord  Bellasis  ; 
the  great  officers  of  the  King's  army  mutinied,  and  came  in  that 
manner  with  swords  drawn  into  the  market-place  of  the  town 
where  the  King  was  j  whereupon  the  King  says,  ' 1  must  horse.' 
And  there  himself  personally,  when  everybody  expected  they 
should  be  opposed,  the  King  came,  and  cried  to  the  head  of  the 
mutineers,  which  was  Prince  Rupert,  "  Nephew,  I  command  you 
begone.'  So  the  Prince,  in  all- his  fury  and  discontent,  with- 
drew,, and  his  company  scattered." — Pepys' s  Diary,  vol.  i.  p.  329. 


1645.]        PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     207 

There  is  but  one  palliative  circumstance  in  all 
this  transaction ;  it  is  certain  that  Rupert's  wrongs 
or  his  popularity  must  have  been  very  great  to  induce 
so  many  of  his  commanders  to  leave  their  King. 
The  seceding  Cavaliers  established  themselves  at 
Belvoir  Castle,  whence  they  forwarded  the  following 
despatch  to  the  Houses  of  Parliament : — 

FROM  PRINCE  RUPERT,  TO  THE  LORDS  AND  COMMONS 
IN  PARLIAMENT  ASSEMBLED. 

MY  LORDS  AND  GENTLEMEN, 

Having  determined,  with  my  brother  Prince  Mau- 
rice, my  Lord  Stanley,  Lord  Gerrard,  Sir  R.  Willis, 
and  many  other  Officers  and  Gentlemen,  to  leave  this 
kingdom,  being  altogether  disengaged  from  the  service  we 
have  been  in,  it  hath  given  me  the  occasion  to  desire  this 
favour  from  you,  that  you  would  grant  a  pass  and  safe 
convoy  for  me,  my  brother  Prince  Maurice  and  these 
Noblemen  and  Gentlemen  that  came  along  with  me,  to- 
gether with  their  servants,  horses,  and  all  necessaries,  to 
go  beyond  the  seas  or  to  retire  to  their  houses,  as  shall  be 
most  convenient  for  them.  And  I  engage  my  honour  for 
myself  and  them,  that  no  act  of  hostility  shall  be  done  by 
us,  and  that  there  is  no  other  design  in  our  journey,  but 
to  go  wherever  our  particular  occasion  or  designs  shall 
lead  us.  I  have  therefore  addressed  unto  you  this  gentle- 
man, Lieu  tenant -Colonel  Osborne,  who  can  assure  you 
that  my  intentions  are  no  other  than  what  I  have  pro- 
fessed ;  and  by  him  I  shall  expect  a  return  of  my  desire. 
And  herein  you  shall  much  oblige 

Your  Friend  and  Servant, 

RUPERT.1 

October  29,  1645. 

1  From  the  rejected  Clarendon  State  Papers  (MSS.)  in  the 
Bodleian  Library. 


208          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [OCT. 

The  result  of  Colonel  Osborne's  mission  is  thus 
related  by  himself: — 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

I  presented,  this  morning,  your  letter  to  my  Lord 
Grey,  of  Warwick,  who  is  Speaker  of  the  House  of  Lords. 
I  found,  upon  my  first  arrival,  that  the  granting  of  your 
desires  in  your  letter  would  be  so  unwillingly  consented 
to,  that  I  thought  it  fit  to  add  to  them  in  the  behalf  of  those 
persons  that  come  along  with  you,  and  I  pretended  I  had 
received  orders  from  your  Highness  to  do  it ;  and,  after 
that,  I  was  called  into  the  Lords'  house,  and  had  told  them 
what   were   your   further  desires.       The    Lords   bid   me 
deliver  them  to  them  in  writing,  which  I  did  according  to 
the  paper  here  inclosed.     Upon  these  demands  they  make 
a  demur ;  but  the  letter  they  have  sent  down  to  the  House 
of  Commons,  who  will  make  no  difficulty  in  the  granting 
of  it.    And  I  am  confident,  although  they  may  make  a  stay 
upon  the  yielding  to  what  is  desired  in  this  paper,  yet 
there  may  be  brought  so  many  more  reasons  why  those 
demands  should  be  granted,  rather  than  denied,  that  they 
will  yield  to  them  at  the  last :  especially  since  I  have  told 
them,  that  upon  the  granting  or  denial  of  them,  I  believed, 
did  depend  your  Highness's    resolutions  ;    and    they    are 
so   fearful  that  you   should  return  again  to  the  King's 
service,  that,  to  draw  you  from  that,  they  will  consent  to 
anything.     But  I  hear  that  the  Lords,  upon  debate,  made 
this  objection :  that  these  desires  were  not  mentioned  in 
your  letter,  nor  was  it  mentioned  that  I  had  any  power  to 
propound  anything  more  to  them ;  and  that  I  ought  to 
have  had  some  letter  of  credence  to  that  effect.     I  shall, 
therefore,  desire  your  Highness  to  send  me  some  letter, 
wherein  you  give  me  authority  to  make  those  demands  to 
the  Parliament,  and  own  them  as  yours  ;  which,  if  they 
grant,  it  will  not  only  be  much  for  the  advantage  of  those 
gentlemen  who  are  with  your  Highness,  but  also  for  your 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.         209 

own  honour.  And  certainly,  otherwise,  no  man  must 
expect  to  preserve  any  estate  he  hath.  And  if  there  shall 
be  occasion,  your  Highness  may  find  pretence  enough  to 
decline  any  part  of  those  demands.  But  I  believe  you  will 
not  need,  for  I  have  given  out  suspicions  that  the  King  is 
now  treating  with  you  to  come  to  him  again,  and  that  if 
you  have  not  a  very  good  answer  in  all  you  shall  desire,  I 
could  not  tell  what  resolution  you  might  take,  and  the 

apprehension  of  this not  a  little,  insomuch  that 

Sir  Thomas  Cheek,  of  the  Lower  House,  told  me  that  he 
was  clearly  for  the  granting  of  them. 

The  Declaration  and  Narrative  of  Bristol  are  printing  ; 
but  I  hear  the  Queen  says  publicly,  at  Paris,  that  you 
sold  the  town  for  money.  There  is  news  come  lately  that 
Prince  Edward  is  turned  Papist  and  gone  to  Rome,  and 
that  the  Pope  and  Emperor  will  make  him  Prince  Elector. 
At  the  last  fight  of  my  Lord  Digby,  he  lost  all  his  letters, 
which  the  Parliament  took,  and  three  score  ciphers,  by 
which  they  have  deciphered  most  of  the  letters,  which,  be- 
fore, they  could  make  nothing  of.  And,  this  afternoon,  a 
committee  hath  been  reading  many  of  them.  Amongst  the 
letters  they  last  took,  there  was  one  from  the  King  to 
your  Highness,  being  an  answer  to  a  letter  of  yours,  of 
July  last,  where  you  advised  him  to  peace,  and  not  to 
trust  the  Irish.  This  letter  hath  done  you  a  great  deal  of 
right,  and  gained  much  of  their  good  opinion.  There  is, 
this  day,  a  letter  come  to  the  Parliament,  from  the  North, 
which  relates  a  second,  and,  they  say,  a  total  defeat  of  my 
Lord  Digby 's  forces.  I  shall  desire,  sir,  you  would  be 
pleased  to  send  me  your  answer  to  the  first  part  of  this 
letter  immediately  upon  the  receipt  of  it,  for  it  requires  a 
great  deal  of  haste,  and  with  it  a  cipher  and  certificate. 

Your  Highness's  most  faithful  and  obedient  Servant, 

HENRY  OSBORNE. 

London,  November  1,  1645. 

This  ambassador  writes  again  on  the  9th  of  No- 

VOL.   III.  P 


210        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [NOV. 

vember,  saying  that  the  Parliament  would  only  give 
a  pass  on  promise  not  to  serve  the  King  again. 
These  terms  were  rejected  by  the  Prince.  On  the 
10th  we  have  the  following  letter  : — 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

I  thought  to  have  sent  away  this  other  letter  this 
morning,  hut  some  things  hindered  it,  and  I  am  not  sorry 
for  the  delay,  since  hy  this  day  I  can  give  your  Highness 
some  better  account  of  your  business ;  for  this  morning 
your  pass  was  despatched  by  both  Houses,  and  it  was  to 
be  sent  by  me,  and  Colonel  Pickering  was  to  come  along 
with  me  with  instructions  from  the  Parliament.  There- 
upon I  desired  to  know  the  condition  of  the  pass,  which 
was,  as  I  had  heard  before,  to  the  effect  I  have  signified 
in  my  other  letter.  I  then  let  the  Parliament  know  that 
that  was  no  answer  to  what  was  desired  by  your  High- 
ness, and  that  they  had  not  granted  hardly  in  any  part 
what  you  expected,  that  your  Highness's  letter,  by  which 
I  was  authorized  to  make  further  propositions  to  them, 
was  not  read  in  the  House  by  my  Lord  Grey,  nor  the  pro- 
positions so  much  as  debated,  which  I  said  signified  but 
very  little  with  respect  to  your  Highness,  and  that  if  they 
would  not  give  a  more  satisfactory  answer  than  this  pass, 
I  desired  they  would  send  somebody  else  with  it,  for  I 
would  not  carry  it.  Thereupon  they  sent  for  me  this 
afternoon,  the  committee  of  both  kingdoms,  where  they 
desired  to  see  your  Highness's  letter -with  the  instructions 
which  they  read,  and  after  some  debate  called  me  in,  and 
desired  me  to  come  thither  again  to-morrow  in  the  after- 
noon, and  I  should  have  an  answer.  And  I  hear  my  Lord 
Grey  was  reproved  for  not  reading  it  in  the  House.  So 
that,  perhaps,  I  may  have  such  a  despatch  to-morrow  as 
may  be  worth  the  bringing ;  if  I  cannot,  I  shall  send  your 
Highness,  as  near  as  I  can,  the  truest  state  of  your  busi- 


1645.J      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      211 

ness,  and  I  believe  they  are  to  be  disputed  into  better 
conditions.     I  rest, 
Your  Highness's  most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

HENRY  OSBORNE. 

London,  November  10,  1645. 

A  pass  was  sent  by  the  same  messenger,  provided 
a  promise  was  given  by  the  Cavaliers,  never  again 
to  bear  arms  against  the  Parliament.  This  they 
refused,  and  they  fought  their  way  to  Worcester 
and  then  to  Woodstock. 

There  the  Prince  and  his  friends  remained  for 
some  time.  Meanwhile  the  King  reached  Oxford, 
and  on  Nicholas's  expostulation  released  Will 
Legge  from  arrest.  He  thus  writes  on  the  21st 
November,  1645: — 

MY    MOST    DEAR    PRINCE, 

The  liberty  that  I  have  got  is  but  of  little  contentment 
when  divided  from  you.  Four  days  after  his  Majesty's 
arrival  here,  Mr.  Ashburnham  fetched  me  to  kiss  his 
hand,  without  any  expostulation  for  my  commitment,  since 
which  I  have  waited  in  the  chamber.1  The  first  discourse 
I  had  with  him  was  concerning  you,  where  he  gave  me  a 
relation  of  the  unhappy  breach  between  you,  which  I 
would  to  God  had  never  been.  But  now  that  what  is  past 
cannot  be  recalled,  I  shall  humbly  beseech  you  to  look 
forward  to  what  may  be  the  best  for  your  future  honour 
and  advantage.  Since  I  had  the  honour  to  be  your  servant, 
I  never  had  other  desire  than  faithfully  to  serve  you,  and 
when  I  leave  to  pursue  that,  may  I  die  forgotten !  I  have 
not  hitherto  lost  a  day  without  moving  his  Majesty  to 
recal  you,  and  truly  this  very  day  he  protested  to  me  he 

1  He  was  not  restored,  however,  to  the  governorship  of  Oxford, 
which  Sir  Thomas  had  the  honour  of  surrendering. 

p  2 


212          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [NOV. 

would  count  it  a  great  happiness  to  have  you  with  him,  so 
he  received  that  satisfaction  he  is  hound  in  honou/to  have, 
and  what  that  is,  you  will  receive  from  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond. The  King  says,  as  he  is  your  uncle,  he  is  in  the 
nature  of  a  parent  to  you,  and  swears  if  Prince  Charles 
had  done  as  you  did,  he  would  never  see  him  without  the 
same  he  desires  from  you  ;  I  beseech  you  consider  well  of 
your  affairs,  and  let  me  but  receive  your  directions,  and 
there  never  shall  be  anything  wanting  that  may  render  me 

Your  most  obliged  faithful  servant, 
November  26,  1645.  W.   LEGGE. 

P.S.  [almost  illegible]  You  must  thank  [Duchess  of 
Richmond,  I  believe]  for  she  furnished  a  present  to  pro- 
cure this  messenger,  I  not  being  so  happy  as  to  have  [any 
money]  myself. 

Again  on  the  25th  November  : — 

MY  DEAREST  PRINCE, 

Your  brother's  man  would  not  do  me  the  favour  to 
call  on  me  for  this  letter,  although  I  told  him  I  had  it 
ready.  I  am  of  opinion  you  should  write  to  your  uncle, 
seeing  your  stay  hath  been  so  long  in  his  quarters  in 
Woodstock — you  ought  to  do  it :  and  if  you  offered  your 
service  to  him  yet,  and  submitted  yourself  to  his  disposing 
and  advice,  many  of  your  friends  think  it  could  not  be  a 
dishonour,  but  rather  the  contrary,  seeing  he  is  a  king, 
your  uncle,  and  in  effect  a  parent  to  you.  If  it  were  pos- 
sible for  me  to  come  where  you  are,  I  would  not  fail  to 
come  to  you,  or  if  you  come  near  I  shall  do  the  same. 

Dear  Prince,  God  of  Heaven  bless  your  faithful  poor 
servant  WILL.  LEGGE. 

November  25,  1645. 

P.S.  This  bearer  goes  purposely  to  carry  our  letters  to 
you,  we  not  else  knowing  how  to  send. 

I  fear  that  these  wise  exhortations  did  not  pro- 


1645.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        213 

duce  this  desired  effect,  for  I  find  the  Earl  of  Dorset 
writing  the  following  excellent  letter,  some  weeks 
later : — 

SIR, 

If  my  prayers  can  prevail,  you  shall  not  have  the 
heart  to  leave  us  all  in  our  saddest  times  ;  and  if  my  ad- 
vice were  worthy  of  following,  truly  you  should  not  aban- 
don your  uncle  in  the  disastrous  condition  his  evil  stars 
have  placed  him.  Let  your  resolution  he  as  generous  and 
great  as  is  your  birth  and  courage.  Resolve,  princely  sir, 
to  sink  or  swim  with  the  King  ;  adjourn  all  particular 
respects  or  interests  until  the  public  may  give  way  to  such 
unlucky  disputes.  Howsoever,  so  great  are  my  obligations 
to  your  noble  and  benign  interpretations  of  my  good 
wishes  and  humble  endeavours  to  serve  you  as  I  shall  ac- 
company your  person  and  your  undertakings  in  any  other 
foreign  course,  with  my  most  zealous  orisons  for  a  prospe- 
rous success  in  all ;  and  God  in  heaven  inspire  you  to  do 
that  which  may  produce  the  best  effects  to  his  glory,  the 
King's  service,  and  your  own  honour  and  safety.  All 
which,  in  my  opinion,  may  be  most  securely  found  in  your 
stay  here,  and  assistance  of  us.  I  rest,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  servant, 

And  affectionate  friend, 

DORSET. 

December  25,  1645. 

Sti)l  the  Prince  continues  obdurate.  He  per- 
haps flattered  himself  he  was  playing  the  part  of 
Coriolanus.  The  importance  of  his  services  is  ad- 
mitted in  the  next  letter,  which  is  from  Secretary 
Nicholas  : — 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  HlGHNESS, 

I  beseech  your  Highness  to  decipher  this,  as  soon  as 
it  comes  to  your  hand. 


214          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF         [JAN. 

Upon  occasion  of  a  letter  now  written  to  the  King, 
after  a  long  and  serious  debate  by  the  Lords  of  the  Coun- 
cil here,  touching  his  Majesty's  armies'  marching  into  the 
North,  I  beseech  your  Highness  to  give  me  leave,  as  a 
servant  that  truly  honours  you,  humbly  to  desire  you 
seriously  to  weigh  what  may  be  the  consequence  for  your 
Highness,  singly ;  for  what  your  officers  and  soldiers  shall 
do,  will  be  understood  as  your  act  to  oppose  and  with- 
stand the  advice  of  all  the  King's  council,  in  a  matter  of 
so  high  concernment.  Wherein,  I  assure  you,  every  one 
of  them  have  unanimously  concurred,  and  delivered 
clearly  their  opinions,  that  it  will  be  absolutely  destruc- 
tion to  the  King's  affairs,  which  are  in  no  way  conceived 
to  be  in  no  ill  condition ;  for  his  army  to  march  at  this 
time  into  the  North;  and  that  his  going  immediately 
into  the  associated  counties  will  soon  put  an  end  to  these 
unhappy  troubles,  and  bring  peace  to  this  kingdom : 
which  is  that  which  I  know  your  Highness  affects  above 
all,  and  would  take  to  be  your  greatest  glory  to  be  a 
happy  instrument  of.  Sir,  you  are  now  looked  upon  as 
a  person  that  hath  reason  to  expect  a  fortune  in  this  king- 
dom ;  and  that  hath  begot  in  me  this  presumption,  to 
tender  to  your  consideration  my  humble  advice,  not  to 
draw  upon  yourself  the  envy  to  be  thought  to  persuade 
the  King,  in  a  business  of  so  great  importance  and  hazard, 
against  the  joint  and  unanimous  advice  of  all  his 
Council.  Having  thus  over-boldly  presumed,  out  of  my 
true  affection  to  your  person,  to  give  your  Highness  the 
truth  of  my  humble  conception,  I  humbly  submit  myself 
and  it  to  your  Highness's  serious  consideration,  in  quality 
of,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  and  faithful  servant, 

EDWARD  NICHOLAS. 

Oxford,  January  10,  1646. 

All    this    time    the    King's    affairs    were    daily 


1646.]        PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     215 

becoming  more  desperate.  Basing-House  had  been 
taken  with  great  slaughter  by  Cromwell;  Shel- 
ford  and  Werton  were  also  taken ;  all  South  Wales, 
except  Ragland,  was  lost;  Chester  and  Belvoir 
soon  followed ;  the  Scots  entered  Newark,  and 
Fairfax  was  steadily  advancing  in  Devonshire ; 
Goring  had  received  orders  to  break  through  and 
join  the  King  at  Newark;  but  that  utter  villain 
had  gathered  together  all  the  money  he  could 
squeeze  out  of  his  district,  and  departed  for  France. 
In  order  to  save  himself  from  being  considered  as 
a  deserter,  he  pretended  an  affront,  and  wrote  the 
following  letter  to  the  Earl  of  Dorset,  now,  I 
believe,  Secretary  to  the  King  in  Lord  Digby's 
place : — 

[The  beginning  of  this  letter  is  lost.] 

honour,  quietly  to  remit  all  the  power 

into  their  hands,  than  by  contesting  with  them ;  to  cherish 
their  divisions,  which  have  and  do  continually  retard  the 
success  of  his  Majesty's  army  in  these  parts.  I  do,  there- 
fore, most  humbly  beseech  his  Majesty,  in  recompense  of 
something  I  have  acted  and  suffered  in  his  service,  to  give 
me  my  discharge,  and  to  lay  me  quietly  aside,  until  such 
an  occasion  may  happen  as  I  may  serve  the  King,  without 
the  opposition  of  those  that  have  the  honour  to  be  near 
his  Majesty's  affairs.  In  the  mean  time,  I  think  it  my 
duty  to  acquaint  his  Majesty,  that  unless  there  be  some 
speedy  course  used  to  dispose  these  clubmen  to  the 
King's  service,  and  to  settle  a  good  understanding  between 
the  army,  garrisons,  and  the  country,  there  will  an  ine- 
vitable ruin  light  upon  the  whole  West :  and  my  humble 
opinion  to  his  Majesty  is,  that  without  his  personal  ap- 


216         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JAN. 

pearance  here,  all  things  will  be  in  a  confusion,  and  that 
within  a  very  few  days.  But,  by  that,  I  am  very  confi- 
dent his  Majesty  will  unite  all  these  parts  to  his  obe- 
dience ;  and  upon  the  place,  his  Majesty  will  find  who  are 
they  that  have  served  him  with  most  warmth  and  loyalty. 
I  shall  beg  the  honour  to  know,  speedily,  to  whom  I  shall 
resign  the  command  of  this  army  ;  and  I  pray  God  and 
heaven  send  them  better  success  than  I  had  with  it,  and 
as  much  zeal  to  the  King's  service  as  I  ever  had,  and 
shall  preserve  to  my  death,  in  what  condition  soever  I  am. 
And  having  had,  in  the  two  last  letters,  assurance  of  the 
continuance  of  your  Lordship's  favour,  I  shall  beg  this 
testimony  of  it ;  that,  although  I  am  turned  out  of  my 
command,  yet  I  may  remain  in  your  thoughts,  as  one  that 
may  live  to  do  his  Majesty  service. 

I  am  your  Lordship's  most  humble,  faithful  servant, 

GEORGE  GORING. 

Pondesford,  January  25,  1646. 

No  sooner  had  he  despatched  this  letter,  than 
without  waiting  for  a  reply,  he  abandoned  bis 
troops  and  took  shipping  for  France,  having  had  too 
good  an  understanding  with  the  Parliament  to  run 
any  risk  of  being  intercepted.  The  King  was  be- 
come anxious  for  the  safety  of  Prince  Charles,  who 
was  first  directed  to  proceed  to  Denmark,  afterwards 
to  France  ;  and  there  to  remain  under  his  mother's 
care  in  all  matters  except  that  of  religion,  which  the 
Bishop  of  Salisbury  was  to  superintend. 

In  December  the  King  had  made  propositions  to 
the  Parliament  for  peace,  but  they  refused  to  hear 
of  any  reconciliation,  except  on  their  own  terms. 
"  They  felt,"  says  Sir  Edward  Walker,  "  that  they 


1646.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      217 

must  either  live  as  conquerors,  or  die  as  traitors ;" 
and  seems  to  consider  them  unreasonable  in  prefer- 
ring the  former  alternative. 

Still  the  King's  cause  lost  ground;  but  still  he 
struggled  on.  Lord  Astley  was  made  General  of 
Hereford,  Salop,  Worcester,  and  Stafford,  and  sent 
thither  to  make  levies  :  Sir  Charles  Lucas  was  made 
General  of  Horse,  and  accompanied  his  colleague. 
The  old  dissensions  between  the  military  governors 
of  towns  and  the  civil  commissioners  proved  more 
virulent  and  disastrous  to  the  cause  than  ever.  All 
failed  :  even  the  official  affairs  in  Oxford  were  dila- 
tory, ill  executed,  and  contradictorily  managed. 
The  Irish  levies  experienced  their  usual  fate,  and 
came  to  nothing.1 

Hereford,  Harwarden,  and  Ruthen  castles  next 
yielded;  Astley  and  Lucas  were  defeated  and  taken 
prisoners  at  Stow  in  the  Wold  ;  Exeter  fell  before 
Fairfax,  and  left  him  free  to  besiege  Oxford.  The 
King  listens  to  false  overtures  from  the  false  Scots, 
and  negotiates  with  them  through  M.  de  Montreuil, 
the  French  agent  or  spy.2  Politics  daily  assumed  a 


1  Lord  Glamorgan's  efforts  were  thus  once  more  rendered  fruit- 
less.    There  is.  an  unintelligible  passage  in  Sir  Edward  Walker 
(p.  151)  relating  to  him  and  to  his  "commitment,  whose  faults 
were  rendered  so  odious,  as  that  it  were  a  crime  to  do  any  good 
for  the  family,  though  in  reference  to  a  greater  to  ourselves/' 

2  Who'  thus  writes  concerning  the  King's  holding  out,  as  Spal- 
lanzani  might  have  done  concerning  the  vitality  of  a  tortured  and 
mortally  wounded  frog  :  "  Mais  ce  qui  porte  da  vantage  a  croire, 
que  le  Roi  d' Angleterre  le  maintiendra  encore  quelque  temps,  est, 
que  ceux,  qui  sont  plus  puissans  dan§  le  Parlement,  ne  veuleiit  pas 


218          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [FEB. 

more  sectarian  character ;  the  schism  between  the 
Independents  and  Presbyterians1  was  complete ; 
the  latter  assumed  moderation,  and  deprecated  all 
injury  to  the  King,  whom  they  had  brought  so 
low.  Milton's  powerful  taunt  against  them  on  this 
occasion  is  not  to  be  forgotten.  Hear  him  : — 

And  if  chance  or  flight  had  not  saved  the  King,  how 
often  had  the  Presbyterians  killed  him,  directing  their 
artillery,  without  blame  or  prohibition,  to  the  very  place 
where  they  saw  him  stand  ?  Have  they  not  sequestered 
him,  judged  or  unjudged,  and  converted  his  revenue  to 
other  uses,  detaining  from  him,  as  a  grand  delinquent,  all 
means  of  livelihood,  so  that,  for  them,  long  since  he  might 
have  perished  or  have  starved  ?  Have  they  not  hunted 
and  pursued  him  round  about  the  kingdom  with  sword 


le  fin  d'une  guerre  dont  ils  tirent  beaucoup  de  profit."  He  adds  : 
"II  se  dit,  que  le  Prince  Rupert  parla  avec  beaucoup  de  hardiesse 
au  Roi  en  prenant  conge  de  lui,  et  lui  fit  des  reproches  assez 
sensibles  jusqu'a  lui  dire,  qu'il  n'avan£oit  pres  de  sa  personne  que 
des  coquins  et  des  me"chans." — Extract  of  M.  de  MontreuiVs  Letter 
to  M.  de  JBrienne. 

1  This  letter  illustrates  the  King's  policy  and  hopes  : — 

FROM    KING    CHARLES    TO    THE    DUKE    OF    RICHMOND. 

I  thank  you  for  the  account  you  sent  ine  by  this  bearer,  and 
have  nothing  of  new  to  direct  you  in,  but  only  to  remember  you 
that  my  going  to  Westm.  is  not  to  be  mentioned  but  upon 
probable  hopes  of  procuring  a  treaty  with  Com.  there  or  there- 
abouts, and  that  you  mention  the  security  I  ask  with  my  coming 
to  Westm.  And  I  hope  I  need  not  remember  you  to  cajole  well 
[both]  the  Independents  and  Scots.  This  bearer  will  tell  you 
how  well  our  Western  and  Northern  Associations  go  on,- to  whom 
I  refer  you  for  other  things.  I  rest.* 
[No  date.] 

*  King  Charles's  Works. 


1G4G.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        219 

and  fire  '( l  Have  they  not  formerly  desired  to  treat  with 
him,  and  their  now  recanting  ministers  preached  against 
him,  as  a  reprohate  incurable,  an  enemy  to  God  and  his 
Church,  marked  for  destruction,  and  therefore  not  to  be 
treated  with  ?  Have  they  not  besieged  him,  and  to  their 
power  desired  him  water  and  fire,  save  what  they  shot 
against  him  to  the  hazard  of  his  life  ?  Yet,  while  they 
thus  endangered  and  assaulted  it  with  hostile  deeds,  they 
swore,  in  words,  to  defend  it  with  his  crown  and  dignity.2 

This  division  of  parties  seemed  to  hold  out  some 
hope  to  the  King,  at  which  his  sanguine  hopes 
eagerly  grasped.  But  for  the  question  of  Church 
government,  however,  there  is  little  doubt  that 
the  Presbyterians  would  have  saved  tbe  King,  if  not 
the  kingdom.3 


1  "  Did  they  not  swear,  at  first,  to  fight 
For  the  King's  safety  and  his  right, 
And  after  march'd  to  find  him  out, 
And  charg'd  him  home  with  horse  and  foot, 
But  yet  still  had  the  confidence 
To  swear  it  was  in  his  defence  ? " 

Hudibras,  Part  II.  Canto  2. 

2  Milton's  Prose  Works,  vol.  ii. 

3  Charles  is  accused  even  of  being  secretly  a  Papist ;  he  ac- 
cepted the  aid  of  Irish  subjects*  in  his  extremity,  when  the 
English  and  the  Scotch  Churches  were  arrayed  against  him  for 
wishing  to  preserve  the  discipline  of  the  former ;  he  maintained, 
in  a  chastened  form,  the  marriage  article,  which  assured  to  his 
Queen  the  safe  exercise  of  her  religion ;  and  when  he  was  in 
Spain,  a  mere  boy,  he  corresponded  with  the  Pope.     To  these 
proofs  are  added  the  assertion  that  he  made  vows  !  (see  How  el !) 
that  he  was  superstitious  (who  was  not  ?) ;  and  that  he  was  zealous 


*  "  Cursed  be  the  laws  that  deprive  me  of  such  men  ! "  said 
the  King  of  England,  when  he  saw  his  English  troops  borne  back 
by  his  alien  Irish,  who  were  forced  to  seek  service  with  a  Roman 
Catholic  sovereign  against  their  own. 


220          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [MAY, 

But  never  was  the  mechanism  of  destiny,  if  I 
may  use  the  expression,  so  traceable  and  manifest,  as 
in  the  concluding  career  of  this  doomed  King.     As 
the  Ten  that  soon  ruled  old  England  with  Decem- 
vir tyranny,   hunted   down  their  monarch   through 
all  his  wanderings,  with  bloodhound  vigilance  and 
patience,    a  thousand  chances    of  escape   seem  to 
offer  :  every  virtue  and  every  vice  by  turns  seem  to 
offer  aid  to  the  Royal  fugitive  ;  loyalty,  at  one  mo- 
ment, seems  about   to  rescue   him  from  insult  by 
transcendant  bravery ;    selfish  interest,  at  another, 
offers  to  replace  him  on  his  throne.     "  Make  Dukes 
of  your   traitors,  Earls   and   Barons  of  your  red- 
handed  rebels,"  says  the  Parliament  just  now,1  "add 
to  my  Lord  Cromwell's  title  a  pension  of  £2,500  a 
year,  and  to  other  disinterested  patriots,  issue  testi- 
monials of  merit  in  proportion,  and  you  shall   be 
once  more  our  King ! "     There  were  certain  other 
matters,  concerning  the  abandonment  of  the  ancient 
rituals  of  the  Church,  and  the  shedding  of  the  blood 
of  those  adherents  who  had  not  already  drained 
their  vein  upon  the  battle-fields  that  were  to  fol- 
low; but  even  to  these  the  King  "  obstinately"  ob- 
jected.    Well  was  it  for  the  Falkland  and  the  Hamp- 
den  of  1648,  that  they  did  riot  live  to  see   these 


for  the  observance  of  the  ritual  that  Latimer,  Ridley,  and  Cranmer 
died  for.  As  to  the  rest,  let  us  read  such  sentiments,  prayers,  and 
speeches  as  even  his  enemies  have  recorded,  and  if  "Papistry" 
can  be  brought  to  such  a  spirit  as  they  speak,  we  can  only  say 
that  Papistry  is  a  right  noble  creed  ! 
i  Whitelocke,  p.  187. 


1646.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     221 

days.  Peace  to  the  ashes  of  the  chivalrous  Lindsey, 
Carnarvon,  Northampton,  Denbigh  ! — they  had  died 
upon  the  field  of  honour,  while  the  cause  on  both 
sides  was  yet  pure — pure,  at  least,  from  those  foul 
stains  of  falsehood,  bloodthirstiness,  and  rapacity, 
that  fell  upon  the  warriors  of  England  in  later  times. 
The  curse  of  Civil  War  seemed  to  have  smitten  in- 
discriminately all  whose  pure  souls  were  not  above 
its  reach.  The  Cavalier  governors  of  towns  and 
forts  turn  into  robbers  of  romantic  vice  and  daring;1 
the  Puritans  intensify  their  equal  atrocities2  with 
the  cant  of  hypocrisy,  and  the  horrors  of  blas- 
phemy. "The  Cavaliers,"  as  one  of  themselves  ad- 
mitted, "  have  the  vices  of  men — the  love  of  wine 
and  women;  but  the  Roundheads  have  the  vices  of 
devils — hypocrisy  and  spiritual  pride." 

The  situation  of  the  Cavaliers,  who  were  not  in  a 


1  I  take  for  instance  the  first  memorandum,  amongst  many  that 
I  find  :— 

Warrant  from  Colonel  (Lord)  Bard  to  the  constables  for  con- 
tributions. "  Know,  that  unless  you  bring  me  on  —  day  to  my 
house  in  Worcester,  the  monthly  contribution  for  six  months, 
that  you  are  to  expect  a  troop  of  unsanctified  horse  among  you ; 
from  whom,  if  you  hide  yourselves,  they  shall  fire  your  houses 
without  mercy,  hang  up  your  bodies  and  scare  your  ghosts." — 
WhitelocMs  Mem.  p.  181. 

2  I  need  only  allude  to  the  names  of  Goring  and  Richard  Gren- 
ville.     Extract  of  a  letter  in  Lord  Denbigh's  MSS. — "  Colonel 
Massey  (Roundhead  Governor  of  Gloucester)  doth  so  harry  and 
plunder  the  people  in  these  parts  that  we  beseech  you  to  have- 
him  removed."     It  is  curious,  in  an  abstract  of  the  letters  relating 
to  the  Civil  War,  to  observe  how  the  character  of  the  combatants, 
on  both  sides,  darkens  down  as  the  war  proceeds.     There  is  no 
other  epoch  in  history  of  which  we  have  a  similar  opportunity  of 
judging  the  consequences,  and  marking  the  excesses  of  Civil  War. 


222         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [MAY, 

position  to  be  feared,  was  now  very  unenviable  ;  all 
those  who  had  a  fair  excuse,  and  many  who  had  not, 
had  left  the  kingdom  ;  Hyde,  Capel,  Culpepper,  and 
Hopton  for  the  Stilly  Islands,  to  Prince  Charles ; 
Goring,  to  Paris;  Digby  and  Langdale,  to  Ireland,1 
and  others  dispersed  over  Europe.  Those  who  re- 
mained and  were  not  in  the  surviving  garrisons, 
were  besieged,  pillaged,  or  outcasts.  After  their 
long  and  vain  strife,  they  found  themselves  in  the 
position  of  worsted  soldiers.2 

Nor  were  the  Roundhead  aristocracy  and  gentry, 
much  more  happily  circumstanced  :  the  committees 
of  counties,  selected  on  account  of  their  democratic 
feelings,  were,  for  the  most  part,  men  of  inferior 
station,  who,  in  this  saturnalia  of  authority,  delighted 
to  lord  it  over  their  once  powerful  neighbours. 
The  peculiarities  that  had  qualified  them  to  carry 
out  the  Parliamentary  views  were  not  such  as  in- 
spired either  esteem  or  respect,  and  wrong  the  aris- 
tocrats, even,  of  their  own  persuasion. 

The  fight,  as  regarded  the  open  field,  was  lost, 
and  the  King  still  strove  to  continue  it  by  diplo- 

1  Clarendon's  Life,  i.  187. 

2  But  so  have  I  known  a  bold  trooper  fight  in  the  confusion 
of  a  battle,  and,  being  warm  with  heat  and  rage,  receive  from  the 
sword  of  his  enemy  wounds  open  like  a  grave ;  but  he  felt  them 
not ;  and  when,  by  the  streams  of  blood,  he  found  himself  marked 
for  pain,  he  refused  to  consider  then  what  he  was  to  feel  to- 
morrow ;  but  when  his  rage  hath  cooled  into  the  temper  of  a 
man,  and  clammy  moisture  hath  checked  the  fiery  emission  of 
spirit,  he  wonders  at  his  own  boldness,  and  blames  his  fate,  and 
needs  a  mighty  patience  to  bear  his  great  calamity. — Apple  of 
Sodom,  Jeremy  Taylor's  Works,  v.  293. 


1646.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      223 

macy ;  in  this  he  was  equally  unsuccessful.  At 
length  he  determined  to  break  away  from  England 
altogether,  and  join  the  Scots. 

Meanwhile,  Prince  Rupert  had  returned  to  his 
duty ;  having  written  the  following  letter,  which 
found  acceptance,  he  and  his  brother,  and  their 
friends,  cut  their  way  through  the  enemy  from 
Worcester  to  Oxford.1 

SIRE, 

I  am  sorry  to  understand,  by  William  Legge,  that 
your  Majesty  hath  not  that  satisfaction  which  I  en- 
deavoured to  give  your  Majesty  in  my  last  letter,  and 
conceived  to  have  given  you  therein ;  and  now  I  shall 
once  again  freely  acknowledge  my  errors,  and  humbly 
entreat  your  Majesty  to  consider  me  by  the  better  and 
more  lasting  expression  of  my  zeal  and  affection,  and  to 
pardon  what  is  done  amiss,  and  to  accept  it  where  it 
cannot  err,  which  is  in  all  humble  duty  and  service  to  your 
Majesty ;  in  which  way  be  pleased  to  command  and  dis- 
pose as  you  shall  think  fit  ,  .  . 

I  am  sorry  to  hear  that  my  former  expressions  have  not 
so  been  understood  as  was  really  intended  by  me ;  where- 
fore, to  leave  all  repetitions,  I  humbly  acknowledge  that 
great  error  which  I  find  your  Majesty  justly  sensible  of, 
which  happened  upon  occasion  at  Newark.  It  having 
been  a  misunderstanding  of  friendship,  I  hope  it  will  be 
the  easier  past  by  by  your  Majesty,  since  the  foundation 
of  love  and  affection  to  your  service  has  ever  been  really 
in  my  heart ;  wherefore,  I  humbly  beseech  your  Majesty 
to  dispose  of  me  in  the  way  you  think  fittest. 

For  you 


See  "Whitelocke's  Memoirs,  p.  187. 


224          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [MAY, 

SIRE, 

The  great  value  at  which  I  have  ever  esteemed  your 
Majesty's  favour  and  affection  to  me,  hath  always  had 
such  rule  in  my  thoughts  as  in  my  contentment  it  hath 
made  up  a  greater  portion  to  believe  you  inclined  to  me, 
than  the  effect  of  that  favour,  though  I  were  happy  by  it. 
That  I  have,  or  ever  shall  have,  less  affection  to  your 
Majesty  than  I  now  express,  I  cannot  wrong  myself  in 
point  of  truth,  how  advantageous  soever  it  might  prove  to 
me  to  allow ;  but  that  my  carriage  hath  always  been  of 
that  appearance  to  others,  or  that  your  Majesty  could 
always  so  understand  of  it,  I  only  rely  upon  your  good- 
ness to  interpret.  My  having  been  now  some  time  as  I  am 
from  you,  is  too  great  an  evidence  to  persuade  a  belief  of 
my  failing  of  that  respect  and  duty  I  owe  you,  because 
your  favour  and  affection  to  those  of  so  near  relation  as  I 
have  the  honour  to  be  in,  will  not  be  thought  so  unsteady 
as  to  have  given  any  cause.  Nor  shall  I  say  it  hath,  but 
freely  to  your  Majesty  acknowledge  my  errors,  when  you 
shall  think  them  such,  which  the  constancy  of  my  affection 
and  duty  to  your  Majesty  makes  me  now  do,  and  now 
humbly  intreat  your  Majesty  that  you  will  consider  me 
by  the  better  and  more  lasting  expressions  of  my  zeal  to 
you,  and  to  pardon  wherein  that  hath  made  me  do  amiss, 
and  to  accept  it  when  it  cannot  err  ;  which  is  in  all  humble 
duty  and  service  to  your  Majesty,  in  which  way  be  pleased 
to  command  and  dispose  as  you  shall  think  fit  of 

*         *          *          * 

To  the  King,  without  date  or  subscription,  1645. 
From  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert. 

It  is  but  justice  to  the  Palatines  to  say  that  they 
had  been  offered  free  exit  and  honorable  conside- 
ration, if  they  would  promise  never  more  to  fight 
against  the  Parliament ;  this  they  declined  to  do,  and 
thus  proved  their  fidelity,  at  the  expense  not  only 


1G46.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        225 

of  their  interest  but  of  their  passion.  As  soon  as 
the  King  had  resolved  upon  the  Scottish  project,  he 
announced  his  intention  to  Rupert,  who  promptly 
volunteered  to  follow  him  wheresoever  he  should 
go.  The  Prince  little  suspected  that  the  King's 
"  progress "  was  to  be  an  escape,  not  a  sally ;  that 
the  King  was  to  issue  from  the  noble  and  loyal  City 
of  Oxford  by  night,  by  stealth,  and  in  a  mean  dis- 
guise. When  the  plan  was  fully  explained,  how- 
ever, Rupert  still  determined  to  share  the  humble 
fortunes  of  his  chief,  but  he  was  forbidden  ;  his 
stately  figure,  the  King  feared,  would  not  pass  un- 
noticed through  the  enemy.1  The  Prince  finding 
that  he  was  not  to  share  the  danger,  endeavoured 
to  dissuade  his  uncle  from  it,  but  in  vain.  He  then 
obtained  the  following  letter,  absolving  him  of  all 
blarne  in  the  transaction:  experience  had  taught 
him,  as  Lord  Worcester  boldly  stated  to  Charles 
the  Second,  not  to  place  any  confidence  in  mere 
verbal  expressions : — 

NEPHEW, 

This  is  for  your  satisfaction,  to  acknowledge  to  you 
that  my  going  to  the  Scotch  army  is  of  such  imminent 
danger  to  my  person,  imminent  in  respect  of  the  numbers 
and  placing  of  the  rebel  forces  between  this  and  where  I 
am  to  go,  that  your  opinion  is,  I  should  not  undertake  it. 
So  far  you  are  from  giving  me  any  advice  for  it.  But  you 
must  likewise  acknowledge  to  me  that  the  reason  of  my 
resolution  in  this,  is  not  because  I  am  ignorant  of  the 

1  Prince  Rupert's  Diary. 
VOL.  III.  Q 


226          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF     [APRIL, 

danger,  in  that  differing  little  or  nothing  from  you,  but  to 
eschew  a  certain  mischief,  which,  otherwise  I  must,  accord- 
ing to  my  sense,  undergo.  You  must  also  remember  that 
you  must  conceal  this  until  the  action  be  over.  And,  in  the 
meantime,  assist  me  as  heartily  in  it  as  if  you  fully  con- 
curred with  me  in  opinion. 

CHARLES  R. 
Oxford,  April  10, 1646. 

In  fine,  the  King  left  Oxford l  very  privately,  dis- 
guised as  a  servant,  and  attended  only  by  Ashburn- 
ham,  the  worst  companion  he  could  have  chosen, 
and  Dr.  Hudson,  who  was  perhaps  the  best ;  a 
characteristic  cboice.  His  Majesty  hesitated  whether 
be  should  venture  at  once  to  London,  or  proceed,  on 
Montreal's  pledge  of  an  honourable  reception,  to 
the  Scots  at  Newcastle.  He  chose  the  latter  alter- 
native ;  he  threw  himself  on  the  honour  and  the 
chivalry  of  a  gallant  people ;  he  was  received  as  a 
prisoner,  held  in  pawn,  and  sold  for  their  miser- 
able profit !  Among  civilized  nations  there  is  no 
parallel  instance  of  such  a  perfidy ;  but  his  betrayers 
deeply  expiated  their  crime  when  tbe  purchasers  of 
their  King  came  soon  afterwards  to  settle  with  them 
for  the  price  of  blood. 

By  the  King's  commands,  the  brave  town  of  New- 
ark was  now  surrendered  to  bis  captors ;  and  soon 


1  As  soon  as  the  Roundhead  Parliament  heard  that  the  King 
had  escaped  from  Oxford,  they  proclaimed  that  "  any  person  who 
harboured  or  knew  of  the  harbouring  of  the  King,  should  forfeit 
his  whole  estate  and  die  without  mercy." — Whitelocke. 


1046.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      227 

afterwards  an  order  was  sent  to  such  garrisons  as 
still  held  out  for  the  Royal  cause,  to  desire  them  to 
make  the  best  terms  in  their  power  with  the  con- 
querors.1 There  is  here  a  long  and  mournful  blank 
in  the  King's  history.  On  the  17th  of  February  in 

1  The  following  was  the  notification  to  the  Governors,  signified 
through  the  Royal  messenger  : — 

Hudson  not  having  time,  I  desire  you  to  advertise  all  the 
several  loyal  governors  of  my  remaining  towns  and  forts,  that  I 
wish  them  now  to  make  their  compositions  upon  the  best  terms 
they  may,  for  the  truth  is  I  cannot  relieve  them  ;  but  assure 
them,  that  as  their  sufferings  is  my  greatest  affliction,  so  whenso- 
ever God  shall  enable  me  they  shall  reap  the  fruits  of  their  fide- 
lity, nor  shall  grief  ever  go  from  my  heart  until  I  have  shewed  by 
my  successful  actions  that  I  am  to  you  all 

A  really  constant  friend, 

CHARLES  R. 
Newcastle,  18th  June,  1646. 

I  do  hereby  aver,  and  will  be  ready  with  my  life  to  justify, 
as  likewise  upon  the  reputation,  faith,  and  honour  of  a  gentleman, 
Christian,  and  soldier,  that  the  original  of  this  letter  was  directed 
and  brought  to  me,  a  prisoner  in  Newcastle,  from  and  by  a  man 
of  honour  and  trust,  and  accordingly  let  me  be  reputed  by  good 
and  gallant  men. 

WILLIAM  HUDSON. 
Aberconway,  July  1646. 

CHARLES  R., 

Whereas  we  have  resolved  to  comply  with  the  desires  of  our 
Parliament  in  everything  which  may  be  for  the  good  of  our  sub- 
jects, and  leave  no  means  unassayed  for  removing  all  differing 
betwixt  us ;  therefore  we  have  thought  fit,  the  more  to  evidence 
the  reality  of  our  intentions  of  settling  a  happy  and  a  firm  peace, 
to  authorise  you,  upon  honourable  conditions,  to  quit  and  sur- 
render the  castle  of  Denbigh  intrusted  to  you  by  us,  and  to  disband 
all  the  forces  under  your  command,  for  which  your  so  doing  this 
shall  be  your  warrant. 

Given  at  Newcastle,  14th  September,  1646. 

To  our  trusty  and  well-beloved  Colonel 

William  Salisbury,  Governor  of  our 

Castle  of  Denbigh,  in  Wales. 

Q  2 


228         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF     [APRIL, 

the  following  year,  his  Majesty  once  more  found 
himself  in  a  palace  of  his  own  :  he  was  on  that  day 
a  prisoner  at  Holdenby.  The  brief  remainder  of  his 
career  is  thus  narrated  by  one  who  long  shared  his 
wanderings. 

Long  had  not  his  sacred  Majesty  continued  there,  but 
he  was,  by  a  part  of  the  army  under  one  Joyce,  violently 
taken  from  thence,  and  brought  to  his  honour  of  Hampton 
Court ;  where,  for  a  while,  he  seemed  to  begin  to  reassume 
his  pristine  Majesty,  being  admitted  to  see  and  be  seen. 
But  Cromwell,  fearing  the  frequency  of  so  great  resort 
might  spoil  his  traitorous  designs,  with  much  serpentine 
craft  and  devilish  subtilty,  persuaded  and  insinuated  into 
his  Majesty's  heart  doubts  and  suspicions  of  mischief 
intended  against  him,  the  only  way  for  preventing  whereof 
he  affirmed  to  be  the  withdrawing  his  person  from  thence 
to  a  place  of  more  strength  and  security ;  and  to  that  pur- 
pose nominated  the  Isle  of  Wight ;  to  which  place  his 
Majesty,  led  by  the  innocency  of  his  spotless  conscience, 
was  decoyed ;  and  at  his  arrival  found  himself  overreached, 
for  he  was  immediately  secured  by  Colonel  Hammond, 
who  then  was  governor  in  the  said  island,  and  kept  a  long 
time  a  prisoner  there,  in  the  Castle  of  Carisbrook  ;  until 
afterwards,  upon  the  petitions  of  most  counties  of  Eng- 
land, a  personal  treaty  was  appointed  to  be  held  in  the 
said  isle,  at  Newport.  For  which  end,  Commissioners  were 
sent  thither  with  instructions,  and  the  treaty  begun  and 
prosecuted  with  so  good  effect,  that  his  Majesty's  conces- 
sions at  that  time  were  voted  by  the  Parliament  a  sufficient 
ground  to  proceed  on,  for  the  settlement  of  the  peace  of 
the  kingdom.  But  here  again  his  Majesty  is  violently  and 
traitorously  seized  by  the  army  then  under  Fairfax's  com- 
mand ;  by  whom,  December  the  1st,  1648,  he  was  brought 
to  Hurst  Castle,  in  Hampshire,  and  there  kept  as  a  priso- 
ner till  the  21st  of  the  same  month,  when  he  was  brought 


1646.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      229 

to  Winchester  ;  thence  on  the  23rd  to  Windsor,  where  for 
a  little  time  he  staid,  attended  by  strong  guards  of  soldiers, 
till  about  the  9th  of  January  following,  when  they  removed 
him  towards  London,  and  brought  him  to  his  own  house 
at  St.  James's,  and  consequently  to  perfidious  London  ; 
(Oh  unfortunate  monarch  !)  where,  not  long  after,  with 
hellish  effrontery,  even  in  despite  of  heaven,  at  noonday, 
before  his  own  house,  Whitehall,  in  the  open  street,  with 
armed  multitudes  of  soldiers,  they  sacrilegiously  murdered 
that  blessed,  though  unfortunate  Prince,  Charles  the 
First.1 

In  returning  to  Prince  Rupert,  we  find  the  prin- 
cipal events  attending  the  surrender  of  Oxford  have 
been  mentioned  in  his  Diary.  On  the  22nd  of 
April,  1646,  Fairfax  sat  down  before  the  walls:  on 
the  24th  of  June  the  city  capitulated.2  The  Pala- 


1  Iter  Carolinum ;  Somers's  Tracts.     There    was   a   struggle 
at    first    for  truth    and  honour   in   the  Parliament.      The    fol- 
lowing brief  extract  may  be  new  to  some  of  my  readers  : — 

About  May  8  the  works  of  Newark  are  "  slighted."  The 
House  of  Commons  votes  the  King  a  prisoner  to  Warwick  Castle. 
"  The  House  of  Lords  storm  j  ask  for  a  conference  [with  the  Com- 
mons] ;  have  it."  Essex  harangues,  "  that  they  were  bound  by 
their  Covenant  to  defend  the  King's  just  rights ;  that  they  had 
fought  hitherto  to  remove  his  evil  counsellors  ;  that  the  King  had 
now  left  those  counsellors ;  and  that  now  nought  remains  but  to 
disband  the  armies  and  make  a  peace.  Rather  than  consent  to 
make  the  King  a  prisoner  [he  spoke  in  the  name  of  the  Lords] 
they  would  all  die  in  the  place."  "  The  Commons  express  them- 
selves ashamed  of  last  night's  votes,  and  vote  counter  thereto." — 
W.  Bancroft  to  his  Father  ;  Tanner  MSS.  30. 

2  On  Wednesday,  the  24th  of  June,  the  citizens  surrendered, 
the  enemy  marched  out  about  twelve  o'clock,  being  a  very  rainy 
day :    a  guard  of  our  foot  was  appointed  for  them  to  march 
through,  which  extended  in  length  from  St.  Clement's  near  Mag- 
dalen Bridge  to  Shotover  Hill ;  the  horse  were  drawn  up  into 
several  bodies  in  other  places.     Those  of  the  enemy  who  marched 


230         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [APKIL, 

tine  Princes  obtained  special  terms,  in  consideration 
of  their  valour  and  their  rank  :  these  were,  that 
they  should  have  leave  to  reside  where  they  pleased 
in  England  for  six  months,  provided  they  did  not  ap- 
proach within  twenty  miles  of  London :  they  were 
to  be  attended  by  all  their  servants,  with  seventy 
horses,  and  all  their  property.  As  a  Puritan 
journal  asserted,  however,  they  soon  "broke  the 


out  in  a  body,  well  armed,  with  colours  flying  and  drums  beating, 
were  two  thousand  and  upwards  besides  officers,  who  received  no 
injury  in  their  march  through  nor  the  least  affront,  which  the 
governor,  Sir  Thomas  Glenham,  hath  since  acknowledged,  much 
for  the  honour  of  the  army.  The  forerunners  of  those  that 
marched  forth  and  the  stragglers  that  came  afterwards  on  the 
same  day,  being  most  of  them  horsemen  and  private  persons 
engaged  in  the  siege,  were  near  five  hundred  men.  There  like- 
wise marched  forth  this  day,  at  the  Northgate,  all  those  that  went 
to  Yorkshire  and  Gloucestershire  and  those  parts,  who  had  a 
convoy  for  that  purpose,  being  a  considerable  number.  When 
Prince  Rupert  and  Prince  Maurice  went  forth  on  Monday,  and 
those  that  followed  them  on  Tuesday  (when  other  gentlemen  of 
quality  left  the  city),  there  were  in  all  about  three  hundred 
persons,  most  of  them  of  good  quality.  Since  we  came  into  the 
town,  it  hath  been  the  continual  employment  of  some  in  making 
passes  for  those  that  were  yet  left  behind,  and  not  marched  out 
of  the  town  with  the  body,  there  having  been  above  two  thousand 
passes  made  out  since  we  entered,  of  which  there  is  a  particular 
list  of  every  man's  name  kept,  there  being  many  of  them  noble- 
men, knights,  and  gentlemen  of  quality,  the  rest  officers  and 
reformadoes,  and  some  scholars.  Likewise,  since  we  came  into 
the  town,  the  three  regiments  of  auxiliaries,  consisting  of  two 
thousand  men,  have  been  disbanded,  and  their  arms  brought  in. 
There  are  yet  great  numbers  in  the  town,  both  officers  and  sol- 
diers and  strangers,  that  have  not  yet  received  their  passes. 
Those  that  marched  out  upon  Wednesday,  about  nine  hundred 
of  them  laid  down  their  arms  when  they  came  to  Tame,  and 
received  passes  to  go  to  their  several  houses,  and  their  arms  were 
brought  into  Oxford ;  eleven  hundred  of  them  listed  themselves 
for  foreign  service.  We  found  in  the  magazine  seventy  barrels  of 
powder ;  besides,  they  had  two  mills  which  supplied  them  daily 


1646.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      231 

articles  to  their  own  prejudice,  and  the  kingdom's 
good,  for  now  they  must  be  gone."  1 

The  King's  cause  was  utterly  lost;  his  bravest 
defenders  slain,  exiled,  or  imprisoned  ;  the  closing 
scene  only  procrastinated  by  the  feuds  among  the 
conquerors.  We  shall  return  to  England  again  to 
view  that  closing  scene,  and  inquire  after  some  of 
those  who  long  and  vainly  strove  to  avert  that  stain 
from  English  history.  We  have  now  to  accompany 
the  adventurous  Rupert  into  other  regions,  and 
to  follow  wanderings  as  little  known,  and  as 


with  powder.  There  were  in  the  town  thirty-eight  pieces  of  ord- 
nance, whereof  twenty-six  were  brass.  For  provisions  of  victuals 
I  cannot  give  you  a  particular  account,  only  this  in  general,  that 
by  what  we  found  in  the  stores,  and  by  what  we  are  informed 
they  had  in  the  store  before  they  sold  it  to  the  townsmen,  during 
the  treaty,  to  raise  money  to  pay  their  soldiers,  there  was  not  less 
than  six  months'  provisions.  The  soldiers  were  much  discon- 
tented, and  much  ado  there  was  to  preserve  the  Lords,  whom  they 
accused  for  being  the  occasion  of  delivering  up  the  town.*  For 
the  strength  of  the  works  about  the  town,  they  are  such  as,  I 
think,  any  knowing  man  in  martial  affairs  will  say  it  was  for  your 
service  the  town  was  taken  by  conditions,  especially  considering 
what  unseasonable  weather  hath  followed ;  for  if  we  had  continued 
the  siege  but  to  this  day,  we  should  have  been  forced  to  have 
quit  some  of  the  leaguers  already  made,  the  fields  being  overflown 
with  water.  I  have  been  with  several  of  your  acquaintance  here 
in  town,  who  were  provided  till  Christmas  with  provisions,  and  do 
affirm,  that  for  corn,  beef,  bacon,  salt,  butter,  and  cheese,  there 
was  plenty  for  the  said  time ;  fresh  meat  for  the  great  ones  being 
the  only  thing  complained  of  as  a  want,  and  yet  we  found  some 
store  of  that  at  the  surrender.-}- 
1  Scots'  Dove,  July,  1646. 


*  Sir  Thomas  received  some  wounds  in  this  riot,  I  find  from  a 
letter  in  Lord  Denbigh's  MSS. 

t  King's  Pamphlets,  226,  art.  9  (in  the  British  Museum). 


232        MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JUNE, 

perilous  as  those  of  Amadis  of  Gaul.  At  this  period, 
however,  the  reader  and  the  writer's  task  is  relieved 
for  some  time  by  another  biographer.  The  following 
fragment  seems  to  have  been  prepared  so  far  for 
publication  during  the  Prince's  life  time,  and  without 
reference  to  the  letters  which  I  have  introduced 
according  to  their  dates. 


1046.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       233 


CHAPTER  II. 

RUPERT  AT  SEA. 


SURRENDER     OF     OXFORD.  —  FRENCH     CAMPAIGN. RUPERT     BECOMES     AN 

ADMIRAL  J    HIS    CRUISE    TO    IRELAND  ;    TO    THE    MEDITERRANEAN  J    TO  THE 
WEST    INDIES. RETURN   TO    FRANCE. 


Thousands  were  there  in  darker  fame  that  dwell, 
Whose  deeds  some  nobler  volume  shall  adorn ; 

And  though  to  us  unknown,  they  sure  fought  well 
Whom  Rupert  led,  and  who  were  British-born. 

DRYDEN. 

"THE    STORY    AFTER   THE    RENDRY    OF    OXFORD.1 

"  UPON  the  rendry  of  Oxford,  the  two  brother 
Princes,  Rupert  and  Maurice,  by  the  General's 
leave,2  made  their  first  remove  June  24th,  to  Oat- 

1  The  following  chapter  is  given  'verbatim  as  I  find  it  among 
Prince  Rupert's  papers. 

2  Passport. — These  are  to  require  you  on  sight  hereof  to  permit 
and  suffer  their  Highnesses  Prince  Rupert  and  Prince  Maurice, 
with   their  servants  and  attendants  hereunder  mentioned,  their 
horses,  arms,  and  goods,  the  number  of  horses  for  them  and  their 
train  not  exceeding  seventy,  to  pass  your  guards  to  Guildford  in  the 
County  of  Surrey,  or  any  other  place  within  fifty  miles  of  Lon- 
don, so  that  it  be  not  within  twenty  miles  of  London  or  in  any 
garrison,  and  there  to  abide  for  the  space  of  six  months  free  from 
any  molestation  whatsoever  j  and  to  go  beyond  the  seas  at  any 
time  within  the  said  six  months,  with  their  said  servants,  horses, 
arms,  and  goods ;  they  having  engaged  themselves,  upon  their 
honours,  not  to  use  the  liberty  hereby  granted  in  the  meantime  to 
any  hostility  against  the  Parliament,  nor  any  way  wilfully  to  the 
prejudice  of  their  affairs  ;  and  they  are  to  have  the  benefit  of  such 


234         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JUNE, 

lands,  from  whence  they  sent  to  the  Prince  Elector, 
to  advise  with  him  what  to  do.  But  the  House  of 
Commons,  taking  advantage  of  their  coming  within 
twenty  miles  of  London,  notwithstanding  the 
liberty  granted  them  by  General  Fairfax  so  to  do, 
declared,  June  26th,  that  the  two  Princes,  Rupert 
and  Maurice,  and  their  servants,  by  their  coming  to 
Oatlands,  had  broken  the  articles  agreed  upon  con- 
cerning them,  upon  the  surrender  of  Oxford  ;  pass- 
ing a  vote  also,  that  a  command  should  be  given 
from  that  House  to  the  two  Princes,  Rupert  and 
Maurice,  and  their  servants,  to  repair  to  the  sea- 
side within  ten  days,  and  forthwith  to  depart  the 

of  the  articles  agreed  unto  upon  the  surrender  of  Oxford  as  any- 
ways concern  them. 

Given  under  my  hand  and  seal  the  19th  day  of  June,  1646. 

T.  FAIRFAX. 
To  all  officers  and  soldiers  under  my  command, 

or  in  the  service  of  the  Parliament. 

Dr.  Watts,  Chaplain  [probably  Mr.  Townshend,  Gent. 

compiler  of  the  notes  in  this  Mr.  Trelawney,  Gent. 

Diary.]  Mr.  Milhiser,  Gent. 

Dr.  Erskin,  Chaplain.  Mr.  Thomas  Daniell,  Gent. 

Mr.  Cole,  Chaplain.  Mr.  Skrimshawe,  Gent. 

Mr.  Powell,  Steward.  Mr.  Ellice  Price,  Gent. 

Mr.  Mortaigne,   Gentleman   of  Mr.  La  Roche  )  [Engineers  who 

the  Horse   [drowned  by  his  Mr.  De  Gomez  j       accompanied 

devotion  on  board  the  Con-          the   Prince   to   England    in 

stant  Reformation].  1642]. 

Mr.  Kempson,  Secretary.  Mr.  Crodolph,  Apothecary. 

Mr.  Craven,  Gent.  Mr.  De  Faust,  )  Grooms  of  the 

Mr.  Whitford,  Gent.  Mr.  Gallois,      /      Chamber. 

[With  fifty-one  more,  named  in  the  pass  :  amongst  others,  a 
cook,  a  "  yeoman  of  the  stable,  nine  footmen,  twelve  grooms,  a 
tailor,  a  gunsmith,  a  farrier,  a  laundress  and  her  maid."  This 
was  no  inconsiderable  establishment  for  a  Prince  about  to  "  seek 
his  subsistence  on  the  Continent."] 

They  are  also  to  pass  with  eight  carts  and  eight  post-horses. 


1640.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      335 

kingdom.  And  in  pursuance  of  that  vote,  they 
ordered  that  the  Serjeant  at  Arms  attending  the 
House,  should  forthwith,  by  one  of  his  deputies,  send 
the  declaration  aforesaid  to  the  two  Princes,  Rupert 
and  Maurice,  concerning  their  breach  of  the  articles 
agreed  upon  concerning  them,  upon  the  surrender  of 
Oxford,  together  with  the  vote  next  above  men- 
tioned.1 The  Prince  received  this  order  upon  the 

1  PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  THE  SPEAKER. 
SIR, 

That  I  might  the  readier  observe  the  order  of  the  Parlia- 
ment, I  yesternight  sent  my  letters  to  the  Committee  residing  at 
Kingston,  to  give  orders  for  four  carts  and  ten  post-horses,  with 
their  furniture,  to  be  sent  in  to  me  to  Oatlands  this  morning  by 
nine  o'clock.  But  this  being  denied  me,  I  desire  your  pass  and 
warrant  for  pressing  of  horses  and  carts  as  I  go  along,  for  which 
I  promise  to  pay  the  due  rates.  This  shall  oblige 

Your  very  loving  friend, 

KUPERT. 
Oatlands,  June  20,  1646. 

Gary's  Memorials  of  the  Civil  War,  i.  118. 

PRINCE   RUPERT    TO  THE   SPEAKER. 

SIR, 

It  was  this  day,  after  dinner,  ere  I  first  received  the  pleasure 
of  the  honourable  House  of  Commons,  signified  in  a  letter  from 
Sir  Richard  Onslow  and  three  other  gentlemen,  members  of  the 
House,  concerning  passes  and  warrants  for  accommodating  me 
and  my  brother,  with  our  servants,  goods,  and  horses,  on  our  way 
to  Dover.  I  pray,  sir,  present  to  the  honourable  House  my  wil- 
lingness to  observe  their  order  by  all  the  speed  I  can  possibly 
use ;  and  withal,  that  in  regard  so  many  of  the  ten  assigned  days 
are  already  spent,  and  for  that  myself  and  brother  have  some 
servants  behind  at  Worcester,  whom  we  would  not  willingly  leave 
behind  us,  I  much  desire  there  may  be  eight  or  ten  more  days 
allowed  us.  It  will  be  to-morrow  night  at  soonest  before  I  can 
receive  the  House's  pleasure  concerning  our  passes,  which  I  also 
desire  may  be  taken  into  consideration. 

I  have  here  underset  the  names  of  our  servants  as  yet  at  Wor- 
cester, for  whose  more  speedy  repair  to  us  before  we  take  shipping 
I  desire  you,  sir,  to  give  order  they  may  have  passes  and  other 


236          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

27th,  being  Saturday,  and  on  the  Monday  following 
he  removed  to  Guildford,  July  2nd  to  Reigate,  the 
3rd  to  Maidstone,  and  the  4th  to  Dover  by  post.  The 
day  following  the  Prince  took  shipping  for  Calais ; 
Prince  Maurice  embarked  upon  the  8th  in  the  Van 
Tromp  for  Holland  ;  our  Prince  taking  post  for  St. 
Germains,  his  train  coming  up  to  him  there  upon 
the  19th.  At  St.  Germains  the  Prince  found  the 
Queen-mother  and  his  Majesty  that  now  is,  and  a 
reception  from  the  Queen  Regent  of  France,  answer- 
able to  his  quality  and  condition,  there  being  many 
occasions  presented  her  for  the  obliging  of  his  High- 
ness with  several  marks  of  her  esteem.  Our  Prince 
was  there  particularly  solicited  to  engage  himself 
wholly  in  the  French  service,  upon  what  conditions 
of  preferment  and  advantage  he  himself  could  desire. 
But  his  Highness  kept  himself  still  upon  this 
reserve,  that  he  would  save  to  himself  a  liberty  of 
entering  into  the  service  of  his  Majesty  of  Great 
Britain,  whensoever  the  state  of  his  affairs  would 
permit  it.1 

accommodation  for  the  way.  By  these  favours  you  will  very 
much  oblige 

Your  very  loving  friend, 
Guildford,  July  1,  1646.  RUPEKT. 

Gary's  Memorials  of  the  Civil  War,  i.  121. 

1  The  war  that  the  French  were  at  this  time  engaged  in,  was  the 
tail  of  the  storm  of  the  Thirty  Years'  War.  The  Court  of  France 
now  sought  to  control  the  over-reaching  power  of  the  Austrians, 
and  with  that  object,  Louis  XIV.  even  encouraged  the  Protestant 
interest.  For  this  reason,  as  well  as  on  account  of  the  old 
family  feud,  Rupert  felt  himself  quite  free  to  engage  in  the 
French  service. 


1646.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     237 

"  Soon  after  this  his  Highness  was  made  Mareschal 
de  Camp,  having  a  regiment  of  foot,  a  troop  of 
horse,  and  the  command  of  all  the  English  in 
France.1 


1  Prince  Rupert  writes  at  this  time  thus  to  our  old  friend  Sir 
John  Owen. 

SIB, 

I  have  taken  this  opportunity  of  Colonel  Donnell's  coming 
into  your  country  to  make  his  levies,  to  invite  you  into  the  King 
of  France's  service,  where  I  have  taken  conditions  to  command  all 
the  English,  and  should  be  glad  that  you  would  raise  men  for 
his  service,  the  particular  condition  you  will  receive  from  Colonel 
Donnell,  which  are  much  better  than  other  Princes  give.  And 
if  you  shall  resolve  to  send  over  any  men  upon  them,  I  desire  I 
may  have  speedy  notice  thereof,  that  I  may  give  you  all  the 
assistance  possible  I  can,  but  you  need  not  have  your  commission 
until  you  bring  over  your  men,  which  I  shall  then  get  for  you, 
so,  desiring  notice  of  your  intention,  I  rest 

Your  friend, 

RUPERT.* 
Paris,  10th  April,  1647. 

This  letter  is  preserved  by  Sir  John  Owen's  worthy  de- 
scendant :  from  a  very  different  source  1  derive  the  following 
extract,  and  a  few  pages  later,  in  the  Prince's  own  papers,  I  find 
a  corresponding  result.  This  is  a  curious  dovetailing  of  remote 
papers  into  one  another.  The  Prince  appears  to  have  sent  letters 
in  blank,  (at  the  same  time  that  he  wrote  to  Sir  John)  as  follows, 
to  be  filled  up  by  trustworthy  Cavaliers. 


A    LETTER    FROM    PRINCE    RUPERT    TO 


Prince  Rupert,  &c.,  invites to  enter  the  service  of  the 

King  of  France,  being  by  him  appointed  to  the  command  of  all 
the  English  who  are  in  or  shall  enter  that  kingdom.  Refers  for 
particulars  to  Colonel  Donnell,  who  is  making  levies  in  England. 
Engages  to  see  the  conditions  on  which  he  shall  enter  the  King  of 
France's  service  performed  towards  himself  and  any  he  may 
engage  in  it.t 

Paris,  April,  3  647.  

*  From  Mr.  Ormsby  Gore's  MSS. 

t  Clarendon's  State  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  532. 


238          MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

"The  next  summer,  in  1647,  the  Spaniards  sitting 
down  before  Armentiers,  the  Cardinal  gave  his 
orders  for  the  relief  of  the  place,  and  upon  Gassion's 
undertaking  for  the  enterprise,  directed  the  Prince 
to  go  to  him  with  some  troops  of  succour.  Upon 
the  Prince  coming  up  to  Gassion,  *  Monsieur,'  dit  il, 
'  vous  verrez  ici  une  belle  action  demain,' — '  You  will 
see  here,5  says  he,  '  a  brave  action  to-morrow.'  The 
enemy  before  the  town  were  twenty  thousand,  and 
the  two  Mareschals,  Gassion  and  Rauzau,  made  but 
seven  thousand  together,  and  no  very  good  intelli- 
gence betwixt  them  neither;  but  the  Cardinal,  how- 
ever, had  ordered  Rauzau  to  assist  Gassion  in  the 
enterprise. 

"  The  Prince  came  up  to  them  at  night,  and  Gas- 
sion went  the  day  following  to  take  a  view  of  the 
enemy's  line  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  taking 
the  Prince  along  with  him.  They  advanced  under 
the  protection  of  certain  hedges,  within  a  little  dis- 
tance of  the  river  side,  where  Gassion  spoke  to  the 
Prince  to  stay  behind  till  he  called,  and  the  Prince, 
with  two  others,  staid  behind  there  accordingly.  The 
Mareschal  Gassion  was  got  up  to  a  little  house  upon 
the  side  of  the  river,  like  a  ferry-house,  and  the 
Prince  in  the  mean  time  heard  the  stroke  of  an  oar, 
as  if  a  boat  were  rowing  over  the  river,  but  he  durst 
not  give  Gassion  any  notice  of  it  for  fear  of  being 
overheard,  and  discovering  him  to  the  enemy.  The 
Mareschal  staid  there  till  the  people  out  of  the 
boat  were  landed,  who  sent  one  before  them  to  see 


1647.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      239 

if  the  house  were  clear ;  but  as  Gassion  was  peeping 
at  the  army  from  behind  the  house  one  way,  this 
discoverer  was  just  upon  the  back  of  him  at  the 
other  end  of  the  house.  But  Gassion,  however, 
being  a  man  of  a  ready  wit,  set  a  good  face  on  it,  and 
gave  the  soldier  a  rebuke,  as  if  he  had  been  one  of 
the  Spanish  officers,  '  Que  fais  tu  la  ?  va  t'en  &  ton 
quartier.' — *  What  the  devil  do  you  here,5  says  he ; 
'  get  you  gone  to  your  quarter.'  This  confidence  put 
the  soldier  to  a  pause,  who  seeing  him  in  a  Spanish 
coat  took  him  for  an  officer  of  his  own  party.  The 
Mareschal  upon  this  stop  of  the  soldier,  very  fairly 
betook  himself  to  his  heels,  and  ran  for  it,  to  recover 
the  hedge,  with  the  enemy's  firelocks  after  him  ;  but 
with  much  ado,  and  in  very  great  disorder,  he  got 
over  a  ditch,  and  the  Prince  coming  up  to  him  to 
bring  him  off,  '  Mort  Dieu,'  dit  il,  '  ce  m'arrive  tou- 
jours,' — 'Death,'  says  he,  *  this  is  always  my  luck.'  To 
which  the  Prince  replied,  6Je  n'en  doute  point,  si 
vous  faites  comme  cela  souvent,' — '  I  make  no  doubt 
of  it,  so  long  as  you  go  this  way  to  work.'  After 
this,  their  horses  were  brought  up  to  them  and 
carried  them  off  to  their  quarters. 

"  On  the  day  following,  the  French  drew  out  to- 
wards the  camp  of  the  enemy,  on  the  other  side  of 
the  river  where  the  passage  was  clear,  with  a  pre- 
tence to  fall  upon  their  line ;  and  then  Gassion,  to 
bring  himself  the  better  off,  called  a  council  of  war. 
Rauzau  asking  the  Prince  what  that  mad  man 
Gassion  intended  to  do,  there  being  no  possibility 


240         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

for  the  horse  to  do  any  good,  by  reason  of  the 
enclosures.  His  Highnesses  opinion  being  asked  at 
the  Council  of  war,  he  delivered  himself,  that  if  the 
French  were  no  stronger  than  he  took  them  to  be, 
he  did  not  think  it  advisable  with  that  force  to 
attack  the  enemy,  which  was  the  general  opinion? 
also  of  the  Council ;  and  so  they  marched  off  with- 
out making  any  attempt. 

"  From  thence  they  went  to  Arras,  whither  Picolo- 
mini  came  to  view  their  quarters,  his  army  being 
near,  and  it  was  upon  a  dyke.  The  Prince  spied 
their  troops,  and  Gassion  left  his  horse  at  a  small  re- 
doubt they  had  made,  with  twenty-five  horse,  which 
put  a  Dutch  officer  there  into  some  admiration. 
The  enemy's  horse  came  down  to  charge  the  Prince, 
but  he  repulsed  them  again  and  again,  and  so  made 
his  retreat.  Gassion  desiring  him  to  stay  as  long  as 
he  could  there,  the  Prince  sent  him  word  '  that  it 
was  not  his  day  of  command  ;'  and  so  came  his  way, 
resenting,  as  well  became  him,  this  ill-usage  of  Gas- 
sion, which  was  taken  notice  of  by  a  check  and  re- 
proach from  the  Court,  asking  him  '  whether  he  was 
a  general  or  a  Croat/ 

"  In  this  interim  the  Spaniards  took  in  Armen tiers, 
and  marched  towards  La  Basse,  a  Spanish  garrison ; 
the  French  army  marching  side  by  side  along  with 
them.  Gassion  being  desirous  to  see  the  enemy's 
march,  made  a  halt,  and  asked  the  Prince,  'Are  you 
well  mounted,  sir?  shall  we  go  seethe  army?'  The 
Prince  agreed  to  it,  and  Rauzau  staid  behind,  so  the 


1647.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        241 

Prince,  with  Gassion,  and  three  or  four  more  went 
up,  and  meeting  two  or  three  Croats,  Gassion 
pressed  upon  them,  and  they  ran  away ;  but  upon  a 
pursuit,  there  started  out  an  ambush  of  eleven  more 
from  behind  a  hillock,  and  a  good  troop  of  horse 
following  them  to  cut  off  the  Prince's  and  Gassion's 
retreat,  they  got  over  a  little  slough,  and  then  Sir 
Robert  Holmes,  Mr.  Mortaigne,  and  several  other 
volunteers  that  were  left  behind,  came  up  to  their 
succour,  the  enemy  endeavouring  to  pass  a  little 
river  that  was  betwixt  them,  three  or  four  of  them 
were  got  over,  but  beaten  back  again  by  Mr.  Mor- 
taigne, Gentleman  of  the  Horse,  and  Sir  Robert 
Holmes,  who  was  then  Page  to  his  Highness, 
together  with  some  volunteers  whom  Gassion  had 
employed  to  beat  them  over.  Sir  Robert  Holmes's 
leg  was  shot  in  pieces  just  below  the  knee,  and  his 
horse  killed  under  him  where  he  lay  upon  the  place, 
and  Mortaigne  also  was  shot  in  the  hand.  Sir 
Robert  Holmes  being  left  alone  upon  the  ground, 
and  the  enemy  firing  hard  from  the  other  side  of 
the  river,  his  Highness  seeing  that  nobody  would 
engage  to  bring  him  off,  with  a  generosity  peculiar 
to  himself,  went  himself,  with  Mortaigne  (who,  by 
reason  of  his  wound  in  the  hand,  could  give  him  but 
little  assistance),  took  him  up  behind  him  with 
great  danger  and  difficulty,  and  so  carried  him  off; 
not  a  man  of  the  French  volunteers  coming  in  to  his 
assistance.  The  French  then  retreated,  the  enemy 
following  them  with  their  Croats,  but  they  made 

VOL.  III.  R 


242        MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JULY, 

their  retreat  in  a  body,  and  so  drew  off  entire,  and  in 
a  posture  to  defend  themselves  in  case  of  an  attack. 
The  Spaniards  upon  this  drew  off  too,  and  went 
and  sat  down  before  Landrecy,  whereupon  orders 
came  for  the  French  to  go  directly  thither  to  relieve 
it.     They  drew  over  the  river  within  musket  shot  of 
the  line,  with  a  design  to  fall  upon  the  line,  as  it 
was  understood  by  the  army.     There  passed  some 
skirmishes,  but  the  French  troops  drew  off  again 
without  any  further  engagement.     While  this  past, 
Mareschal  d'Aumont   made  an  attempt  according 
to  order  and  instructions  from  Court,  to  put  in   a 
relief  of  one  or  two  thousand  men  into  the  town  by 
another  way,  but  the  guide  misleading,  that  project 
was  lost.     The  Prince  was  here  left  with  three  regi- 
ments of  German  horse,  and  one  of  Croats,  to  make 
good  the  retreat;    whereupon  the  Spaniards  drew 
out  six  thousand  of  their  best  men,  with  their  Croats 
and  some  regiments  of  horse   to  follow  him,  the 
French  army  being  drawn  off  before,  and  some  of 
their  cannon  laid   fast  in  the  mire.      The   Prince 
having  got  over  the  first  pass,  a  regiment  of  the 
enemy's  horse  passed  over  after  him,  but  his  High- 
ness beat  them  off,  after  which  the  whole  body  of 
the  enemy  advanced  upon  him,  but  he  still  made 
good  the    retreat.     Here  Gassion  came  up  to  the 
Prince  and  told  him  the  cannon  were  a  second  time 
bemired,  and  asked  him  what  he  thought  of  it.     So 
the  Prince  desired  that  the  regiment  of  guards,  Pi- 
cardy,  and  the  Switzers  might  come  back,  and  with 


1647.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE  CAVALIERS.        243 

them  he  would  undertake  to  make  good  the  retreat, 
and  bring  off  the  cannon,  which  Gassion  was  in 
doubt  whether  he  should  leave  behind  him  or  no. 
Upon  this  he  presently  gave  orders,  but  advised  to 
draw  off  the  foot  first ;  which  the  Prince  was  utterly 
against,  and  drew  off  first  the  horse,  and  then  the 
foot,  without  the  loss  of  a  man. 

After  this,  when  the  Prince  thought  to  have  lain 
down  and  refreshed  himself,  there  came  an  order 
for  the  French  to  march  away  directly  towards  La 
Basse,  and  so  the  horse  made  what  haste  they  could 
to  invest  it,  leaving  the  foot  to  come  after.  The 
same  night  that  the  horse  had  invested  it,  there 
came  a  relief  of  three  or  four  hundred  men,  most  of 
them  of  the  Lord  Goring's  and  Colonel  Gage's  troops 
that  happened  to  fall  just  in  with  his  Highness's 
guards  :  they  were  all  taken,  and  most  of  them 
being  English,  took  conditions  in  the  Prince's  regi- 
ment.1 By  this  time  the  foot  were  come  up,  and 
then  they  fell  to  entrenching  and  began  the  siege. 
The  very  first  night  the  Prince  ran  a  line  of  six 
hundred  yards,  and  within  a  matter  of  three  weeks 
they  came  to  a  parley  at  the  Prince's  quarter,  and 
the  town  was  delivered  without  anything  remark- 
able that  passed  upon  that  action,  saving  only  that 
Gassion  did  manifestly  envy  the  Prince  the  honour 


2  Hence  it  would  seem  that  many  of  the  Cavaliers  had  as- 
sumed the  habits  of  the  old  Condottieri,  and  let  out  their  swords 
(or  gagnepains)  to  the  best  bidder.  Goring  had  been  refused  a 
commission  in  the  English  corps. 

R  2 


244        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JULY, 

of  taking  it,  not  having  allowed  him  so  much   as 
fossing  for  the  facilitating  of  the  work. 

A  little  before  the  taking  of  the  town  the  Duke 
of  Lorraine  drew  up  his  horse  to  face  the  intrench- 
ment,  as  if  the  Spanish  army  had  a  design  to  attack 
the  French  camp,  where  he  lost  above  three  hundred 
horse,  having  fourteen  pieces  of  cannon  playing  upon 
him ;  but  an  allowance  also  by  agreement  of  three 
hundred  guilders  a  horse  for  every  horse  he  lost. 

After  the  taking  of  La  Basse,  the  French  marched 
directly  to  surprise  Lens,  where  they  immediately 
lodged  themselves  in  the  out-works,  and  in  all  pro- 
bability ,  if  the  Picard  regiment  had  but  had  orders 
to  have  pushed  for  the  place,  they  might  have  got 
possession  of  the  ports.  This  passed  in  the  morning, 
and  at  night,  his  Highness  having  the  guard,  there 
were  miners  clapt  on  upon  the  main  works,  where 
seven  or  eight  of  them  were  presently  knocked  on  the 
head.  The  Prince  at  last  fixed  one  of  them  to  the 
works,  but  the  very  next  morning,  before  they  could 
make  any  further  progress,  the  Spanish  army  appear- 
ed, and  the  French  were  commanded  to  draw  off,  so 
they  returned  again  to  La  Basse  to  their  quarters. 

Being  at  La  Basse,  Gassion  invites  the  Prince  one 
day  to  take  the  air,  and  his  Highness  was  pleased  to 
bear  him  company ;  but  his  business,  it  seems,  was 
to  carry  him  to  Eysters,  to  talk  with  his  bailiff  about 
oats  and  hay,  and  other  country  affairs.  He  took 
some  fourscore  horse  of  the  guards  along  with  him. 
This  being  taken  notice  of  by  a  certain  boor,  the 


1647.]      PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      245 

fellow  ran  presently  to  Armentiers  and  fetched  a 
party  of  about  one  hundred  firelocks  to  try  to  inter- 
cept them  in  their  return.     As  they  came  back,  the 
Prince   discovered  a  dog  sitting  upon  his  breech, 
with    his    face   towards   the   wood,   whereupon   his 
Highness  gave  Sir  William  Reeves,  who  was  then 
his  page,    his  cloak,  and  riding  through  the  party 
up  to  Gassion,  who  was  about  forty  yards  in  the 
head  of  them,  with  some  officers  about  him,  "  Have  a 
care,  sir,"  says  the  Prince,  "  there  is  a  party  in   the 
wood.1"     The  word  was  no  sooner  spoken  but  they 
had  a  salvo  from  the  enemy's  ambush,  both  before 
and    behind,  so  that   they  were    forced    to    break 
through  the   fire.     Sir  William  Reeves,  with  some 
others,  being  taken  prisoners,  the  Governor  of  Ar- 
mentiers very  civilly  returned  him  again.     So  soon 
as  they  had  broken   through,  Gassion  faced  about 
towards  the  enemy,  "  Mort  Dieu,"  says  he,  "  il  faut 
rompre  le  col  a  ces  coquins  la, — let  us  break  the 
necks  of  these  rogues ;"  and  then  taking  his  foot  out 
of  the  stirrup,  "  pied  a  terre,"  says  he.     The  Prince 
with  some  few  officers  understood   it  that  he  was 
alighting,  and  that  the  whole  party  should  do  the 
like,  and  so  fall  in  upon  the  ambush  with  sword  and 
pistol.     The  Prince  and  some  officers  dismounted, 
but  Gassion,  in  the  mean  time,  marched  away  with 
the  horses,  the  enemy  following  his  Highness,  and 
the  officers  with  him,  on  foot.     His  Highness  here 
received  a  shot  in  the  head,  from  whence  he  return- 
ed to  La  Basse,  and  so  to  Bethune  to  be  cured,  from 


246          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF       [JUNE, 

whence,  after  his  recovery,  his  Highness  went  into 
France,  where  he  passed  his  next  winter,  with  as 
much  satisfaction  as  the  tenderness  he  felt  for  the 
state  of  his  Royal  uncle's  affairs  would  permit.1 

1  I  find  several  letters  from  the  Cavaliers  to  Prince  Rupert 
about  this  time,  consisting  for  the  most  part  of  details  relating  to 
their  surrenders.  The  following  letter  from  Edinburgh  contains 
some  news : — 

MAY   IT   PLEASE   YOUR   HlGHNESS, 

The  resolutions  of  this  Parliament  hath  been  long  inter- 
rupted by  Argyll  and  his  corrupt  associates,  and  by  the  seditious 
preachers,  who  daily  do  throw  in  new  difficulties  to  hinder  the 
raising  of  an  army,  but  all  in  vain  j  for  the  colonels  are  nominated 
in  Parliament,  and  the  inferior  officers  are  left  to  the  election  of 
the  colonels  and  the  committees  of  the  several  shires.  According 
to  the  account  of  the  Parliament,  the  army  will  consist  of  thirty 
thousand  :  the  rendezvous  is  appointed,  the  24th  of  this  month, 
on  this  side  the  river  Tay.  The  levy  of  the  army  is  so  willingly 
undertaken  by  the  nobility  and  the  gentry,  that  I  am  confident  it 
will  be  more  numerous  and  choicer  men  than  any  that  hath  been 
raised  this  many  ages  from  this.  Berwick  and  Carlisle  are  again 
possessed  by  the  Cavaliers,  Sir  Marmaduke  Langdale  being  in 
Berwick,  and  Sir  Philip  Musgrave  in  Carlisle.  The  declaration 
emitted  by  the  Parliament  may  dissatisfy  the  King's  party,  but 
there  was  a  present  necessity  to  couch  it  in  that  strain.  Ere  long 
I  am  confident  that  things  will  be  more  clearly  understood,  to  the 
full  satisfaction  of  all  that  wish  well  or  do  suffer  for  his  Majesty. 
I  could  have  wished  your  Highness  the  immediate  command 
under  the  Prince  of  Wales,  but  the  present  condition  of  affairs 
will  not  allow  it,  your  Highness  and  Prince  Maurice  remaining 
still  excepted  by  both  Parliaments.  I  am  confident  that  it  will 
be  easy  to  take  the  sense-rate  of  this  Parliament  against  you  two, 
by  the  means  of  the  Duke  of  Hamilton,  his  brother  Lanerick,  and 
their  friends,  but  this  present  time  is  most  unfit  for  any  such 
motion.  I  find  a  civil  and  kind  inclination  in  both  the  brothers 
to  serve  your  Highness,  and  give  me  leave  to  wish  that  there 
were  a  friendly  understanding  betwixt  you.  I  know  that  the 
malice  of  many  of  the  English  are  great  against  you,  particularly 
the  Marquis  of  Hereford  :  what  course  is  to  be  taken  to  purge 
the  angry  humours  of  the  English  I  know  not,  but  here  the  two 
brothers  most  do  your  business.  It  is  my  duty  to  represent  the 
truth  of  things  to  your  Highness's  consideration,  being  passionately 
desirous  to  be  instrumental  and  active  in  anything  conducing  to 


1647.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        247 

It  must  not  be  omitted  that  Gassion  staying  for 
the  Prince  after  he  had  received  his  wound,  his 
Highness  recovered  the  party ;  and  as  they  were 
upon  their  march ;  "  Monsieur,"  says  Gassion  to  the 
Prince,  "  je  suis  bien  fasch6  que  vous  estes  blesse," 
— "  sir,  it  troubles  me  that  you  are  wounded."  "  Et 
moi  aussi,"  says  the  Prince, — "  and  truly  so  does  it 
me  too."  After  this  Gassion  went  to  besiege  Lens, 
where  he  was  killed  by  a  musket-shot  in  the  head.1 

So  soon  as  the  Prince  had  paid  his  compliments 
to  the  French  Court,  he  went  from  Paris  to  St. 
Germains,  where  his  Highness  the  Prince  of  Wales, 


the  good  of  your  service.  The  reality  of  this  truth  shall  appear 
when  your  Highness  is  pleased  to  honour  with  your  commands 
your  Highness's  Most  humble  and  faithful  servant, 

W.  B. 

Edinburgh,  4th  May,  1647.  [Sir  William  Bellenden  1] 

For  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert,  these. 

1  The    following    note    of   the    Prince's    musters    may  have 
interest : — 

Estat  des  regiments  Anglois  qui  sont  a  present  au  service 
du  Roi,  et  du  nombre  de  compagnies  dont  ils  sont  com- 
posez  : — 

Comps.  Homines. 

A  Lens,  Regiment  de  Rokeby  10    faisans    675 

...neufbourgou  aux faubourg  de  Caen,  Sandys     11         „         304 
Idem,  Vagstaffe  a  este  licentie*  et  les  hommes 
joints  au  regiment  de  Sandys. 

Idem,  Tillier 2        „         118 

A  Kesdin,  Holies   1        „  60 

Were  licentie  les  hommes  joints  a  la  com- 
pagnie  de  Holies. 

Venant,  Hawkins  3        „         150 

Lunsford  1  65 


Nombre  total  28  1372 

Fait  a  Paris  le  20  Jan.  1647. 
Regiments  Anglois  estans  au  scrvirc  du  Roi. 


248          MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

and  the  chief  of  the  exiled  Royalists  then  resided  ; 
soon  after  his  arrival  there,  he  received  a  very  affec- 
tionate letter  from  his  Majesty,  then  a  prisoner  at 
Hampton  Court,  which  in  respect  both  of  the  kind- 
ness, and  the  occasion  of  it,  we  shall  here  insert : — 

NEPHEW, 

Amongst  many  misfortunes,  which  are  not  my  fault, 
one  is,  that  you  have  missed  those  expressions  of  kindness 
I  meant  you,  which,  I  believe,  was  occasioned  by  your 
being  in  the  army.  It  being  likewise  the  reason  that 
made  me  write  so  few  letters  to  you.  Besides,  the  truth 
is,  as  my  condition  is  yet,  I  cannot  say  anything  to  you  as 
I  would ;  not  being  able  to  second  words  in  the  deeds. 
Wherefore  excuse  me  if  I  only  say  this  to  you  now,  that, 
since  I  saw  you,  all  your  actions  have  more  than  confirmed 
the  good  opinion  I  have  of  you.  Assuring  you  that,  next 
my  children  (1  say  next)  I  shall  have  most  care  of  you, 
and  shall  take  the  first  opportunity  either  to  employ  you 
or  have  your  company.  And,  be  confident  that  this  shall 
be  really  performed  by 

Your  most  loving  Uncle,  and  constant  faithful  Friend, 
Hampton  Court,  Sept.  $,  1647.  CHARLES  R. 

P.S. — I  heard  not  of  your  hurt1  before  I  was  assured 
of  your  recovery ;  for  which  nobody,  without  compliment, 
is  gladder  than  myself.  For  the  particular  state  of  my 
affairs,  I  have  desired  the  Duke  of  Richmond  to  give  you 
an  account.2 

The  people  of  England  were  at  this  time  generally 
well-disposed  toward  the  deliverance  of  their  Sove- 


1  Received  when  deserted  by  Gassion 

2  This  letter,  unfortunately,   is  not   to  be  found  among  the 
Prince's  MSS. 


1648.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       249 

reign  and  themselves  out  of  the  hands  of  their  op- 
pressors; and  among  other  loyal  and  resolute  attempts 
for  the  accomplishment  of  these  honourable  ends, 
the  commotion  in  Kent,  in  May,  1648,  was  not  the 
least  considerable,  either  for  itself,  or  for  the  con- 
sequences of  it ;  for  it  was  that  encouragement  chiefly 
that  brought  over  a  great  part  of  the  rebel  fleet, 
which  their  master  had  set  out  for  their  summer 
guard,  to  their  allegiance,  and  if  they  had  taken  their 
course  directly  for  the  Isle  of  Wight,  as  was  earnestly 
pressed,  when  by  a  fatality  of  other  counsels  they 
went  over  for  Holland,  the  King's  life  had  probably 
been  spared,  and  most  of  those  other  dismal  calami- 
ties prevented,  that  ensued  upon  the  miscarriage. 

Upon  their  arrival  in  Holland,  the  news  of  it 
being  brought  to  the  Prince  of  Wales,  who  was 
then  at  St.  Germains,  it  was  advised  in  council  that 
his  Highness  should  repair  to  the  Hague ;  whither 
he  went  accordingly,  so  soon  as  ever  he  could  get 
himself  supplied  with  a  small  sum  of  money  for  the 
advancing  of  his  design  ;  which  with  much  difficulty 
and  delay  he  did  at  length  obtain  ;  and  the  Princes, 
with  many  of  the  English  nobility,  June  29th,  1648, 
began  their  journey  from  Paris  toward  the  Low 
countries ;  several  others  following  them  also  (July 
24th)  as  the  Lord  Witherington,  Lord  Bellasis, 
Lord  Hawley,  &c.,  who  went  first  to  the  Hague, 
and  from  thence,  in  the  "  Satisfaction  "  frigate  into 
the  Downs;  where  the  two  Princes  were  then 
on  board  the  fleet.  His  Highness  Prince  Rupert 


250        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [SEPT. 

having  been  plied  over  again  with  the  repeated  offer 
of  any  conditions  in  the  French  service,  before  his 
going  for  Holland. 

The  seamen  in  the  fleet  being  mutinous  through 
the  scarcity  of  provisions  and  want  of  employment, 
a  good  part  of  them,  after  shewing  themselves  in 
Yarmouth  Road,  upon  another  design,  at  their  own 
importunity,  landed  August  14th,  to  seize  a  small 
fort  near  Deal,  in  Kent,  from  whence  by  a  party  of 
horse  they  were  beaten  off  with  loss,  Sir  John  Boys 
taken  prisoner  by  the  rebels,  and  Captain  Beckman, 
principal  engineer,  slain  upon  the  place.  Upon  this 
repulse  disorders  and  discontents  increasing  in  the 
fleet,  and  all  disadvantages  being  artificially  improved, 
it  was  thought  the  best  way  to  return  for  Holland. 

Batten1  and  Jordan  came  to  the  King  in  the 
Downs,  in  the  "  Constant  Warwick,"  Batten  giving 
assurance  of  provisions  from  London,  but  put  off  so 
long  that  the  fleet  was  distressed  for  want  of  pro- 
visions, and  none  from  London  at  last :  they  were 
divided  what  course  to  steer ;  some  were  for  reliev- 
ing Colchester,  which  was  at  that  time  besieged. 

Batten  was  to  have  the  ships  go  to  the  frith,  in 
Scotland. 

The  Prince  Rupert  upon  the  return  of  the  fleet 
propounded  the  sending  of  some  forces  to  the  Isle  of 
Wight,  to  deliver  the  King ;  but  the  seamen  were 
generally  for  going  into  the  river  to  take  the  colliers' 

1  The  villain  who  fired  on  the  Queen. 


1648.]      PRINCE  RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       251 

fleet  in  their  return,  and  sink  the  boats  in  the  Med- 
way,  that  the  fleet  might  not  get  out. 

Several  prizes  were  seized  in  the  Downs,  and 
while  the  fleet  was  there,  came  the  news  of  Hamil- 
ton's defeat  [at  Preston]. 

The  Duke  of  Lorraine  offered  forces  upon  the 
security  of  Jersey  and  Guernsey. 

Sailing  for  the  King's  channel,  so  soon  as  they 
were  open  of  it,  the  King,  (then  Prince  of  Wales,) 
was  prevailed  upon  to  stand  away  for  Holland.  As 
he  was  bearing  up  to  stand  his  course,  some  of  the 
ships  followed  to  the  King ;  but  the  resolution  was 
so  much  disliked  by  the  seamen,  that  the  Swallow, 
(the  Rear-Admiral,)  in  which  the  King's  council 
was,  stood  away  for  the  river ;  when  by  Providence 
comes  a  little  bark  that  had  stood  before  the  fleet 
into  the  river,  and  gave  intelligence  that  the  Lord 
of  Warwick's  ships  were  rowing  out  of  the  river  to 
follow  them.  Upon  which  they  all  agreed,  and  the 
King  resolved  to  stand  against  the  Earl  of  War- 
wick, and  to  fight  him ;  so  that  every  ship  made 
ready  to  engage.  They  turned  up  the  river,  the  tide 
serving,  and  overtook  the  enemy  about  Lee-road, 
who  made  what  way  they  could  from  them  ;  and  just 
upon  the  point  of  coming  to  an  engagement,  there 
rose  a  sudden  blast  of  wind  that  forced  both  fleets 
to  an  anchor.1  Hereupon  the  Prince  of  Wales  sent 
a  summons  to  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  by  Mr.  Henry 

1  "In  September,  1648,  my  husband  was  commanded  by  the 
Prince  to  wait  on  him  in  the  Downs,  where  he  was  with  the  fleet ; 


252         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

Seymour  of  the  Bed-chamber,  and  received  an  an- 
swer as  follows.     [The  answer  not  given]. 

The  next  day  finding  that  they  could  not  force 
the  other  fleet  to  fight,  they  resolved  for  Holland. 
Just  as  they  were  setting  sail,  there  was  a  boat  gave 
them  advice  that  they  saw  some  ships,  which  they 
believed  to  be  the  Portsmouth  fleet,  standing  into 
the  river ;  but  this  would  not  be  credited.  At 
night,  the  Prince  standing  upon  the  deck,  in  the 
Constant  Reformation,  the  Master  of  the  ship,  one 
Pattison,  called  out  to  his  Highness  that  he  saw  a 
light,  and  asked  what  he  should  do.  The  Prince1 
told  him  that  he  judged  it  to  be  the  Portsmouth 
fleet,  and  Pattison  too  (with  the  rest  of  the  seamen) 
were  of  the  same  opinion.  Whereupon  the  Prince 
advised  to  steer  towards  them,  which  was  done  ac- 
cordingly ;  but  as  they  were  upon  their  course,  Bat- 
ten spake  to  the  King,  "  Sir,"  says  he,  "  whither  do  we 
steer  ?  will  your  Majesty  have  him  run  out  of  the 
way  for  every  collier  that  he  sees  ?"  The  Swallow 
and  two  or  three  other  ships  more,  steered  with  the 
Portsmouth  fleet,  and  hailed  them.  They  answered 
them,  yea,  yea ;  being  then  at  an  anchor  waiting  for 


but  the  fleet  was  divided,  part  being  for  the  King,  and  part  for 
the  Parliament.  They  were  resolved  to  fight  that  day,  which,  if 
they  had,  would  have  been  the  most  cruel  fight  England  ever 
knew ;  but  God,  by  his  will,  parted  them  by  a  storm  ;  and  after- 
wards it  was  said  that  Lord  Colepepper,  and  one  Low,  a  surgeon, 
that  was  a  reputed  knave,  so  ordered  the  business,  that  for  money 
the  fleet  was  betrayed  to  the  enemy," — Lady  Fanshaw's  Memoirs. 
1  i.  e.  Rupert,  who  is  always  to  be  understood  as  the  Prince, 
although  the  Prince  of  Wales  was  also  in  the  fleet. 


1648.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      253 

the  tide  to  carry  them  into  the  river.  But  the  King 
steering  his  course  for  Holland,  the  rest  followed; 
and  this  was  the  loss  of  the  Portsmouth  fleet, 
which  would  have  furnished  the  King's  with  pro- 
visions, and  might  have  been  had  for  the  asking. 
The  whole  fleet  of  the  King's  went  into  Goree 
road,  and  there  fell  to  revictualling ;  his  Highness 
going  away  with  the  King  for  the  Hague,  where 
he  arrived  the  4th  of  September,  and  after  a  short 
stay  returned  again  to  the  fleet. 

The  business  was  now,  who  should  first  get  the 
possession  of  the  harbour;  the  Constant  Reforma- 
tion was  nearest,  but  Warwick  sent  a  good  sailing 
frigate  to  get  in  before,  so  the  Prince's  boat  and  the 
other  rowed  d  vi  for  the  harbour ;  theirs  being  near- 
est, got  ashore  first.  Captain  Allen  being  then  on 
shore,  and  appearing  to  be  their  friend,  called  for 
the  rope  to  make  it  fast,  but  as  the  boat  was  putting 
off  again  he  let  slip  the  rope,  and  back  went  the 
frigate,  so  that  his  Highness  got  first  possession. 
After  which,  they  hauled  in  all  the  ships  except  the 
Convertine,  which,  at  the  next  spring  tide,  they 
got  in  too.  After  this,  Moulton,  one  of  Warwick's 
principal  officers,  came  aboard  the  Prince,  and  asked 
his  Highness  if  he  would  give  him  leave  to  speak 
with  some  of  the  seamen.  The  Prince  told  him 
yes,  in  his  hearing ;  but  if  he  spake  anything  amiss, 
he  would  throw  him  overboard.  His  Highness, 
however,  clapped  him  up,  but  at  the  desire  of  the 
States  released  him  again. 


254         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

Before  the  Convertine  could  be  got  in,  the  enemy 
had  a  design  to  take  possession  of  her ;  which  being 
discovered,  his  Highness  privately  slipped  in  as 
many  officers  as  he  could,  to  secure  her ;  where  they 
lay  upon  their  bellies,  having  only  stones  and  pikes 
to  defend  themselves ;  fo*  they  were  resolved  not 
to  make  any  shot,  unless  the  enemy  began  the  fray. 
But  in  the  mean  time,  a  boy  from  their  main  top, 
being  come  very  near  her,  discovered  the  men 
lying  on  their  bellies,  and  so  they  quitted  that 
design ;  the  frigate  sheering  off  again.  About  this 
time,  the  following  letter  arrives  from  Montrose. 
His  brilliant  career  has  been  checked  in  his  own 
country,  but  his  gallant  heart  still  yearns  for 
action.  Such  praise  as  follows,  from  such  a  writer, 
is  not  to  be  lightly  esteemed : — 

SIR, 

Your  Highness  may  justly  think  strange  what  should 
embolden  me  to  this  freedom,  never  having  done  myself 
the  honour  to  have  used  the  like  heretofore,  nor  being 
favoured  with  your  commands  now  to  do  it.  But  when 
your  Highness  shall  be  pleased  to  know,  that  I  was  ever  a 
silent  admirer  of  you,  and  a  passionate  affecter  of  your 
person,  and  all  your  ways,  you  will  be  pleased  to  allow  me 
recourse  to  your  goodness  and  generosity,  and  the  rather 
that  your  Highness's,  I  am  for  the  present  at  such  dis- 
tance, with  all  interests  as  no  end  but  naked  respect  can 
now  prompt  me  to  it ;  which  if  your  Highness  shall  do  me 
the  honour  to  take  in  good  part,  and  command  me  to  con- 
tinue, I  shall  hope,  it  will  not  wrong  the  King,  your 
uncle's  service,  nor  what  may  touch  your  Highness,  both 
in  relation  to  those  and  their  points,  in  either  whereof  I 


1648.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.      255 

should  presume  to  be  able  to  do  you  some  small  service, 
so  hoping  your  Highness  will  pardon  this  boldness,  and 
take  it  from  the  true  fountain,  I  shall  only  say,  that  I 
desire  to  be  ever, 

Sir,  your  Highness's  most  humble,  faithful, 

affectionate  servant,  MoNTROSE.1 

Brussels,  7th  Sept.  1648. 

While  this  passed,  and  after  several  debates  in 
council,  how  to  dispose  of  and  manage  the  business 
of  the  fleet ;  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert  was  de- 
sired to  take  it  into  his  care,  till  they  might  come 
to  a  more  regular  conclusion  upon  the  settlement 
of  that  affair;  which  the  Prince  did  readily  take 
upon  him,  although  an  undertaking  at  that  time  of 
so  desperate  an  appearance,  that  his  nearest  friends 
dissuaded  him  from  it.  But  still,  his  invincible 
courage,  and  the  passionate  zeal  and  affection  which 
he  had  ever  expressed  for  the  interests  of  his  Ma- 
jesty of  Great  Britain,  surmounted  all  difficulties, 
and  prevailed  upon  him  to  engage  in  an  enterprize 
that  no  other  person  would  meddle  with. 

[Cotemporaneously  with  the  following  naval  his- 


1    INSTRUCTIONS    TO    COLONEL    ROBERT    BLAKE,    GENERAL    OF   THE 
FIRST    FLEET    THAT   IS    GONE   TO    THE   SOUTHWARD. 

You  shall  remonstrate  to  the  King  of  Portugal,  that  the  fleet 
commanded  by  Prince  Rupert,  now  in  his  port,  are  not  of  a  nature 
capable  of  neutrality,  for  they  were  a  part  of  the  navy  of  England 
in  the  real  and  actual  possession  of  the  Parliament ;  from  which 
service  the  mariners  perfidiously  apostatized,  and  as  renegadoes 
have  run  away  with  the  said  ships,  wherewith  as  pirates  and  sea- 
robbers  they  have  made  depredations.  You  are  to  destroy  these 
ships  wherever  you  find  them.  If  the  King  will  not  see  you 
justified,  we  refer  you  to  our  former  authority. 


256          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

tory,  but  apparently  unknown  to  the  writer  of  it,  I 
find  a  voluminous  and  strangely  heterogeneous  cor- 
respondence, from  kings,  courtiers,  captains,  mer- 
chants, and  contractors.  This  correspondence  would 
be  full  of  interest  to  any  person  engaged  in  writing 
the  naval  history  of  the  period,  but  I  find  myself 
obliged  to  glean  very  sparingly  from  the  store.  At 
this  late  period  of  my  work,  I  wish  to  introduce 
as  little  matter  as  possible  that  does  not  belong 
strictly  to  narration.  Selection  with  this  view 
becomes  very  difficult ;  and  I  must  trust  to  the 
reader's  indulgence  if  such  letters  have  been  omitted 
as  might  have  proved  more  interesting  than  those 
that  are  introduced.  I  have  endeavoured  to  give 
in  the  following  remarks  some  of  the  information 
derivable  from  some  hundred  documents.] 

The  naval  expedition,  undertaken  by  Prince 
Rupert  in  the  autumn  of  1648,  is  of  a  nature 
without  any  parallel  in  history.  We  must  look 
back  to  the  days  of  the  Scandinavian  Sea-Kings 
for  even  a  resemblance  to  Rupert's  present  mission. 
His  was  a  spirit  cast  in  the  old  Northern  heroic 
mould ;  resolute,  indomitable,  adventurous,  and 
dauntless.  He  was  one  who  could 

"  Turn  what  some  deem  danger  to  delight, 
And  for  itself  could  woo  the  approaching  fight." 

He  lived  in  a  romantic  world  of  his  own,  notwith- 
standing the  dismal  realities  of  his  position  :  the 
petty  intrigues  of  the  young  King's  petty  Court ; 
the  perpetual  mutinies  of  his  own  dissolute  sailors ; 


1648.J      PRINCE   RUPERT    AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      257 

the  humiliating  efforts  to  raise  money ;  the  mer- 
cenary considerations  that  prompted  almost  every 
exploit;  even  the  details  of  captive  cargoes,  the 
forced  sales  of  "sugars,  and  indigo,  and  hides," 
not  one,  nor  all,  of  these  things,  could  bring  down 
his  soaring  spirit  for  more  than  a  moment  to  their 
own  level.  From  the  time  that  he  first  trod  the 
deck  of  his  gallant  ship,  he  assumed  the  bearing 
and  the  tone,  as  well  as  the  habits,  of  the  ancient 
Vikingr.  In  the  commission  that  he  received,  he 
was  invested  with  "all  the  command  at  sea  that  he 
had  held  formerly  on  shore  :"  that  is  to  say,  he  was 
absolute.  To  gratify  the  official  people  about  the 
exiled  Court,  the  young  Viking  received  what  were 
termed  "  Instructions,"  but  those  instructions  were 
dictated  according  to  his  own  resolute  will,  and 
were  binding  no  longer  upon  him  than  he  chose.  Nor 
was  this  power  to  be  wondered  at :  who  else,  in  the 
midst  of  such  a  storm  of  misfortune,  would  or  could 
have  undertaken  a  post  of  such  difficulty  and  danger  ? 
Who  else  could  have  borne  the  Royal  Standard  in 
such  a  career  as  his,  without  dishonour  to  it  ?  Rupert 
was  destined  to  maintain  the  name  of  Royal  England 
on  the  seas,  and  to  contend  with  his  mighty  enemies 
not  only  for  their  naval  supremacy  but  their  wealth. 
This  last  was  the  first  great  object  of  the  Prince's 
cruise  ;  the  Prince  of  Wales  and  all  his  Court  were 
almost  famishing  in  their  exile ;  they  looked  to 
Rupert's  squadron  to  supply  them  with  the  very 
necessaries  of  life.  But  for  this  consideration,  the 
VOL.  ITT  s 


258          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

extraordinary  squadron  we  are  about  to  sail  with, 
would  never  have  been  fitted  out.1  And  while 
Orraond  anxiously  expected  Rupert  to  enable  him 
to  reconquer  Ireland,  the  courtiers'  first  anxiety 
was,  that  his  Highness  should  enable  them  to 
obtain  their  bread.  The  naval  speculation  was 
perfectly  successful  in  this  point  of  view.  The 
King  being  persecuted  by  every  one,  proved  a  source 
of  great  profit  to  the  Royal  Buccaneers.  There 
was  scarcely  any  flag  that  had  power  to  protect  its 
owner.  Wherever  a  ship  was  seen  she  was  pur- 
sued, wherever  pursued  she  was  taken,  and  the 
remaining  process  was  wonderfully  simplified  by 
the  nature  of  the  "  Court  of  Adjudication."  This 
high-sounding  tribunal  seems  frequently  only  to 
have  comprised  the  officer  of  the  watch ;  at  other 
times  it  amounted  to  a  court-martial  of  the  beg- 
gared and  rapacious  Cavaliers.  A  sail  in  sight  and 
a  well-secured  prize,  soon  became  synonimous. 
There  was  something  very  attractive  in  this  sort  of 
adventure,  and  it  required  all  the  native  charac- 
teristics of  gentlemen  to  prevent  the  sea-going 
Cavaliers  from  carrying  their  buccaneering  to 

1  There  was  a  party  against  the  Prince  in  England  as  well  as 
in  the  exiled  Court.  A  man  called  Bamfield  writes  from  London 
in  the  summer  of  1648,  to  say  that  the  Presbyterian  party  in 
England  desire  very  much  to  support  the  King ;  that  they  can 
only  do  so  by  promoting  peace,  and  that  "  Rupert's  very  name 
hath  a  sound  of  war  in  it,  and  therefore  it  is  hoped  he  may  not 
be  employed."  Bamfield  adds  :  "  If  Lady  Carlisle  [still  in  confi- 
dence !]  and  Mr.  Denham  constitute  the  Presbyterian  party,  then 
your  Highness's  name  is  obnoxious,  but  I  do  not  believe  it."  He 
proved  to  be  a  traitor,  and  a  spy  of  Cromwell's. 


1648.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       259 

excess.  But  it  was  not  carried  to  excess ;  at  least 
all  was  done  fairly  and  above  board,  as  to  an 
enemy ;  no  cruelty  was  practised  ;  fair  terms  were 
offered  and  honourably  kept  towards  the  victims  of 
this  predatory  war. 

Some  of  the  difficulties  attending  the  getting  up 
of  this  speculation  are  detailed  in  the  MS. :  money 
and  men,  the  first  requisites  in  fitting  out  a  fleet, 
were  both  wanting ;  the  latter  were  in  great  re- 
quest, and  ill  disciplined  and  mutinous  even  when 
procured.  Their  pay  was  not  low ;  24s.  a-month, 
with  food  and  clothes,  afforded  a  comfortable 
subsistence  in  those  days.1 

The  Royal  cause  was  now  at  sea ;  the  whole 
Cavalier  system  was  transferred  at  once  from  mili- 
tary into  naval  details :  generals  became  admirals ; 
colonels,  captains  ;  soldiers,  marines ;  garrisons  be- 
came ships'-crews ;  intrigues  and  cabals  were  trans- 
ferred from  Merton  and  Oriel  Colleges2  to  the 
Hague  and  the  Royal  fleet.  The  statesmen  of  the 
Royal  party  were  the  most  out  of  their  element. 
They  assumed  something  of  a  mercantile  and 
appraising  character;  and  it  is  curious  to  find  Hyde, 

1  I  find  by  the  contractor's  estimates  for  provisions  the  follow- 
ing prices  :  cheese  5d.  per  lb.,  butter  ±d.  per  lb.,  peas  63s.  the 
bushel,  sea-bread  about  Id.  perlb. ;  1  lb.  of  bread,  j  lb.  of  cheese, 
and  ^  lb.  of  butter,  was  allowed  to  each  man  per  diem. — Prince 
Rupert's  Correspondence.     Sword-belts,  it  seems,  cost  about  7s.  Qd. 
each. — Lord  Denbigh's  MS. 

2  The  Queen  and  many  of  her  ladies  resided  at  Merton  College, 
during  her  stay  at  Oxford  ;  the  Privy  Council  was  held  at  Oriel ; 
the  King  and  Prince  Rupert  had  their  quarters  at  Christchurch. 

s  2 


260         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [AUG 

Culpepper,  and  others,  discussing  with  as  much  zest 
the  price  of  sugars,  indigo,  and  "jacoletto,"  as  in 
our  first  volume  they  speculated  on  subsidies  and 
fifteenths,  and  the  fatal  ship-money. 

Through  the  mass  of  his  naval  correspondence  we 
may  trace  a  very  curious  texture  of  warlike  and 
commercial  interests.  The  latter,  however,  is  always 
subservient  to  the  former.  If  new  guns  for  the 
Antelope,  or  the  Honest  Seaman  are  required^  hides, 
or,  peradventure,  elephants'  teeth,  are  to  be  ex- 
changed for  them :  if  the  exiled  King  of  England 
prevails  on  some  merchant  to  cash  a  bill  for  him,  it 
is  always  drawn  upon  Prince  Rupert ;  and  a  frigate 
is  despatched  for  means  to  honour  it.  If  the  Pala- 
tine's men  become  more  mutinous  than  usual,  from 
want  of  pay,  he  sends  them  out  to  catch  a  ship  for 
themselves,  the  first  that  heaves  in  sight ;  they  are 
seldom  particular  about  the  flag.  And  in  this  mar- 
vellous manner,  the  Palatine  leads  his  squadrons 
for  four  long  years  through  fleets  of  the  angry 
enemy,  with  a  Blake  at  their  head  ;  not  only  re- 
ceiving no  money  from  the  King,  but  supporting 
him  and  his  needy  courtiers  by  his  formidable  in- 
dustry. He  who  shall  hereafter  write  Prince  Ru- 
pert's life,  unencumbered  by  the  responsibility  of 
formal  old  MSS.,  will  make  a  stirring  tale  of  his 
adventures.  When  the  fragile  but  fearless  fleet  of 
the  young  Palatine  roved  at  large  over  England's 
own  watery  realm — the  wide  sea:  now  sheltering 
under  the  lee  of  stormy  Ireland ;  with  Scotch 


1648,]      PRINCE  RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       261 

Puritans,  and  Romish  rebels,  and  Irish  raparees 
watching  for  him  on  the  shore,  and  the  Parlia- 
ment's stout  fleet  lying  in  wait  for  him  at  sea. 
Now  breaking  away  into  the  Western  ocean,  cap- 
turing rich  galleons  on  the  Spanish  main,  or  traffick- 
ing the  gems  and  ivory  of  the  South,  for  the  wines 
of  Portugal  and  the  powder  that  was  to  win  yet 
more  ;  now  pursued  by  all  powerful  fleets  as  a  fugi- 
tive, and  now  received  in  foreign  kingdoms  as  a  con- 
queror. I  now  resume  the  Prince's  narrative : — 

"Upon  his  application  to  this  work,  he  found  the 
fleet  in  a  mutinous  and  distracted  condition  ;  the 
enemy  then  riding  at  the  harbour's  mouth,  the  very 
seamen  acknowledging  what  temptations  they  had 
both  by  the  flatteries  and  moneys  from  several  of 
Warwick's  agents  that  were  dispersed  there  ashore, 
expressly  to  debauch  them  from  their  duties,  and 
make  them  desert  their  service ;  insomuch  that 
divers  of  the  officers  themselves  were  upon  strong 
presumptions  suspected  of  an  intent  to  slip  their 
cables  in  the  night,  and  so  fall  down  with  the  tide 
of  ebb  into  the  enemy's  fleet.  But  then  a  squadron 
of  Dutch  ships  came  into  the  road,  and  anchored 
betwixt  the  two  fleets ;  prohibiting  all  acts  of  hos- 
tility in  that  place,  and  declaring  that  in  case  of 
any  violence  they  would  join  against  the  aggressor. 

"Several  weeks  they  continued  in  this  posture, 
facing  of  one  another,  but  the  Prince  having  enter- 
tained a  resolute  number  of  exiled  gentlemen  and 
soldiers  that  had  served  his  Majesty  in  the  late  war, 


262         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [OCT. 

he  disposed  them  proportionably  into  the  several 
ships ;  by  which  means  the  fickle  and  licentious  sea- 
men were  kept  in  some  sort  of  awe  and  obedience. 

The  Prince  has  written  to  Montrose  such  a  reply 
as  that  kindred  spirit  might  have  expected;  he 
now  received  the  following  rejoinder  : — 

THE  MARQUIS  OF  MONTROSE  TO  PRINCE  RUPERT. 

SIR, 

Your  Highness's  noble  and  generous  expressions  do 
not  only  give  me  all  subject  most  humbly  to  acknowledge 
such  gallant  civilities,  but  also  embolden  me,  grounded 
upon  your  Highness's  allowance,  to  presume  to  entertain 
myself  with  the  honour  and  happiness  of  so  much  wished 
favour,  humbly  entreating  your  Highness  to  do  me  the 
justice  to  believe,  that  as  it  was  still  my  secret  and  most 
predominant  passion,  to  witness  myself  the  faithfulest  of 
all  your  servants,  rather  in  order  to  his  Majesty's  affairs, 
in  which  I  may  appear  so  very  little  useful,  or  that  of 
your  Highness  own  particular,  so  shall  it  be  still  my 
greatest  ambition,  without  affectation  at  all,  for  your 
Highness's  worth  and  merit,  and  the  strong  inclinations  I 
harbour  to  serve  it,  to  avow  myself  ever  against  all  oppo- 
sitions, 

Sir,  your  Highness's  most  humble,  faithful, 

affectionate  servant,  MONTROSE.] 

Brussels,  7th  Oct.  1648. 

Such  was  the  industry  and  address  of  our  Prince 
in  all  these  extremities,  that  the  Prince  of  Wales 
himself  had  often  acknowledged  that  the  fleet  had 
been  brought  to  nothing  without  it.  There  was 
a  distemper,  it  is  true,  in  the  Antelope,  a  second- 
rate  ship,  which  was  much  more  dangerous  than 
all  the  rest,  and  it  began  upon  a  complaint  about 


1648.]        PRINCE    RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     263 

victuals.  His  Highness  telling  them  that  such 
as  did  not  like  the  service  might  be  gone,  for 
he  could  find  men  enough  to  sail  in  the  King's 
ships  without  them  ;  they  stood  muttering,  without 
giving  any  particular  answer. 

"  It  must  be  here  observed,  that  toward  Michael- 
mas his  Highness  caused  all  the  ships  to  be  unrigged, 
for  the  preventing  of  embezzlement  and  disorder,  and 
in  expectation  of  the  frost,  which  must  certainly 
force  the  Parliament  fleet  to  quit  the  road.  But 
Michaelmas  being  past,  the  Prince  got  his  fleet 
in  readiness,  intending  for  Ireland,  according  to  his 
orders,  so  soon  as  he  was  rid  of  Warwick's  neigh- 
bourhood ;  which  now  was  expected  would  be  very 
quickly,  his  provisions  having  grown  very  low.  But 
contrary  to  expectation,  the  rebels'  whole  fleet  (for 
their  money)  was  plentifully  supplied  with  all  neces- 
saries from  Rotterdam :  and  which  was  yet  worse, 
the  Dutch  squadron  about  the  5th  of  November, 
quitted  the  place  ;  leaving  the  port  to  defend  its  own 
privileges,  and  both  fleets  to  their  good  behaviour, 
but  yet  before  they  went  they  endeavoured  to  satisfy 
his  Highness  by  telling  him  that  Warwick  had 
engaged  his  honour  not  to  violate  the  law  of  na- 
tions, and  that  the  States  would  declare  themselves 
enemies  to  the  assailant. 

"  At  the  time  when  the  Prince  was  giving  orders 
for  the  rigging  of  the  fleet,  he  sent  to  the  Antelope 
for  twenty  of  their  best  men  to  help  rig  the  Ad- 
miral :  but  they  plainly  refusing  to  come,  his  HTgh- 


264          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [OCT. 

ness  went  on  board  himself,  with  some  half-a-score 
resolute  gentlemen,  and  called  positively  for  twenty 
of  their  best  foremast  men,  and  walked  upon  the 
deck  to  see  his  commands  obeyed ;  when  the  sea- 
men, instead  of  complying,  gathered  about  his  High- 
ness, and  one  bold  fellow  among  the  rest  cried  out 
"  one  and  all,"  upon  which  the  Prince  immediately 
caught  him  in  his  arms  and  held  him  overboard,  as 
if  he  would  have  thrown  him  into  the  sea.  The 
suddenness  of  this  action  wrought  such  a  terror 
upon  the  rest,  that  they  returned  forthwith  to  their 
duty. 

"  After  the  departure  of  the  States'  fleet,  the  Earl 
of  Warwick  entered  the  harbour  with  his,  and 
anchored  within  musket  shot  of  the  Prince,  but 
without  any  exhibition  of  hostility  than  words  of 
contumely  and  reproach.  Both  parties  met  ashore, 
also,  promiscuously,  where  they  had  their  brawls 
and  drinking  bouts,  insomuch  that  Warwick's  party 
complained  to  the  States  of  violence  and  injuries 
that  were  offered  them  by  the  other ;  and  there  was 
care  taken  to  see  that  if  they  did  quarrel,  there 
should  be  fair  play. 

"  Immediately  upon  Warwick's  entering  the  har- 
bour, the  Prince  dispatched  a  gentleman  with  letters 
to  his  Highness  the  Prince  of  Wales,  with  orders  to 
return  with  all  possible  speed,  who  arriving  at  the 
Hague,  found  the  Prince  sick  of  the  small-pox ;  but 
Mr.  Progers,  one  of  the  Grooms  of  the  Bedchamber, 
did,  notwithstanding,  forthwith  present  the  letters 


1048.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE    CAVALIERS.      265 

and  the  bearer  of  them  to  his  Highness,  and  he  was 
dispatched  away  the  same  night,  getting  back  again 
by  the  next  morning  to  Helvoet-Sluys,  where  he 
found  affairs  not  a  little  altered. 

"  The  Prince  with  the  Constant  Reformation,  Con- 
vertine, Antelope,  Swallow,  and  four  frigates,  were 
got  up  to  the  quay,  the  Convertine  lying  athwart, 
with  her  starboard  side  to  the  enemy's.  Upon  the 
tree-heads  the  Prince  had  raised  batteries,  and 
planted  several  pieces  of  cannon,  which  he  took  out 
of  the  ships.  The  remainder  of  the  fleet  was  revolted 
to  the  Earl  of  Warwick,  and  being  under  his  pro- 
tection, invited  their  fellows  to  follow  the  example, 
which  many  of  them  were  willing  and  ready  enough 
to  do,  but  prevented  by  the  care  and  vigilance  of 
the  Prince,  who,  with  three  hundred  landsmen  which 
he  had  lately  entertained,  so  manned  the  Convertine 
and  the  batteries,  that  the  seamen  had  it  not  in 
their  power  to  go  over  to  the  enemy,  nor  could  they, 
without  much  danger,  attempt  it.  In  this  condition 
a  great  part  of  the  winter  was  spent,  and,  in  short, 
many  of  the  seamen  deserted  the  service,  and  went 
overland  to  the  rebels. 

"  His  Highness  having  planted  guns  upon  the  har- 
bour for  the  security  of  his  fleet,  the  States  took 
notice  of  several  complaints  for  fortifying  the  har- 
bour, and  for  many  disorders  that  were  committed 
among  the  seamen.  The  Prince  returned  answer 
that,  if  the  States  would  account  for  the  protection 
of  the  fleet,  his  Highness  would  depend  upon  it; 


266          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [NOV. 

but,  otherwise,  having  taken  charge  of  the  fleet  by 
his  Majesty's  commission,  he  was  resolved  to  protect 
it  as  well  as  he  could ;  and  as  to  any  disorders  com- 
mitted ashore,  his  Highness  wished  them  to  send  an 
officer  to  take  some  course  to  prevent  it,  for  that 
their  harbours  were  as  free  to  his  men  as  to  the 
others ;  beside  that,  the  King's  men  had  the  first 
possession  of  it. 

"  Upon  the  21st  of  November  the  Earl  of  Warwick 
set  sail,  and  departed  for  England,  and  his  Highness 
presently  hastened  away  to  the  Prince  of  Wales  to 
know  his  pleasure  what  should  be  done  with  the 
small  remainder  of  the  fleet  now  laid  up  by  the 
walls.  Our  Prince  was  now  desired  again  to  take 
upon  him  the  charge  of  admiral,  Prince  Maurice 
being  appointed  for  his  vice-admiral,  and  the  rear- 
admiral  to  be  Sir  John  Mennes.  The  matter  being 
now  resolved  upon,  his  Highness  resigned  him- 
self to  the  good  pleasure  and  liking  of  the  Prince  of 
Wales  and  his  council,  with  all  deference  imagin- 
able to  the  Royal  authority  and  family,  and  received 
his  commission  of  admiral  in  the  terms  following: — " 

[A  very  verbose  document  here  intervenes;  its 
purport  may  be  expressed  in  one  line :  it  gave  to 
Prince  Rupert  on  sea  "  all  the  powers  he  formerly 
exercised  on  land ; "  and  his  authority  was  to  be 
"  unlimited  on  the  coasts  of  the  three  kingdoms." 

o 

About  this  time,  the  Presbyterian  party  in  Scot- 
land, professing  loyalty,  had  sent  Commissioners  to 
Prince  Charles.  They  consisted  of  those  who  were 


1648.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       267 

more  hostile  to  Montrose :  the  latter,  therefore,  was 
kept  at  a  distance,  notwithstanding  the  wishes  of 
Prince  Rupert.  Sir  Edward  Hyde  was  sent  to 
have  a  clandestine  interview  with  the  great  Scot- 
tish Cavalier.  However,  as  he  tells  us  in  his 
Life,  Montrose  is  not  pleased,  and  writes  thus  to 
Prince  Rupert : — 

SIR, 

I  had  the  honour  to  receive  your  Highness's  by  Sir 
John  Urrie,1  and  was  informed  by  him,  likewise,  of  all 
your  Highness  committed  to  him  to  deliver,  to  which  I 
could  not  have  failed  to  have  made  an  instant  return,  but 
that  I  was  still  upon  my  dispatch  with  these  slow  gamesters 
here,  to  have  waited  upon  your  Highness  myself,  which, 
finding  draw  to  a  little  more  length  than  I  could  have 
imagined,  I  am  constrained  humbly  to  crave  your  High- 
ness's  pardon,  to  be  resolved  of  your  commands  in  this 
way.  1  must  confess,  as  your  Highness  has  perhaps  heard, 
that  it  is  my  resolution  to  return  for  the  Imperial  Court, 
though  I  never  intended  it,  without  being  resolved  first  to 
receive  your  commands,  as  the  persons  in  the  world  shall 
have  greatest  iniluence  upon  all  my  services.  In  regard 
there  is  nothing  of  honour  amongst  the  stuif  here,  and 
that  I  am  not  found  useful  for  His  Majesty's  service  in 
the  way  of  home.  Always,  if  your  Highness  shall  wish  me 
to  engage,  or  find  a  fair  way  for  it,  or  be  to  lay  your  rest1  at 
any  stake,  I  entreat  your  Highness  to  believe  that  I  have 

1  "  Colonel  Hurry  is  the  ever-changing  Sir  John  Hurry,  some- 
times called  TJray  and  Hurrey,  who  whisks  like  a  most  rapid 
actor  of  all  works,  ever  on  a  new  side,  ever  changing  in  the  van, 
through  this  Civil  War  drama.  The  notablest  feat  he  ever  did, 
was  leading  Prince  Rupert  on  that  marauding  party  from  Oxford 
to  High  Wycombe,  on  the  return  from  which  Hampden  met  his 
death.  Hurry  had  been  on  the  Parliament  side  before.  He  was 
taken  at  last  when  Montrose  was  taken,  and  hanged  out  of  the 
way." — Carlyles  Cromwell,  vol.  i.  (note)  p.  375. 


268          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [DEC. 

still  so  much  invincible  loyalty  to  His  Majesty,  and 
passionate  respect  to  your  own  person,  that  I  will  abandon 
all  fortunes  and  advantages  in  the  world,  and  rather 
hazard  to  sink  by  you,  nor  save  myself  aside  of  all  others. 
Wherefore,  let  your  Highness  be  pleased  I  may  receive 
your  commands  freely  by  your  return,  and  I  will  study  to 
forego  all,  and  dispose  upon  myself  in  everything  accord- 
ingly. I  have  made  bold  to  do  it  in  this  way,  because 
I  wish  not,  if  your  Highness  be  pleased  to  think  it  fit, 
that  any  should  know  what  passes,  until  I  have  first  the 
honour  to  wait  upon  yourself,  which  shall  undoubtedly  be 
soon  after  the  return ;  at  which  time  I  hope  to  let  your 
Highness  see  all  is  not  yet  gone,  but  that  we  may  have  a 
handsome  pull  for  it,  and  a  probable  one,  and  rather  win 
it  or  be  sure  to  lose  it  fairly.  The  pressingness  of  time 
makes  me  use  this  freedom,  to  which  I  shall  add  nothing 
but  a  begging  of  your  Highness's  pardon,  with  a  solemn 
vow  that  I  am,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble, 

faithful,  affectionate  Servant, 

MONTROSE. 

Brussels,  3rd  December,  1648. 

The  following  letter  seems  to  have  been  also 
written  about  this  time,  and  proves  that  there  were 
far  other  designs  brooding  in  the  daring  hearts  of 
these  two  leaders,  than  those  with  which  they  were 
forced  to  content  themselves  afterwards  : — 

SIR; 

If  those  people,  who  pretend  His  Majesty's  order  for 
me,  and  are  to  be  directed  hither  as  they  profess,  by  the 
Prince  [Charles  and  his  Councillors],  be  parted  when  this 
comes  to  your  Highness's  hands,  I  shall  not  fail  to  attend 
you  with  all  possible  speed ;  otherwise,  if  they  be  not, 
your  Highness  would  be  pleased,  in  an  indirect  way,  to 

1  I  presume  that  "  rest "  means  "  what  is  left." 


1618.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     269 

dispose  it  so  as  they  may  immediately  be  sent  along.  For 
it  will  concern  much  that  we  know  how  their  designs  are 
composed,  and  upon  what  string  they  touch ;  that,  when  I 
have  the  honour  to  wait  on  your  Highness,  we  may,  with 
the  more  clearness  cast  our  moulds,  and  know  how  to  keep 
the  better  consort  with  their  [illegible],  so  that  it  will 
be  much  time  gained,  although  it  may  seem  to  retard  it. 
Since,  notwithstanding  I  were  with  your  Highness  now, 
before  you  could  resolve  anything,  it  were  necessary  to 
find  out  their  mind,  that  you  might  the  better  know  how 
to  labour  yours ;  and,  until  then,  the  less  they  know  of 
my  faithful  respects  to  your  Highness,  or  intentions  to- 
wards His  Majesty's  service,  the  better.  For,  the  more 
necessity  they  have  of  men,  and  the  less  certainty  to 
have  them,  will  still  afford  us  the  more  freedom,  and 
greater  square  to  work.  As  for  the  present  difficulties  of 
your  Highness  shipping,  you  need  not  doubt  it ;  for  there 
will  be  many  ways  found  for  their  entertainment,  that 
they  may  be  still  kept  in  call ;  and,  since  there  be  so 
handsome  and  probable  grounds  for  a  clear  and  gallant 
design,  if  the  measures  be  rightly  taken,  I  should  be 
infinitely  sorry  that  your  Highness  should  be  induced  to 
hazard  your  own  person,  or  those  little  rests  [the  little 
that  remains]  upon  any  desperate  thrust.  For,  while  you 
are  safe,  we  shall  find  twenty  fair  ways  to  state  [reinstate] 
ourselves,  and  give  them  the  half  of  the  fear.  But  if  any- 
thing else  did  behappen,  I  should  esteem  myself  the  most 
unfortunate  person  in  the  world,  both  for  His  Majesty's 
interest,  and  your  own  person.  Always  I  will  submit 
myself  to  your  Highness's  better  judgment,  and  entreat 
you  to  pardon  this  freedom,  which  only  proceeds  from  the 
entire  and  perfect  respects  of,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  faithful  and  affectionate  Servant, 

MONTROSE.1 

1  This  letter  is  without  date,  but  docketed  "From  Earl  Mon- 
trose."     I  conceive  that  it  must   belong  to  this  period,  though 


270        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF          [JAN. 

I  do  not  find  that  any  meeting  between  the 
gallant  Marquis  and  the  Prince  ever  took  place.  I 
find  one  more  letter  from  the  former,  and  his  name 
is  mentioned  no  further  in  these  papers.  Before 
the  Prince  returned  from  his  Corsair  expedition, 
Montrose  had  crowned  his  gallant  life  by  an  heroic 
death : — 

SIR, 

According  to  your  commands,  by  your  Highness's 
return,  I  was  immediately  to  have  found  the  way  to  have 
wait  on  you,  but  did  receive  one  letter,  just  at  the  same 
time,  from  one  Mr.  Mowbray,  who  pretends  to  have 
orders  for  me  from  His  Majesty,  and  to  be  on  the  way, 
together  with  some  others  with  them  ;  wherefore  suppos- 
ing it  might  be  very  fit  for  your  Highness  that  I  should 
smell  them  out,  Sir — I  did  attend  you,  and  withal  (that 
they  should  have  no  pretext  to  work  upon,  as  I  know  they 
would  be  very  apt  unto),  I  have  made  bold  to  hazard  some 
very  few  days  upon  your  Highness's  patience,  of  which  I 
thought  fit  to  give  you  notice,  that  you  should  not  con- 
ceive me  slackened  of  the  invincible  [desire,  I  believe]  I 
have  vowed  ever  to  retain,  to  serve  you.  And  though  it 
will  but  oblige  a  four  or  five  days'  delay,  I  hope  it  may 
advance  much  more  in  other  kinds.  Meanwhile,  I  shall 
make  bold  to  trouble  your  Highness  no  further,  but  only 
crave  your  favour,  to  tell  you  this  truth,  that  I  am  as  much 
as  any  person  alive,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  passionate  Servant, 

MONTROSE. 

Brussels,  14th  December,  1648. 

I  again  resume  the  Prince's  own  story.] 


Montrose  was  made  a  marquis  in  1644.     These  letters  are  often 
endorsed  with  the  names  and  titles  more  familiar  to  the  writer. 


1649.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        271 

"After  the  perfecting  his  commission,  and  the 
formal  authorising  of  the  Prince  to  all  purposes,  and 
with  all  powers  therein  contained,  such  yet  was  the 
tenderness  and  modesty  of  his  Highness,  that  he 
could  not  proceed  heartily  and  effectually  upon  the 
service  without  first  craving  satisfaction  upon  some 
other  scruples,  which,  in  truth,  imported  rather 
matter  of  respect  than  any  sort  of  relation  to  his 
charge ;  and  this  will  appear  by  Prince  Charles's 
answer  to  the  request  of  Prince  Rupert,  whereof 
the  following  is  a  true  copy :  — 

CHARLES  PRINCE. 

Right  dear,  and  right  entirely  beloved  cousin,  we 
greet  you  well.  Whereas,  you  have  often  desired  of  us, 
when  we  declared  our  intention  to  make  you  Admiral  of 
the  fleet  under  our  command,  that  your  authority  and 
commission  might  be  subordinate ;  and,  with  relation  to 
our  dear  brother,  the  Duke  of  York,  which,  though  we 
intend  to  do,  yet  methought  it  not  fit  at  this  time  ;  in  re- 
gard our  said  brother  was  speedily  to  remove  into  France. 
But,  for  your  satisfaction  therein,  we  hereby  declare  unto 
you,  that  whensoever  our  said  brother  shall  desire  any 
authority  over  the  fleet,  that  we  will  then  alter  your  com- 
mission, and  make  it  with  express  subordination  to  him, 
at  your  desire.  And,  in  the  mean  time,  we  expect  that 
you  do  proceed  to  put  in  execution  that  commission  which 
you  now  have. 

Given  under  our  hand  and  seal,  at  the  Hague,  the 
fifth  day  of  January,  in  the  twenty-fourth  year 
of  the  reign  of  the  King,  our  royal  father.1 


1  The  good  feeling,  good  taste,  and  disinterestedness  on  Rupert's 
part  exhibited  by  this  letter  is  very  noticeable. 


272          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JAN. 

"The  Prince  had  just  taken  the  command  of  the 
fleet,  and  received  the  order  at  Helvoet-Sluys, 
when  a  letter  was  brought  him  from  the  King  in 
the  Isle  of  Wight,  by  Sir  William  Compton,  and 
William  Legge,  to  send  a  ship  to  the  Isle  of  Wight, 
to  lie  there  ready  for  his  Majesty's  escape  ;  being 
charged  to  acquaint  only  the  Prince  of  Orange  with 
it,  and  no  other  mortal :  and  to  desire  his  ordering 
it,  which  upon  our  Prince's  application  to  him,  was 
readily  granted." 

[This  very  interesting  letter  is  copied  into  the 
Prince's  Diary,  already  frequently  quoted  from. 

DEAREST  NEPHEW, 

For  want  of  a  cipher,  I  have  chosen  this  most  trusty 
messenger,  Will  Legge,  to  acquaint  you  with  a  business 
which  is  of  great  importance  for  my  service  ;  for  I  have 
commanded  him  to  desire  in  my  name  both  your  advice 
and  assistance.  Of  which,  knowing  your  affection  to  me, 
I  am  so  confident  that  I  will  say  no  more,  but  only  to  de- 
sire you  to  give  full  credit  to  this  bearer,  and  to  give  him 
a  quick  despatch,  for  his  sake  who  is 

Your  loving  uncle  and  most  faithful  friend, 

CHARLES  R.1 

Newport,  Saturday,  28th  October,  164?. 

[Endorsement.]  By  Sir  William  Compton  and  Sir  Ed- 
ward Lisle,  who  is  yet  living  in  the  Isle  of  Wight,  with 
instructions  to  provide  a  ship,  and  not  to  acquaint  any  of 
the  Privy  Council  with  it,  nor  the  Prince  of  Wales  him- 
self, unless  he  thought  fit.] 

1  This  letter  is  quoted  by  Mr.  Forster  in  his  "  Life  of  Crom- 
well." He  states  that  the  original  is  in  Lord  Nugent's  collection. 
The  above  only  professes  to  be  a  copy  ;  that  which  Mr.  Forster 
gives  does  not  contain  the  endorsement. 


1649.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        273 

"  The  Prince  had  gone  himself,  if  he  could  have 
been  spared  from  the  fleet;  but  Mr.  Sayers1  was 
sent  with  the  ship.  The  captain  went  accordingly, 
and  acquitted  himself  very  well,  being  searched  and 
examined ;  but  his  pretence  [to  the  Roundheads] 
was  that  he  lay  only  for  a  wind,  and  would  not  stir, 
and  there  he  continued  five  or  six  days,  which  was  as 
long  as  any  excuse  could  be  made. 

"  After  these  marks  of  a  singular  esteem  for  the 
honour  and  abilities  of  our  illustrious  Prince,  we 
shall  now  give  an  account  of  his  instructions,  as  well 
as  of  his  powers,  which  instructions  were  afterwards 
supplied  by  a  new  commission  upon  the  change  of 
condition  in  the  person  of  the  King. 

"The  ships  were  all  extremely  unfurnished,  both 
of  men  and  provisions,  and  the  Royal  party  at  that 
time  so  necessitous  that  they  were  fain  to  pawn  the 
brass  guns  of  the  Antelope,  a  stately  ship,  at  Rot- 
terdam, to  victual  and  rig  up  the  rest  against  the 
breaking  up  of  the  frost ;  beside  that,  the  Queen  of 
Bohemia's  jewels  were  pawned  over  and  above,  or 
the  work  had  never  been  done.  To  say  nothing  of 
the  sloth,  improvidence,  and  neglect  of  some  who 
had  formerly  the  management  of  this  affair,  who  had 
no  other  way  but  by  discouraging  others,  and  cre- 
ating difficulties  where  none  were,  to  vindicate  and 
justify  themselves.2 

1  The  MS.  has  a  memorandum  here  in  these  words:  "Mem. 
inquire  of  his  widow,  the  ship's  and  the  captain's  name." 

2  Sir  Edward  Hyde  bears  the  following   testimony  to  these 

VOL.  III.  T 


274         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [JAN. 

"  His  Highness  having,  with  incredible  diligence, 
got  together  some  of  the  old  seamen ;  and,  with  a 
little  ready  money  and  hope  of  future  purchase, 
engaged  others — in  the  interim,  while  the  flag- ships 
were  fitting,  sent  out  to  sea,  January  the  llth, 
Captain  Marshall  in  the  Roebuck,  a  vessel  of  one 

difficulties,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  in  another 
department : — 

SIB, 

This  evening  I  have  received  your  Highness's  letter  of  the 
last  night.  I  am  exceedingly  sensible,  and  truly,  I  think,  every- 
body with  whom  I  converse  is  so,  of  the  difficulties  of  all  kinds 
with  which  you  are  to  wrestle,  and  if  we  could  administer  any 
kind  of  assistance  to  you,  we  would  do  it  most  gladly.  For  God's 
sake,  tell  me  who  you  would  have  come  to  you,  and  it  shall  go 
hard  but  you  shall  be  satisfied.  This  is  the  first  day  I  have  been 
able  to  get  out  of  my  chamber,  and  if  your  Highness  believes  I 
can  do  you  as  much  service  there  as  here,  I  will  not  fail  to  wait 
on  you.  It  is  a  wicked  thing  that  your  sea-officers,  upon  whom 
you  must  so  much  depend,  should  be  so  negligent,  to  say  no 
worse.  Is  not  Dick  Fielding  worth  so  much  consideration  as  for 
your  Highness  to  vouchsafe  to  chide  him  1  Methinks  he  should 
not  want  honesty  or  courage,  and  having  both,  it  is  as  strange  he 
should  be  negligent  at  such  a  time  as  this. 

Here  is  a  report  come  hither  this  day,  they  say  from  my  Lord 
Willoughby,  by  one  Jack  Owen,  who  it  seems  is  known  to  many 
here,  who  says  he  came  from  London  on  Friday  last,  and  reports 
with  confidence  that  the  King  and  the  two  Houses  are  agreed, 
and  the  City  preparing  an  array,  but  other  evidence  of  this  I 
hear  not. 

A  Dutchman  came  to  us  this  morning  upon  the  report  of 
selling  the  Antelope,  with  her  tackling  of  sails  and  anchors,  for 
which  he  offered  to  deal.  We  gave  him  for  the  present  no  positive 
answer,  but  if  your  Highness  think  it  would  yield  a  considerable 
sum,  he  shall  be  sent  to  you,  for  I  perceive  you  will  want  many 
sums  of  money  which  are  not  yet  apprehended ;  as  poor  Captain 
Kettleby  this  day  told  us,  that  upon  the  warrants  formerly  given 
to  Hammond  he  hath  not  yet  received  a  penny,  which  is  a  sad 
business,  and  I  hope  you  will  be  able  upon  the  sugar  ship  or  this 
new  contract  to  relieve  him  ;  for,  I  protest  to  God,  if  I  know  any- 
thing, the  Prince  is  in  the  most  lamentable  condition  of  want 
that  any  gentleman  hath  been  acquainted  with.  If  you  were 


1649.]    PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        275 

hundred  and  twenty  tons  and  fourteen  small  guns> 
and  Captain  (since  Sir  Thomas)  Allen,  in  the  Guinea 
frigate  of  three  hundred  tons  and  thirty  guns ;  both 
which  quickly  made  advantageous  returns ;  the 
former  having  taken  a  collier  with  800/.  ready 
money  in  her ;  and  the  latter  a  ship  from  Hamburgh 
richly  laden,  taken  out  of  Yarmouth  road,  as  she  lay 
there  at  anchor.1 

"  His  Highness  being  now  ready  to  enter  upon  his 
voyage,  received  a  most  gracious  letter  from  Prince 
Charles,  upon  the  very  point  of  his  departure,  which 
we  cannot  well  omit  in  this  place  with  justice  either 
to  the  generosity  and  tenderness  of  his  Highness  the 
Prince  of  Wales,  or  to  the  merits  and  abilities  of 
the  heroic  Prince  Rupert,  wherefore  we  shall  deliver 
it  word  for  word,  according  to  the  original." 

once  gone  out  with  the  fleet,  I  would  get  out  of  this  crowd.  God 
preserve  your  Highness.  Sir,  Your  Highnesses 

Most  humble  and  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HYDE. 

Hague,  this  10  Thursday,  eight  at  night. 
[No  date,  probably  Jan.  1649.] 

Mr.  Attorney  hath  been  here  this  day,  and,  I  hope,  will  not 
stir  out  of  town  till  your  commission  be  settled. 

1  It  is  amusing  now  (sad  enough  at  the  time,  no  doubt)  to  hear 
of  the  naive  manner  in  which  the  Royal  Wanderer's  exchequer 
and  his  fleet  for  the  future  were  maintained.  If  they  want  to 
"  fit  up  a  vessel "  or  to  "  victual  a  frigate,"  they  send  out  a  couple 
of  cruisers  to  take  the  first  "ship"  they  can  catch,  which  they 
sell  in  the  most  plausible  manner.  In  the  following  year, 
Charles  II.  is  invited  to  come  to  Ireland  by  Prince  Rupert,  and 
his  Highness,  knowing  that  it  was  necessary  to  furnish  the 
viaticum,  very  coolly  sends  out  and  catches  a  Dutchman  "  worth 
10,OOOZ.,  which  he  sends  to  the  fugitive  King  as  travel-money 
(the  Dutch  being  at  the  time  their  very  particular  friends,  greatly 
facilitated  this  species  of  commerce)." 

T  2 


276        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [JAN. 

[This  letter  is  unfortunately  lost.  Here  the  MS. 
breaks  off.] 

The  difficulties  which  Rupert  had  to  contend  with 
had  not  their  only  origin  in  mutinies,  in  want  of 
money  and  of  men,  but  also  in  the  Prince's  Council, 
where  Culpepper's  vehemence  and  skill  gave  great 
weight  to  his  arguments.  Those  arguments  were 
always  hostile  to  Prince  Rupert.  It  appears  that 
Batten,  who  fired  on  the  Queen  at  Burlington,  is 
now  in  command  in  the  King's  service,  and  has 
been  displaying  the  Royal  Standard,  which  Rupert 
was  forbidden  to  make  use  of,  except  upon  special 
occasions.  Sir  Edward  Hyde  explains  : — 

SIR, 

I  promised  the  Prince  [of  Wales]  to  give  your  High- 
ness advertisement  of  the  debate,  concerning  this  wearing 
of  the  standard,  in  which  I  learned  many  things  which  I 
never  heard  before.  It  is  agreed  by  all,  that  the  standard 
is  properly  and  of  right  to  be  worn  only  by  the  Lord  High 
Admiral  of  England ;  and  when  I  inquired  of  the  order 
granted  for  the  Lord  Willoughby's,  or  Sir  William  Bat- 
ten's wearing  it,  it  is  said,  that  it  was  thought  then  neces- 
sary, since  the  Earl  of  Warwick  wore  a  standard ;  that 
whosoever  commanded  the  fleet  that  was  to  fight  against 
him,  should  likewise  wear  one,  lest  the  seamen  should  be 
discouraged,  and  look  upon  the  Earl  as  the  greater  person ; 
so  that  it  is  the  opinion  of  all,  that  when  you  are  like  to 
engage  with  the  rebels'  fleet,  your  men  may  expect  you 
should  wear  that  ensign ;  it  is,  therefore,  wholly  referred 
to  your  Highness,  to  wear  it  upon  any  occasions  you 
think  fit.  And  I  thought  it  very  agreeable  to  my  devo- 
tion to  your  Highness,  to  present  this  intimation  to  you, 


1649.]        PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.      277 

that,  from  a  constant,  frequent  wearing  it,  some  persons 
may,  according  to  their  custom,  infuse  into  the  Duke  of 
York  an  opinion  that  he  is  supplanted ;  and  others  report 
that  the  Prince  hath  made  an  Admiral  of  England,  which, 
as  all  men  know,  is  not  in  his  power  ;  so  none  should  be- 
lieve at  such  a  time,  when  they  talk  so  loudly  of  deposing 
his  father. 

I  shewed  his  Highness  the  postscript  of  your  letter,  and 
asked  him  privately,  for  of  this  I  spoke  only  to  himself, 
whether  he  would  give  me  leave  to  prepare  half-a-dozen 
lines  for  his  own  hand,  to  the  Marquis  of  Ormond,  which 
he  wished  me  to  do,  and,  before  I  came  out  of  the  house, 
I  did,  and  delivered  it  to  him,  upon  his  absolute  promise 
to  send  me  his  letter  this  night,  by  nine  o'clock,  and  I 
might  send  it  to  your  Highness.  If  he  hath  not  said 
enough  to  him,  it  is  my  fault ;  but,  truly  it  is,  all  I  would 
have  wished  him  to  say,  if  he  had  been  in  the  room  with 
him.  He  hath  told  him  of  the  extraordinary  arts  which 
have  been  used  to  bring  this  fleet  to  nothing,  and  that  he 
owes  all  that  is  kept  to  your  industry  and  dexterity ;  that 
he  expects  now,  that  they  who  are  disinclined  to  his  ser- 
vice, should  employ  all  their  wit  to  make  an  ill  understand- 
ing between  your  Highness  and  his  Lordship  [Ormond], 
which  would  be  the  most  mischievous  thing  could  befall 
the  public ;  that  he  knows  your  Highness  is  very  well 
prepared  against  all  such  attempts;  and  so  conjures  him,  &c. 
And  truly,  sir,  I  do  not  apprehend  any  danger  this  way, 
and  I  know  your  Highness  will  comply  in  all  things  with 
him,  as  a  person,  besides  his  great  merit,  of  the  clearest 
and  most  entire  reputation  of  any  subject  the  King  hath. 

so  much  by  the  year  to  each,  which 

would  be  a  certainty  out  of  an  uncertainty,  for  all  must 
depend  upon  the  taking  of  prizes,  which  may  amount  to 
so  much,  or  whether  it  should  be  so  much  upon  the  pound, 
as  the  commissioners  of  excise  had  at  Oxford,  and  usually 
all  receivers  have  :  and,  it  may  be,  there  may  be  reason  to 


278        MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF          [JAN. 

allow  some  persons  more  than  others,  according  to  the 
charges  they  are  put  to  ;  so  that  I  do  not  believe  your 
Highness  can  so  well  proportion  what  will  be  fit  to  be 
done  in  that  particular,  till  you  come  into  Ireland ;  you 

see  what  your  wealth  is,  or  is  like  to  be 

I  ask  your  pardon  for  this  long  vexation  I  give  you, 
which  proceeds  from  the  great  desire  I  have  to  serve  you, 
as,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  faithful  and  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HYDE. 

Hague,  Wednesday,  eight  at  night, 
?  January,  1649. 

The  MSS.  writer  whose  story  we  are  about  to 
follow  was  evidently  a  sharer  in  the  exploits  be  de- 
scribes.    He  was  evidently,  too,  to  have  his  hero  for 
his  critic,  which  may  account  for  the  very  ceremo- 
nious style  that  he  adopts.     Occasionally,  however, 
he  utters  himself  more  freely,  and  is  then  graphic 
and   even   humorous,  but  always  very  decorous  as 
regards  the  Prince.     His  account  of  tbe  foundering 
of  tbe  Constant   Reformation   is   very  powerfully 
told  and,  indeed,  it  would  be  difficult  to  spoil  such 
a   majestic  episode    of   heroism.      I  imagine   this 
writer  was  either  Dr.  Watts,  Prince  Rupert's  chap- 
lain, or  Captain  Pyne ;   probably  the  relation  was 
made  by  the  sailor,  judging  from  its  nautical  ex- 
pressions ;  and,  judging  from  the  very  proper  and 
unexceptionable  nature  of  tbe  narrative,  we  may 
perhaps  infer  that  it  was  corrected  by  tbe  Divine. 
It  is  to  be  feared  tbat  tbe  actual  life  those  sea- 
faring Cavaliers  were  used  to  lead,  was  scarcely  so 
unexceptionable. 


1649.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      279 


PRINCE  RUPERT'S  VOYAGE  TO  THE  WEST  INDIES. 

DEPARTURE    OF     THE    FLEET     UNDER    PRINCE   RUPERT, 
FROM    HELVOETSLUYS,    IN   JANUARY,    1649.1 

"THE  Fleet  being  unfortunately  brought  into 
great  necessities  by  the  improvident  conduct  of 
those  who  had  the  management  thereof,  and  having 

1  The  following  letter  should  be  read  as  giving  a  picture,  from 
the  great  historian's  pen,  of  the  mournful  state  of  the  King's 
party : — 

SIR   E.   HYDE   TO    SIR   R.  FANSHAW. 

I  need  not  tell  you  much  of  ourselves,  or  of  this  place.  I 
never  lived  with  less  satisfaction  to  myself  any  part  of  my  life. 
There  was  a  purpose  that  the  Prince  should  have  gone  to  Jersey, 
but  that  again  is  suspended,  upon  an  invitation  from  the  Prince 
of  Orange  to  stay  here  until  he  be  ready  for  some  design.  That 
design,  I  hope,  will  be  Ireland,  to  which  all  my  friends  are  heartily 
inclined;  and  I  believe  the  next  clear  advice  from  my  Lord 
Ormond  to  that  purpose  will  be  followed.  In  the  meantime,  I 
presume  the  fleet  will  be  with  you  before  this  comes  to  your 
hands ;  the  preservation  whereof  must  be  entirely  ascribed  to 
Prince  Rupert,  who  seriously  hath  expressed  greater  temper  and 
discretion  in  it  than  you  can  imagine.  I  know  there  is,  and  will 
be,  much  prejudice  to  the  service  by  his  being  engaged  in  the 
command,  you  will  believe  me,  and  not  be  without  that  prospect, 
both  by  your  own  observation  and  the  information  we  every  day 
received  from  England.  But,  the  truth  is,  there  was  an  unavoid- 
able necessity  in  it.  Batten  and  Jordan  played  the  rogues  with 
us  j  and  when,  after  their  full  promises,  they  had  kept  us  in 
expectation  that  the  fleet  would  be  ready  to  go  out  by  a  day,  they 
came  on  a  sudden,  and,  without  more  ceremony,  told  us  they 
would  not  go  to  sea,  nor  any  more  to  Helvoetsluys,  having  at 
the  same  time  used  all  their  skill  to  corrupt  both  officers  and 
mariners.  In  this  distress  Prince  Rupert  took  the  charge,  and, 
with  unwearied  pains  and  toil,  put  all  things  in  reasonable  order, 
it  being  then  resolved  that  the  Duke  of  York  should  go  with  the 
fleet  to  Ireland.  But,  to  our  amazement,  his  old  Presbyterian 
counsellors  wrought  so  on  his  Royal  Highness,  that  in  express 


280        MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF          [JAN. 

lost  the  opportunity  of  making  themselves  masters 
of  the  English  seas,  by  creating  difficulties  where 
none  were ;  by  that  and  their  sloth  gave  leisure  and 
boldness  to  their  enemies,  to  prevent  those  under- 
takings which  were  consulted  of  too  late  ;  insomuch 
as  the  enemy  was  increased  to  that  strength,  as 
they  grew  formidable  and  the  Royal  party  hardly 
able  to  defend  themselves,  seeking  refuge  in  a 
country1  whose  neutrality  might  rather  administer 
suspect  than  protection.  Moreover,  the  often  inter- 
parlance  of  both  parties  gave  opportunity  to  the 
enemy  to  suggest  matter  enough  whereby  to  disaiii- 
mate,  if  not  seduce,  our  men,  which  took  such  effect 
as  some  officers  betrayed  their  trust,  and  many 
seamen  revolted. 

"The  fleet  being  thus  daily  enfeebled,  and  the 
danger  impending  great,  by  his  Majesty's  want  of 
monies  to  supply  men  and  ships  with  provisions, 
the  former  undertakers  quitted  their  employments, 
though  not  their  avarice  and  evil  counsel;  and  being 
at  an  exigent  what  to  determine,  counselled  his  Ma- 
jesty2 to  employ  Prince  Rupert  as  the  fittest  person 
to  undertake  so  shaken  a  design :  after  the  conclu- 
sion whereof,  and  the  Prince's  acceptance  of  the 


terms  he  refused  it.  So  you  see  the  necessity  of  what  is  done, 
and  really  I  believe  the  Prince  will  behave  himself  so  well  in  it, 
that  nobody  will  have  cause  to  be  sorry  for  it.  I  know  I  need 
not  charge  you  to  perform  all  offices  towards  preserving  a  right 
understanding  between  his  Highness  and  the  Lord-Lieutenant. 

The  Hague,  Jan.  21,  1648-9. 

i  Holland.  2  Then  Prince  of  Wales. 


1649.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      281 

charge,  the  ordnance  of  the  Antelope1  were  sold  to 
produce  monies  for  equipping  the  rest ;  with  part 
whereof — a  frigate  and  a  small  ship — they  fortu- 
nately set  forth,  and  returned  with  prizes  sufficient 
to  set  forth  the  fleet ;  which,  with  the  first  fair  wind, 
his  Highness  performed,  setting  sail  directly  for 
Ireland.2  In  which  voyage  he  encountered  many  and 

1  "  The  Queen  of  Bohemia  pawned  her  jewels,  or  it  had  not 
been  done." 

2  Another  MS.  gives  the  following  particulars  of  this  fleet : — 
"With   the   blessing   of   the   Prince   of  Wales's   affectionate 

farewell,  his  Highness  [Rupert]  set  sail  for  Ireland  from  Helvoet- 
sluys,  January  21  [1649],  with  three  flag-ships,  four  frigates, 
and  one  prize  (the  collier  being  sold  to  help  to  victual  the  fleet), 
in  company  with  the  Amsterdam,  a  Dutch  ship  of  1000  tons,  and 
two  others  of  less  burthen  bound  for  the  Indies,  the  wind  at  east 
and  east-north-east.  In  the  Admiral,  a  second-rate  ship,  which 
was  never  allowed  less  than  three  hundred  men,  there  were  but 
forty  seamen  and  eighty  soldiers,  and  the  other  two  flag-ships 
furnished  at  the  .same  proportion.  The  frigates,  indeed,  were  a 
little  better  manned,  for  they  were  to  bestir  themselves  and  ven- 
ture for  booty. 

"  By  twelve  o'clock  on  the  22nd  of  January,  the  wind  continuing 
still  where  it  was,  they  came  as  high  as  Dover.  His  Highness 
by  break  of  day  that  morning,  sailing  by  the  Downs,  discovered 
at  anchor  Admiral  Moulton  with  three  or  four  good  frigates,  two 
whereof,  that  is  to  say,  the  Constant  Warwick  and  the  Satisfac- 
tion, were  of  those  that  were  revolted  again  to  the  rebels." 

At  this  time  Prince  Charles  writes  thus  : — 

TO    SIE   GEORGE   CARTERET,    BART. 

CHARLES  P. 

Trusty  and  well-beloved,  we  greet  you  well.  We  having 
some  time  since  conferred  the  command  of  his  Majesty's  fleet 
upon  our  right  dear  and  right  entirely  beloved  cousin,  Prince 
Rupert,  he  hath,  by  his  great  industry  and  endeavour,  brought 
the  same  into  a  condition  to  be  ready  to  set  sail  with  the  first 
opportunity,  and  hath  instructions  from,  us  to  put  in  at  Jersey, 
and  to  endeavour  the  reduction  of  Guernsey,  if  he  shall  have 
means  to  attempt  the  same  with  probability  of  success.  We 
intreat  you  therefore,  not  only  to  give  him  your  best  advice  in 
that  particular,  but  all  the  assistance  you  may,  in  case  he 


282         MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF        [JAN. 

great  difficulties,  being  weakly  manned  and  enforced 
to  sail  through  the  Channel,  whereby  he  must,  of 
necessity,  come  in  view  of  the  enemy's  fleet,  who 
rode  in  the  Downs;  by  reason  whereof,  there  was 
much  murmuring  amongst  the  men ;  which  was  pre- 
sently silenced  by  the  Prince's  resolution,  for  as 
soon  as  he  made  their  fleet,  he  steered  directly  with 
them ;  who,  being  surprised  with  so  bold  an  attempt, 
dispersed  themselves  in  great  confusion.  The  bra- 
very of  the  act  being  crowned  with  wished  success, 
confirmed  the  men's  affections  to  prosecute  the  ser- 
vice under  the  conduct  of  their  new  General : 
Heaven  also  assisting,  with  a  favourable  gale,  the 
whole  fleet  to  their  desired  coast ;  but,  through  the 
inexpertness  of  the  pilots,  they  were  prevented  of 
their  intended  port,  and  so  forced  to  leeward  in 
several  harbours,  though  all  in  safety." 

Finally,  they  all  made  rendezvous   in  Kinsale.1 

shall  think  fit  to  make  any  attempt  upon  the  said  island  of 
Guernsey. 

Given  under  our  hand  and  seal,  the  llth  day  of  January,  in 

the  twenty-fourth  year  of  the  reign  of  the  King  our  royal 

Father. 

To  our  trusty  and  well-beloved  Sir  George  Carteret, 
Bart,  Lieut.-Governor  of  the  Island  of  Jersey. 

"  They  judged  the  three  Dutch  ships  in  company  with  his  High- 
ness's  fleet  to  be  hired  into  the  King's  service ;  in  which  belief 
they  were  the  rather  confirmed  when  they  saw  his  Highness,  who 
was  resolved  to  make  the  best  of  a  bad  game,  so  boldly  bearing 
up  to  them  ;  upon  which  supposition  they  slipped  their  anchors 
and  sheltered  themselves  under  the  castles,  though  Moulton's  own 
ship,  the  St.  George,  might  have  engaged  his  Highness's  whole 
fleet,  the  Satisfaction  being  run  aground  :  and  so  the  Prince  stood 
on  west-south-west." 

1  See  the  Appendix  for  the  state  of  Ireland  at  this  time. 


1649.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       283 

Here  the  Prince  first  heard  of  the  King's   death 
in  the  following  letter  : — 

SIR  EDWARD  HYDE  TO  PRINCE  RUPERT. 
SIR, 

Though,  when  your  Highness  left  this  place^  there 
was  no  reason  to  expect  any  good  news  from  England,  yet 
the  horrid  wickedness  which  hath  been  since  acted  there, 
with  those  dismal  circumstances  which  attended  it,  was  so 
far  beyond  the  fears  and  apprehensions  of  all  men,  that  it 
is  no  wonder  we  were  all  struck  into  that  amazement  with 
the  deadly  news  of  it,  that  we  have  not  yet  recovered  our 
spirits  to  think  or  do  as  we  ought.  For  though  he  had  too 
great  cause  to  look  every  day  to  hear  of  the  death  and 
murder  of  the  King,  yet  that  it  should  be  done  in  the 
light  of  the  sun,  and  in  that  manner,  I  think  no  man  could 
imagine.  I  shall  not  enlarge  upon  this  woful  argument,  I 
hope  it  will  put  new  fire  of  honest  rage  and  fury  into  us, 
and  infuse  a  united  resolution  into  all  men  who  would  be 
reputed  subjects  or  Christians,  to  take  and  follow  those 
courses  and  counsels  which  are  most  likely  to  take  ven- 
geance upon  those  incarnate  devils.  And  methinks,  the 
sense  of  this  unparalleled  wickedness,  and  the  judgments  of 
God  which  must  attend  the  authors  and  abettors  of  it, 
should  work  such  a  detestation  in  the  hearts  of  all  Eng- 
lishmen in  that  kingdom  where  your  Highness  now  is,  that 
Jones  himself  and  Monk  should  run  to  their  allegiance  and 
join  in  the  revenge.  But  with  this  sad  discourse  I  will 
trouble  your  Highness  no  further.  We  have  not  heard  one 
word  from  your  Highness  since  your  removal  from  hence  ; 
yet  here  is  a  skipper  of  Rotterdam  arrived,  who  says  he 
was  at  Kinsale  when  you  came  in  with  thirteen  sail  of 
ships,  and  that  he  was  since  at  Waterford,  when  the  peace 
was  proclaimed  there  ;  and  mentions  so  many  particulars, 
and  he  is  so  well  known  here,  that  we  give  full  credit  to 
him,  and  promise  ourselves  a  full  relation  and  advice  very 
shortly  from  your  Highness,  and  from  my  Lord  Lieutenant, 


284          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [FEB. 

from  whom  no  letter  hath  come  hither  since  that  of  the 
2nd  of  October.  You  will  believe  upon  this  great  altera- 
tion, that  our  Court  is  full  of  distraction  ;  all  men  being 
full  of  design  to  be  counsellors  and  officers,  and  Percy, 
at  least,  keeps  his  interest.  Yet  the  King  hitherto  keeps 
himself  upon  his  guard,  and  professeth  that  he  will  not  yet 
dispose  of  any  place ;  and  really  he  carries  himself  very 
well.  That  which  I  like  worst  is,  that  he  will  not  be  per- 
suaded to  send  more  counsellors,  which  must  proceed  from 
somewhat  I  do  not  understand.  I  hope  your  Highness 
have  better  intelligence  out  of  England  than  we  have,  who 
have  not  heard  what  they  have  done  since  the  murder  of 
the  King,  neither  is  Harry  Seymour  or  any  other  messen- 
ger returned  from  thence.  But  truly  in  this  place  they 
have  expressed  their  sense  of  this  wickedness  with  all 
imaginable  circumstances  of  respect  to  the  King;  the 
States-General,  their  several  colleges,  and  the  clergy,  and  all 
kinds  of  men  having  attended  his  Majesty,  and  manifested 
a  great  horror  and  detestation  of  the  villany.  How  this 
affection  may  be  improved  and  made  use  of,  is  the  present 
business,  for  hitherto  it  has  consisted  only  in  words.  The 
King's  wants  being  so  great  that  he  is  not  able  to  send 
messengers  to  the  Christian  princes ;  insomuch  as  Mr. 
Pooly,  who  went  yesterday  to  the  Queen,  stayed  four  days 
for  the  procurement  of  50/.  for  the  charge  of  his  journey  ; 
and  if  we  can  find  no  way  to  get  money  to  put  business 
into  order,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  move.  Our  Court  is 
full  of  Scots.  The  Earls  of  Lauderdale  and  Lanrick  are 
here,  being,  as  they  say,  driven  out  of  their  country  by 
the  power  of  Argyle,  who  is  in  a  firm  league  with  Crom- 
well. Here  [is  likewise  the  Marquis  of  Montrose,  who  in 
truth  is  a  gallant  person,  and  very  impatient  to  be  doing  ; 
and  though  the  Presbyterians  are  as  busy  as  ever,  yet  I 
believe  the  next  news  I  shall  send  you  will  be  that  his 
Majesty  entirely  trusts  Montrose,  and  puts  the  business  of 
Scotland  wholly  into  his  conduct,  and  he  doubts  not  but  to 


1049.]       PRINCE  RUPERT   AND   THE    CAVALIERS.     285 

be  able  to  get  many  horse  and  foot  out  of  Germany  if  he 
shall  need;  so  that  I  doubt  not  the  design  of  having  the  King 
into  Scotland  will  be  disappointed,  and  without  doubt  the 
Keep  exceedingly  desire  to  be  in  Ireland,  which  I  hope  is  as 
much  desired  there.  I  know  not  what  more  to  say  to  your 
Highness  till  I  hear  from  you  and  receive  your  commands, 
which  I  will  punctually  obey.  The  captain  of  the  Blacka- 
more  Lady  hath  stayed  here  ten  days  for  want  of  100/., 
which  at  last,  with  great  difficulty,  we  have  furnished  him 
with;  indeed,  we  wondered  he  would  put  into  these  harbours 
with  such  prizes  as  were  necessary  to  be  discharged,  or  other- 
wise would  have  been  taken  away  by  the  justice  of  the  coun- 
try. One  was  a  Scotchman,  who,  besides  that  he  was  worth 
little,  brought  over  the  Earl  of  Seaford,  a  person  of  great 
power  there,  and  who  joined  always  with  my  Lord  Montrose ; 
another  was  an  Amsterdam  man,  and  the  third  of  Denmark, 
neither  of  which  could  be  made  prize  after  they  were 
brought  hither.  But  I  hear  the  captain  took  good  prizes 
at  Meath,  and  disposed  of  them,  of  which  I  hope  he  will 
give  you  an  account.  I  have  contracted  with  a  merchant 
of  Rotterdam  to  send  corn  into  Ireland,  who  will  send  one 
ship  within  these  four  days,  and  by  him  I  will  again  trou- 
ble your  Highness,  and  likewise  send  a  duplicate  of  this, 
lest  this  vessel  should  have  a  misfortune.  I  beseech  your 
Highness,  if  you  send  any  vessels  this  way,  vouchsafe  two 
or  three  lines  to  Charles  II.,  who  will  be  much  encouraged 
by  it.  My  last  to  your  Highness  was  by  way  of  London. 
God  preserve  your  Highness,  and  me  no  longer  than  I  lay 
hold  on  all  opportunities  to  express  myself,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HYDE. 

Hague,  28th  February. 

This  letter  was  apparently  accompanied  by  the 
following,  enclosing  the  Prince's  commission  from 
Charles  THE  SECOND  : — 


286         MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [FEB. 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

His  Majesty  hath  commanded  me  to  send  your  High- 
ness by  this  bearer,  Captain  Dossey,  a  new  commission  and 
new  instructions,  in  both  which  there  is  no  other  alteration 
from  the  former  but  what  is  necessary  in  regard  to  the 
change  of  condition  in  the  person  of  the  King,  by  the  bar- 
barous murder  of  his  father  by  the  bloody  rebels  in  Eng- 
land. The  King  hath  yet  no  other  new  seal,  but  the  signet 
under  which  this  commission  is  past,  but  I  am  confident 
when  the  great  seal  is  made,  which  will  require  some  time, 
he  will  grant  your  Highness  such  confirmation  of  those 
powers  you  have  already,  or  such  further  authority  as  shall 
be  necessary. 

R.  LONG  [Secretary  to  Charles  II.]. 

From  here,  in  the  midst  of  danger  and  difficulties, 
tbe  Prince  writes  the  following  gentle  letter  to  his 
mother : — 

A  LA  REINE  DE  BOHEME. 
MADAME, 

J'ai  une  extreme  satisfaction  que  votre  Majeste  soit 
persuadee  de  la  part  que  je  continue  de  prendre  dans  tout 
ce  qui  la  touche,  et  que  la  douleur  que  m'a  fait  recevoir 
le  changement  de  Madame  la  Princesse  Louise.1  II  est  vrai 
qu'on  a  fait  courir  des  fruits  qui  1'interessent,  and  qu'ils 
ont  ete  portes  jusques  dans  ses  provinces.  Je  suis  tres- 
aise  que  votre  Majeste  ait  eu  la  bonte  de  s'en  ouvrir  a 
moi ;  car,  outre  que  c'est  une  marque  de  sa  confiance, 
elle  me  donne  la  moyen  de  travailler  a  les  dissiper,  et 
d'en  faire  remarquer  la  faussete.  Je  souhaite  qu'ils  vien- 
nent  plutot  des  ennemies  de  Madame  la  Princesse  de 
Zolern  que  d'elle-meme,  et  qu'elle  ne  soit  pas  assez  mal- 
heureuse  pour  que  cette  facheuse  rencontre  lui  fasse  per- 
dre  les  bonnes  graces  de  votre  Majeste,  qui  avait  toujours 
eu  pour  elle  vrai  bienveillance  toute  particuliere,  et  de 

1  Her  conversion  to  the  Roman  Catholic  faith. 


1649.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      287 

laquelle  elle  ne  saurait  avoir  une  trop  grande  reconnais- 
sance. Je  puis  cependant  assurer  votre  Majeste,  qu'en 
cette  occasion  j'aurai  tous  les  sentimens  que  votre  Ma- 
jeste m'inspirera ;  et  que  si  elle  continue  a  me  faire  part 
da  ce  qui  se  passera  dans  cette  affaire,  je  me  reglerai  aux 
ordres  qu'elle  me  prescrira,  et  lui  donnerai  sujet  de  croire 
que  je  ne  suis  pas  moins  que  par  le  passe.  Si  ce  n'etait 
point  manquer  au  respect  que  je  vous  dois,  je  demande- 
rais  a  votre  Majeste  des  nouvelles  du  Roi  [Charles  II.] 
son  neveu,  and  de  l'6tat  de  ses  affaires  ;  sur  le  sujet  des- 
quelles  je  ne  me  puis  rien  reprocher.  Mais  1'etroite  union 
qui  est  presentement  entre  la  France  et  le  gouvernment 
d'Angleterre  ne  me  permet  pas  de  dire  tout  ce  que  j'ai  sur 
le  cceur,  dans  lequel  je  conserve  pour  le  Roi  un  respect 
inviolable.  Madame,  de  votre  Majeste, 

Le  tres  humble,  tres  obeissant,  et  tres  fidele  serviteur, 

LE  P.  DE  RUPERT.* 

24  Fevrier,  1649. 

The  following  letter  alludes  to  the  same  trans- 
action : — 

PRINCE    RUPERT    TO    THE    STATES    GENERAL. 

HAUTS  ET  PUISSANTS  SEIGNEURS, 

J'ai  trop  de  part  a  tout  ce  qui  concerne  la  Reine,  ma 
mere,  et  les  interests  de  nostre  maison,  pour  n'avoir  pas 
este  sensiblement  touche  de  raffliction,  qu'on  lui  accuse 
par  1'enlevement  de  ma  sceur  la  Princesse  Louise ; 2  mais 
aussi  j'ai  eu  beaucoup  de  consolation,  quand  j'ai  su, 
que  vos  seigneuries  avoient  pris  1'affaire  en  main,  et  que 
vous  aviez  considere  les  tres  justes  plaintes  de  la  Reine, 
avec  toute  la  tendresse  et  la  reflection  de  vostre  justice 
et  de  vostre  prudence.  J'espere,  messieurs,  que  vous 

1  Bromley's  Royal  Letters. 

2  The  Princess  had  fled  (it  was  said  she  had  been  carried 
away)  to  the  Roman  Catholic  States,  as  is  told  hereafter. 


288          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE    OF       [FEB. 

ferez  avoir  a  la  Reine  et  a  toute  nostre  maison  la  satisfac- 
tion que  nous  est  du,  et  1'egard  des  medisances,  qui 
augmentent  si  outragieusement  1'injure,  qui  vous  a  este 
faite  par  le  dit  enlevement.  Je  vous  supplie,  messieurs, 
de  nous  donner  de  nouvelles  marques  de  la  continuation 
de  vostre  affection  et  de  vostre  justice,  et  de  croire  qu'en 
mon  particulier  je  n'oublierai  jamais  de  tesmoigner  a  vos 
seigneuries  en  toutes  occasions  par  mes  tres  humbles  ser- 
vices la  reconnaissance  de  vostre  amitie  et  de  vostre  pro- 
tection, vous  protestant,  que  je  suis  avec  passion, 
Hauts  et  puissants  seigneurs, 

vostre  tres  humble  serviteur, 

(Signe)     RUPERT.* 

"  Soon  after  our  arrival  here,  his  Highness,  having 
increased  his  fleet,  neglected  no  means  or  occasion 
to  advance  his  designs ;  but  following  his  first  suc- 
cess, set  forth  some  ships,  by  means  whereof,  in  short 
time,  the  harbours  were  stored  with  prizes,  to  our 
unspeakable  joy,  and  enemy's  loss :  so  as  he  who 
lately  was  necessitated  for  want  of  men  and  money, 
hath  now  profusely  of  both,  and  begins  to  plough 
the  main  with  confidence,  claiming  the  obedience 
thereof  to  his  standard,  and  is  become  the  wonder 
and  amazement  of  his  very  enemies,  having,  for  his 
first  exploit,  relieved  [the]  Scilly  [Islands],  and 
strengthened  them  with  a  considerable  party  of 
soldiers ;  all  which  was  done  with  part  of  the  fleet.2 

1  Thurloe's  State  Papers,  vi.  803. 

2  The  naval  reader  may  find  interest  in  the  following  : — 

"  Rule  of  proportion,  whereby  every  man   shall   know  what   is 

his  due  in  taking  of  such  vessels  as  shall  be  adjudged  prizes. 

"  First,  his  Majesty  is  to  be  allowed  his  fifteenth,  and  his  admiral 

the  tenth,  the  remainder  is  to  be  divided  into  three  parts ;  the 

one  part  for  the  owners  of  such  ships  as  shall  be  set  out  at 


1649.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        289 

[The  following  letter  must  have  been  written  soon 
after  this  visit : — 

DEAR  SIR, 

You  will  receive,  if  these  ships  come  safe,  such  pro- 
vision as  we  can  spare  here,  and  also  some  men,  which  I 


their  respective  costs,  one  other  for  the  victualler,  the  other  to  be 
divided  amongst  the  seamen,  and  that  part  to  be  subdivided  as 
followeth. 


Shares. 

The  admiral  of  the  fleet  ...  40 

The  vice-admiral  of  the  fleet  40 

The  rear-admiral  of  the  fleet  40 
The  commander-in-chief  of 
a  squadron,  where  neither 
of  the  three  chief  officers 

is  present 40 

A    captain,    besides    dead 

shares   12 

A  lieutenant     9 

A  master : 8 

A  master's  mate   6 

A  pilot 8 

A  master-gunner 5 

A  boatswain 5 

A  purser  5 

A  master-carpenter 5 

A  master-cook 4 

A  steward     3 

A  coxswain  3 

A  boatswain's  mate 3 

A  gunner's  mate  3 

A  carpenter's  mate  3 


Shares. 

A  cook's  mate 

A  cooper  

A  quarter-master , 3 

A  yeoman     3 

A  quarter-gunner 3 

A  coxswain's  mate  3 

A  steward's  mate 3 

A  swabber    3 

A  swabber's  mate 

A  trumpeter     4 

A  trumpeter's  mate 2 1 

A  drum    3 

Afife    

Other  carpenters  as  common 
men. 

A  muster-master  6 

A  marshal    5 

A  preacher  5 

A  surgeon    5 

A  surgeon's  mate 3 

A  corporal    4 

An  armourer    3 


"  In  case  we  fight,  then  all  the  pillage  between  decks  belongs  to 
the  company  that  enters ;  if  we  enter  and  fight  not,  then  the 
pillage  to  be  brought  to  the  mainmast  and  prized. 

"  Likewise  where  a  ship  is  fought  withal  and  entered  by  force, 
then  the  best  gun  belongs  to  the  captain  and  what  belongs  to  the 
captain  taken  in  his  cabin ;  to  the  gunner,  the  second  gun ;  to 
the  master,  the  best  cable  and  anchor ;  to  the  boatswain,  the 
kedge  and  hawser ;  the  master's  mate's-mates,  the  mainsail ;  the 
surgeon,  the  surgeon's  chest ;  the  carpenter,  the  carpenter's  tools  ; 

VOL.  III.  U 


290  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF    [APRIL, 

was  fain  to  send  out  of  my  own  regiment.  They  are  all 
armed,  and  have  some  to  spare  :  the  officers  have  formerly 
served  his  Majesty ;  you  may  trust  them.  I  doubt  not, 
ere  long,  to  see  Scilly  a  second  Venice  .  .  it  will  be 
for  our  security  and  benefit ;  for  if  the  worst  come  to  the 
worst,  it  is  but  going  to  Scilly  with  this  fleet,  where,  after 
a  little  while,  we  may  get  the  King  a  good  subsistence, 
and,  I  believe,  we  shall  make  a  shift  to  live,  in  spite  of  all 
factions. 

Your  most  faithful  and  loving  friend, 

RUPERT.1] 
Kinsale,  Saturday,  April  28,  1649. 

"In  their  return  to  their  port,  the  frigate  Charles  was 
separated  by  storms  from  his  consorts,  and,  by  a  fog 
fell  in  with  the  Leopard  and  the  Constant  Warwick, 
two  Parliament  men-of-war,  who,  after  long  dispute, 
took  her.  This  accident  carries  with  it  divers  reports ; 
some  imputing  the  fault  to  the  Captain,  others  to 
the  officers  which  commanded  the  squadron :  but  the 
care  and  conduct  of  his  convoy  will  clear  him  from 
the  crime,  and  although  the  loss  seemed  not  valua- 
ble, yet  it  proved  prejudicial  to  the  fleet,  causing  a 

the  cook,  the  kettle ;  the  gunner's  mates,  the  loose  powder ;  the 
trumpeter,  the  mizen ;  the  drummer,  the  drum  :  the  hatches  to 
be  spiked  down  of  all  prizes  upon  entering. 

"  Common  men  to  have  two  shares,  to  be  added  or  diminished 
at  the  judgment  of  the  captain  as  he  shall  think  fit. 

"  A  boy  half  a  share. 

"  A  proportion  of  shares  extraordinary  reserved  for  wounded 
men  :  suppose  ten  shares  out  of  every  prize. 

"  All  other  things  to  be  regulated  according  to  the  custom  of 
the  seas. 

«  CHARLES  R." 

1  For  this  interesting  letter  I  am  indebted  to  Lord  John 
Fitzroy. 


1649.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      291 

diversity  of  opinions  both  in  officers  and  private 
men,  whose  inclinations  led  them  to  sidings.  His 
Highness  foreseeing  the  danger  of  such  private  dis- 
putes, thought  it  not  convenient  to  question  any 
further,  but  rather  slight  it  as  not  worth  his  taking 
notice  of,  by  which  means  he  quieted  the  disturbed 
fancies  of  the  common  people,  although  the  officers 
retained  some  animosities  among  themselves,  which 
woful  experience  taught  us  in  the  progress  of  the 
ensuing  designs." 

[The  following  letter  contains  one  of  the  few 
welcomes  Prince  Rupert  met  with  in  Ireland. 

MAY    IT    PLEASE    YOUR    HlGHNESS, 

I  have  been  always  ambitious  to  be  esteemed  your 
servant,  and  your  unwearied  labours  for  the  King  and 
gallant  dangerous  undertakings  increase  my  desires  there- 
in ;  there  are  but  few  men,  of  your  quality  and  fortune, 
that  would  expose  himself  to  those  difficulties  you  con- 
stantly are  subject  unto,  your  ends  therein  having  no 
particular  relation  to  the  interest  of  your  own  person,  and 
seeing  that  the  redemption  of  his  sacred  Majesty  is  that 
which  your  Highness  proposes  to  make  your  actions 
glorious,  I  am  confident  you  will  accomplish  it,  and  may 
he  perish  that  contributes  not  thereto. 

This  nation  have,  in  some  proportion,  given  testimony 
of  their  loyalty  ;  and  it  is  a  great  omen  of  our  happiness, 
that,  upon  the  perfection  of  our  peace  your  Highness 
appears  a  bulwark  against  our  enemies.  If  my  Lord- 
Lieutenant  permits  me,  I  will  wait  upon  him  to  kiss  your 
hands,  there  being  no  creature  that  congratulates  your 
coming  into  this  kingdom  more  than 

Your  Highness's  most  faithful  and  humble  Servant, 
Carrick  [on  Suit],  Feb.  2,  1649.  TAAFFE.] 

u  2 


292          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JUNE, 

I  may  here  also  introduce  a  letter  without  pre- 
cise date  from  Sir  Edward  Hyde.  That  passage  has 
especial  interest  in  which  Prince  Rupert  is  re- 
quested -to  contribute  towards  the  great  history  in 
which  his  Highness  is  so  hardly  dealt  with  : — 

SIR, 

This  bearer  is  one  of  those  were  mentioned  to  you  at 
the  last  conference  you  were  pleased  to  admit  here,  as  a 
person  fit  to  be  employed  in  a  clerk's  place  for  the  taking 
accounts.  Truly,  I  think  him  a  very  honest  man,  and, 
without  doubt,  is  in  a  desperate  condition  with  the  Parlia- 
ment, which  is  on  degree  towards  trust  in  these  dangerous 
times.  If  your  Highness  find  he  may  be  useful,  I  beseech 
you  dispose  him  accordingly.  I  hear  many  of  the  officers 
who  came  out  of  the  North,  intend  to  wait  on  your  High- 
ness at  sea,  of  which  I  am  very  glad ;  and  the  more  since 
the  sight  of  a  letter  which  the  Prince  hath  lately  received 
from  my  Lord  Ormond,  which,  upon  the  whole  matter,  is 
a  very  cheerful  one  ;  for,  though  he  acknowledges  some 
indisposition  in  some  officers  of  the  army  towards  a  peace 
with  the  confederate  Catholics,  yet  he  doubts  not  to 
master  those  difficulties,  and  is  abundantly  satisfied  with 
my  Lord  Inchequin,  and  says  if  the  fleet  comes  thither,  it 
will  not  be  only  secure  in  the  Harbours  of  Cork  and  Kin- 
sale,  but  give  such  a  countenance  to  the  affair  there,  that 
he  doubts  not  he  shall  shortly  invite  His  Highness  to  the 
possession  of  the  better  part  of  that  kingdom,  and  in  a 
very  short  time  to  the  absolute  command  and  dispose  of 
very  considerable  armies  there.  Methinks,  sir,  this  should 
give  us  some  new  life  ;  for,  I  confess,  I  see  no  prospect 
that  hath  light  and  pleasure  in  it  but  that  of  Ireland  :  and 
if  the  Prince  were  once  there,  I  would  hope  our  brethren 
of  Scotland  might  be  treated  with  upon  more  equal  con- 
ditions. I  have  not  been  able  to  stir  out  of  my  chamber 
since  you  went,  but  I  hear  that  the  Prince  is  resolved  to 


1649.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.         293 

go  to  Ireland  on  Friday  morning ;  so  that  when  you 
discern  his  presence  to  be  necessary  at  the  fleet,  it  will  be 
necessary  that  your  intimation  be  a  day  or  two  the  sooner. 
And  now,  sir,  give  me  leave  to  put  your  Highness  in  mind 
of  a  gracious  intimation,  if  you  will  not  give  me  leave  to 
call  it  a  promise,  that  you  would  vouchsafe  me  some 
memorials  and  observations  of  the  late  most  signal  actions 
in  England,  by  which  I  may  be  the  better  able  to  remem- 
ber what  ought  not  to  be  forgotten,  when  I  shall  have 
leisure  again  to  proceed  in  that  unequal  task  I  have 
adventured  on.  Indeed,  such  a  contribution  from  your 
Highness  will  give  me  much  courage,  and,  therefore,  I 
hope  you  will  let  me  prosper  in  this  suit.  God  preserve 
your  Highness.  Sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble  and 

most  obedient  Servant, 

EDWARD  HYDE.] 

Hague,  this  6th  Wednesday,  10  at  night. 

"  Winter  being  spent,  we  began  to  careen  and  fit 
for  a  summer  voyage  :  but  the  fleet  being  ready  to  fall 
down  to  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  the  enemy  ap- 
peared with  a  very  potent  fleet  before  it,  which 
caused  us  to  stop  our  proceedings.  His  Highness, 
to  prevent  their  coming  in,  raised  two  batteries  at 
the  entrance,  to  secure  his  ships,  until,  upon  consul- 
tation with  bis  officers,  lie  might  know  what  was 
most  expedient  to  be  done.  In  the  council  it  was 
decreed  not  to  engage,  until  more  men-of-war  might 
be  fitted,  and  some  fireships  ;  to  which  purpose,  his 
Highness  went  in  person  to  all  the  port-towns  on 
that  coast,  and  engaged  as  many  both  soldiers  and 
mariners  as  he  could,  for  this  expedition.  This  pre- 
paration required  some  time,  in  which  our  hasty 


294         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JUNE, 

advisers'  courages  grew  cold  by  a  more  consideration 
of  the  business;  for  when*  his  Highness  was  ready 
to  set  sail,  a  council-of-war  was  called  to  set  all 
things  in  order  for  that  engagement,  in  which  they 
voted  it  unfit  to  hazard  what  they  now  possessed 
against  so  powerful  an  enemy,  and  that  it  was  much 
better  to  secure  the  shipping  within  the  harbour, 
until  by  force  of  bad  weather  the  enemy  might  be 
driven  from  the  coast,  and  so  set  sail  without  danger. 
This  pretence  was  plausible  enough,  but  his  High- 
ness, who  had  found  the  temper  of  this  people, 
knew  it  to  be  rather  the  security  of  their  own  pos- 
sessions than  the  public  interest  which  they  endea- 
voured ;  yet,  since  it  was  carried  by  the  major  part, 
he  would  not  seem  to  contradict  it,  lest  upon  an  ill 
success  he  might  be  censured  of  vanity  and  rashness, 
and  therefore  accordingly  drew  back  his  fleet  into 
the  harbour,  where,  having  spent  some  months  in 
expectation  of  a  fortunate  gale,  we  began  to  be 
wanting  victuals  and  pay  for  so  many  men  exhaust- 
ing much  treasure;  especially  when  our  harbour 
being  blocked  up,  we  had  no  merchants  to  come  arid 
trade  for  our  goods,  and  no  likelihood  of  recruit  until 
summer  were  past.  His  Highness,  to  prevent  the 
growth  of  this  extremity,  judged  it  fit  to  disband 
the  new-raised  men,  and  only  keep  the  flag-ships, 
with  four  frigates  manned,  to  wait  upon  them ;  yet 
this  could  not  so  speedily  be  effected,  but  want 
began  to  creep  in  upon  us.  The  Commissioners,  who, 
by  his  Majesty's  commission,  had  the  disposal  of  the 


1649.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        295 

goods  for  sale,  having  sucked  the  leaves  and  fruit, 
caterpillar-like,  left  us  the  bare  stalk  to  gnaw  on, 
pleading  poverty  to  excuse  furnishing  his  Highness 
with  money  for  victualling  the  fleet,  yet,  by  God's 
providence  and  his  industry,  the  victualling  of  the 
fleet  was  once  more  accomplished  without  their 
assistance,  and  finding  them  to  be  a  company  of 
self-servers,  shook  them  off  as  unuseful  evils." 1 

[SIR  EDWARD  HYDE  TO  PRINCE  RUPERT. 
SIR, 

This  evening,  I  had  the  honour  to  receive  your  High- 
ness's  letter  of  Friday,  and  if  that  which  I  sent  yesterday 
be  come  to  your  hands,  you  find  that  I  had  then  spoken 
with  Tom  Cook.  The  truth  is,  nothing  could  be  added 
to  your  answer,  which  is  very  full,  to  the  States ;  and  it 
lies  upon  us  here  to  prevent  any  inconveniences  which  may 
grow,  from  the  power  and  partiality  of  this  people,  of 
which  we  have  every  day  some  instance.  And  truly,  if  it 
were  not  to  watch  that,  and  that  I  think  myself  better 
able  to  serve  your  Highness  here  than  at  Helvoetsluys, 


1  I  find  among  Lord  John  Fitzroy's  MSS.  the  following  orders 
from  Prince  Rupert  to  Sir  John  Grenville,  then  Governor  of  the 
Scilly  Isles.  I  can  only  make  out  as  much  as  follows  from  the 
MS.  Recommending  Mr.  Prog,  who  has  given  a  bill  of  exchange 
for  5000Z.  to  his  Majesty  in  Holland,  and  Rupert  has  only  paid 
him  5331.  as  he  does  not  like  the  prizes  at  Kinsale,  wherefore 
Rupert  begs  Sir  John  Grenville  (who,  it  seems,  keeps  piratic 
stores  of  his  own,  in  his  nest  at  Scilly)  to  give  the  bearer  4567£. 
worth,  or  "  109091b.  of  Ardasse  silk."— Kinsale,  Uth  April,  1649. 
In  a  letter  written  previously  by  a  clerk,  but  signed  by  the 
Prince,  I  find  that  his  Highness  sends  Sir  John  Grenville  "  as 
much  corn,  salt,  iron,  and  steel,  as  the  ships  could  stow ; "  and 
asks  for  butter  or  any  other  island  commodity  in  return  by  Sir 
John  Minne's. — Kinsale,  3rd  March,  1648-49. 

(Signed)  RUPERT. 


296         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [NOV. 

I  would  make  haste  thither  to  you,  though  I  am  not  so 
well  in  health  as  is  requisite  for  so  scurvy  a  journey  ;  but 
I  hope  my  Lord  Hopton  will  shortly  wait  on  your  High- 
ness, and  when  I  think  I  can  be  handsomely  spared  here, 
I  will  not  fail  to  kiss  your  hands,  though  I  stay  but  a  day 
there ;  having  much  to  say  to  you,  even  to  disburthen 
myself,  for  I  cannot  deny  that  I  am  so  much  out  of  hu- 
mour, that  I  want  some  correction,  which  I  can  receive 
with  greater  reverence  from  your  Highness  than  from  any 
other  hand.  Would  you  believe  that  Batten  and  Jordan 
have  had  the  presumption  to  come  to  the  Prince,  with  the 
confidence  of  persons  who  have  saved  his  life,  and  been 
received  by  him  as  such ;  and,  if  we  had  not  prevented 
it,  would  have  received  a  greater  testimony  of  their  merit 
and  fidelity,  than  I  believe  I  should  be  able  to  obtain,  if  I 
were  to  be  gone  tomorrow.  Oh,  sir,  this  too-gentle  tem- 
per will  undo  us,  and  make  men  ashamed  of  being  honest. 
Here  is  a  new  confident  discourse  of  an  agreement  be- 
tween the  King  and  the  Houses,  published  by  Sir  William 
Batten,  upon  no  grounds  that  I  can  hear  of;  but,  indeed, 
it  is  strange  that  we  should  not  receive  one  word  from  the 
King,  or  intimation  from  any  person  we  have  sent  thither, 
and  I  do  not  wonder  at  any  man  who  keeps  his  judgment 
in  suspense,  till  he  hears  what  the  conclusion  is  of  that 
treaty ;  for  how  little  room  soever  there  is  for  hope,  there 
wants  not  abundant  argument  for  fear  ;  and  there  are  still 
some  correspondencies  between  this  place  and  my  Lord  of 
Warwick,  which  are  not  understood  by  any  persons  with 
whom  I  converse. 

Your  Judge  Advocate  shall  be  sent  to  wait  on  your 
Highness  speedily,  and  I  beseech  you,  when  he  comes, 
let  him  take  full  examination  of  all  particulars,  which  may 
be  arguments  of  just  complaint  for  the  States'  unkind 
carriage  towards  us ;  that  at  least  we  may  make  it  appear, 
we  have  not  been  kindly  dealt  with :  and  I  hope,  one  way 
or  other,  we  shall  be  able  to  keep  the  Charles  frigate,  in 


1(549.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       297 

spite  of  our  friends  as  well  as  our  enemies,  and,  it  may  be, 
there  is  more  danger  from  the  former  than  the  latter. 

I  received  an  information  this  evening,  which  I  think 
necessary  to  impart  to  your  Highness,  though  I  have  not 
been  able  so  fully  to  examine  the  truth  of  it,  as  to  present 
it  otherwise  than  discourse ;  but  if  one  Henry  Cowen,  a 
Dutchman,  who  hath  the  charge  of  the  ammunition,  which 
was  not  come  to  you,  when  your  letter  was  dated,  be  now 
at  the  Sluys,  he  is  the  man  who  reports  that  Sir  Thomas 
Hooper  offered  him  so  much  money  to  debosh  away  the 
foot-soldiers  from  the  Sluys ;  and  that  Sir  Thomas  is  to 
be  Lieutenant-Colonel  of  a  regiment,  and  hath  received  a 
good  sum  of  money  to  raise  the  men,  which  he  hopes  to 
do  in  this  place.  God  preserve  your  Highness. 

Sir,  your  most  obedient  servant, 

EDWARD  HYDE.] 
Hague,  Sunday,  9th  Nov.  11  at  night. 

"  Having  thus  spent  a  wearisome  summer  in 
anxiety  and  troubles,  he  resolved  to  make  a  harvest 
in  £he  winter,  the  fleet  was  now  fully  fitted,  when 
there  began  new  combustions  in  the  land.  His 
Majesty's  army  having  bad  a  defeat  before  Dublin, 
the  garrisons  about  us  began  to  revolt,  so  as  we 
were  to  expect  an  enemy  as  well  by  land  as  by 
sea.  And  not  being  well  assured  of  the  governor's 
fidelity  in  the  port  wbere  we  were,  his  Highness 
surprised  the  Fort  of  Kinsale,  for  security  of  the 
fleet,  which  proved  of  necessary  consequence,  for 
the  circumjacent  garrisons  were  already  delivered  to 
the  enemy.  The  Governor  of  Cork,  intending  to 
betray  the  town,  resolved  to  make  himself  famous 
by  an  infamous  act,  before  bis  intended  treachery ;  to 


298        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF         [NOV. 

which  purpose,  knowing  his  Highness  loved  hunting, 
he  invited  him  to  the  chase  of  a  deer,  close  by  the 
town  ;  but  Heaven  abhorring  such  inhumanity,  pre- 
vented that  design  by  providing  importunate  business 
to  impede  his  Highness's  intentions;  being  again 
importuned  by  the  Governor  for  the  same  sport,  he 
mistrusted  him,  who  seeing  himself  frustrated  of  his 
design,  speedily  surrendered  his  town.  This  was 
seconded  by  another  plot.  The  enemy  had  engaged 
an  ensign  belonging  to  the  Prince,  to  betray  his 
guard  at  the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  which  he 
endeavoured  with  a  part  of  his  men ;  but  being  dis- 
covered and  apprehended,  they  were  deservedly 
executed.  His  Highness  being  ready  to  put  to  sea, 
invested  the  Lord  Lieutenant  with  the  fort ;  these 
unexpected  commotions  on  land,  with  the  incon- 
venience our  timorous  counsellors  had  exposed  us 
unto,  were  the  cause  of  laying  up  divers  good  ships, 
for  want  of  men  to  man  them,  so  that  we  were 
driven  to  begin  the  wrorld  anew,  with  seven  sail  ; 
but  he  who  traced  the  paths  of  danger  with  less 
force,  knew  the  better  how  to  manage  this  second 
adventure. 

THE   VOYAGE   FROM   IRELAND. 

"Winter  being  come,  a  strong  north-east  wind 
blew  hard  upon  the  coast,  which  forced  our  enemies 
to  ply  to  sea,  having  a  dangerous  lee-shore ;  they 
resolved  to  beat  before  the  harbour  at  a  distance, 
the  coast  being  very  perilous  to  anchor  upon,  but  the 


1049.]        PRINCE  RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     299 

freshness  of  the  gale  made  void  their  design,  by 
dispersing  them  to  divers  coasts,  so  that  they  who 
were  scattered  to  the  offing  stood  northward  to 
seek  harbour,  fearing  that  being  thus  separated, 
they  might  fall  into  our  hands. 

"  The  seas  thus  cleared,  we  set  sail  for  Portugal, 
and  being  athwart  the  Bay  of  Biscay,  we  met  with 
foul  weather,  which  forced  us  to  lie  a-try *  under  our 
main  course,  so  that  some  of  our  ships  lost  company 
by  reason  of  the  growing  sea,  which  hindered  them 
from  seeing  the  light;  but  our  rendezvous  being 
about  the  Burlings,  we  were  not  long  separated. 
Prince  Maurice  met  with  a  Malaga-man,  which 
struck  at  his  summons  ;  the  fleet  being  come  to- 
gether, we  directed  our  course  to  the  rock  of  Lisbon. 
In  our  way,  we  met  two  proper  ships,  the  John  Ad- 
venture and  the  Hopeful  Adventure,  both  bound 
from  London  to  St.  Lucar,  who  defended  themselves 
very  stoutly  for  many  broadsides,  against  our  small 
frigates;  but  their  Admiral's  main-top-mast  being 
shot  by  the  board,  and  his  ship  torn  in  the  dispute, 
as  soon  as  the  flag-ships  came  up,  surrendered  them- 
selves. Having  spent  some  time  in  stopping  their 
leaks,  and  fitting  a  topmast  for  our  prize,  we  stood 
in  for  land,  when  we  descried  a  ship  standing  our 
course ;  we  gave  her  chase,  and  being  within  shot, 
commanded  her  to  strike,  which  they  refusing,  stood 
in ;  but  Prince  Maurice  steering  athwart  his  fore- 

1  "  Lay-to,"  1  presume. 


300         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [NOV. 

foot,  prevented  his  intent,  and  forced  him  to  lie  the 
lee.  She  proved  to  be  an  English  ship  bound  for 
Lisbon  from  Brazil,  which  might  have  caused  some 
dispute,  because  she  was  freighted  by  the  Portu- 
guese, yet  the  Court  of  Admiralty  adjudged  her  our 
prize,  by  reason  they  had  refused  obedience  to  their 
Prince's  flag.  Having  manned  her,  we  stood  in  for 
Cascales  Road,  where  his  Highness  received  an  em- 
bassy from  the  King  of  Portugal,  to  invite  him  up 
the  river  of  Lisbon.  The  Prince  having  spent  most 
of  his  provisions,  thought  it  convenient  to  be  assured 
of  a  retreat,  lest  adversity  might  cause  us  to  fall 
into  our  pristine  necessity ;  and  being  assured  from 
his  Majesty,  we  should  have  the  law  of  nations  made 
good  unto  us  in  his  ports,  whatsoever  enemy  came  to 
molest  us,  he  bore  into  the  river  Tagus,  where,  as  we 
sailed,  we  were  saluted  all  the  coast  along,  by  the 
forts.  We  sailed  along  the  north  channel,  and  came 
to  an  anchor  in  the  Bay  of  Weyrs :  that  night  we 
continued  there,  and  next  day  stood  in  for  the 
Bay  of  San  Katherina,  where  we  continued  for  some 
time  to  treat  with  merchants  for  the  sale  of  our 
goods,  and  the  victualling  our  fleet. 

"THE   PROCEEDINGS  IN   PORTUGAL. 

"  As  soon  as  we  were  at  anchor  in  the  Bay  of  St. 
Katherina,  the  King  of  Portugal  sent  the  Conde  de 
Poros  unto  the  Princes,  to  invite  them  ashore,  and 
to  assure  them  of  all  the  assistance  his  kingdom 


1649.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        301 

could  afford  them  :  their  Highnesses  having  returned 
thanks  to  his  Majesty,  accepted  his  invitation,  and 
went  on  shore  at  Belleisle,  where  they  were  received 
by  many  of  the  nobles,  and  treated  in  very  great 
state  for  some  days,  until  preparation  was  made  for 
their  reception  at  Court ;  which  being  ready,  the 
King  sent  his  nobles  with  a  great  train  to  attend 
them  to  his  palace,  where  he  received  them  with 
great  kindness,  confirming  what  his  ambassador  had 
promised.  Being  thus  assured  of  the  fleet's  security, 
Prince  Rupert  commanded  them  to  anchor  off  the 
fort  of  Belleisle,  where  we  continued  till  our 
prizes  were  adjudged,  and  the  goods  sold,  to  our 
content,  which  spent  much  time :  that  performed, 
we  sailed  up  the  river,  over  against  the  city,  where 
we  careened,  victualled  and  fitted  our  prizes  for 
men-of-war. 

"The  fleet  being  ready  to  put  to  sea,  with  an 
intent  to  fall  down  to  our  former  berth,  we  fell 
down  to  our  former  berth  in  Belleisle ;  but  before 
we  were  ready  to  set  sail,  the  enemy  came  to  an 
anchor  before  the  river's  mouth  with  a  great  fleet, 
in  which  there  was  an  ambassador  from  the  States 
of  England  to  demand  the  persons  of  the  Princes 
and  the  flag-ships  to  be  delivered  into  their  hands, 
or  else  to  be  immediately  put  out  to  sea.  This  was 
the  effect  of  this  embassy.  He  landed  at  Cascales? 
and  was  received  with  great  respect,  and  forthwith 
had  audience  :  but  the  King  having  promised  to 
maintain  the  law  of  nations  to  us  within  his  ports, 


302          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [NOV. 

could  not  answer  his  expectation,  requiring  three 
days,  according  to  that  law,  for  us  to  put  to  sea ; 
but  they  being  masters  at  sea,  would  not  condescend 
thereunto.  The  King,  fearing  to  engage  in  a  war, 
and  being  daily  importuned  by  the  Conde  de  Miro, 
whom  they  had  corrupted  by  money  to  embrace 
their  interest,  granted  that  this  business  should  be 
more  seriously  considered  of  at  the  Council-table, 
where  it  was  highly  urged  by  the  said  Conde  and 
his  faction  on  the  enemy's  behalf.  But  the  Queen 
and  Prince  of  Portugal,  being  very  sensible  how 
odious  a  thing  in  Princes  the  breach  of  faith  was, 
and  how  infamous  it  would  render  them  to  posterity, 
stood  firm  to  the  maintaining  their  former  promise, 
although  nothing  had  passed  under  their  hands.1  It 
was  long  debated  in  council  before  any  determina- 
tion could  be  set  down ;  being  a  thing  of  that  con- 
sequence either  to  falsify  their  Royal  word,  or  make 
war  against  a  potent  enemy ;  yet  to  delay  time  until 
the  Brazil  fleet  was  fitting  to  send  away  securely, 
permitted  the  enemy  to  anchor  in  St.  Katherine's 
Bay,  on  the  other  side  of  Belleisle  Fort.  His 
Highness  seeing  their  neighbourhood,  and  not  cer- 
tain what  effects  their  money  and  threats  might 
produce,  the  Council  being  timorous,  and  their 
Conde  their  friend,  being  short  of  provisions,  under- 

1  The  young  King  of  Portugal  was  as  chivalrous  as  the 
Spaniards  were  dastardly  :  he  was  scarcely  prevented  from  sailing 
at  the  head  of  his  own  fleet  to  escort  the  Royalists  out  of  his 
harbour.  The  mercantile  interests  of  the  country,  however, 
proved  too  strong  for  him. 


1649.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      303 

hand  fitted  his  fleet  with  all  materials  to  defend 
himself,  force  his  passage  if  need  were,  or  perish  in 
the  attempt,  like  himself. 

"The  fleet  being  now  in  condition  to  perform 
something  for  its  safety,  gave  suspicion  both  to  the 
Court  and  enemies ;  the  one  fearing  we  would  seek 
revenge,  and  in  relation  thereunto  act  desperately, 
the  other  suspected  themselves  abused  by  the  Coun- 
cil and  drawn  into  a  snare.  The  Prince  to  increase 
these  jealousies  and  further  his  design,  applied  him- 
self to  the  clergy,  urging  point  of  conscience,  and 
sometimes  their  own  interest  (they  having  a  large 
proportion  in  the  government  of  that  kingdom),  by 
which  means  he  made  them  sensible  of  the  unjust 
proceedings  at  Court  against  him.  This  took  wished 
effect,  and  they  began  to  fill  the  pulpits  with  how 
shameful  a  thing  it  was  for  a  Christian  King  to 
treat  with  rebels ;  this  so  inveterately  incensed  the 
people,  that  the  King  could  hardly  pass  the  street 
without  hearing  their  exclamations.  Prince  Rupert 
perceiving  the  artifice  to  take  with  the  commons, 
began  to  shew  himself  frequently  amongst  them, 
hunting  daily,  as  though  he  suspected  no  danger, 
but  making  them  his  security :  this,  with  his  libe- 
rality and  complaisance  to  all  sorts  of  people,  they 
having  been  accustomed  to  a  Spanish  gravity  were 
surprised  by  such  unusual  favours  from  so  great  a 
person,  and  very  much  confirmed  their  belief  to 
what  their  preachers  had  promulgated.  Insomuch, 
as  the  prevalent  faction  at  Court,  for  our  enemies 


304         MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF        [NOV. 

dared  not  to  propose  anything  prejudicial  to  the 
Princes  for  fear  of  the  commons.  At  the  same  time 
came  into  the  river  two  French  men-of-war,1  who 
by  mistake  came  to  anchor  in  the  middle  of  the 
enemy's  fleet,  and  going  on  board  the  Admiral 
[Blake],  thinking  to  have  saluted  the  Prince,  were 
by  him  confined.  This  much  displeased  the  King, 
to  have  his  allies  and  friends  taken  under  command 
of  his  forts ;  yet  desiring  to  avoid  a  war,  sent  to 
demand  them  in  courtesy,  which  if  refused,  permis- 
sion was  granted  to  his  Highness  and  the  forts  to 
endeavour  their  rescue;  but  the  enemy  no  sooner 
received  the  message  but  they  restored  the  persons 
confined,  as  fearing  to  make  a  national  breach  be- 
twixt France  and  them.  The  French  being  at  liberty, 
anchored  amongst  us.  The  enemy  seeing  their 
affairs  go  slowly  on,  or  at  least  come  to  a  doubtful 
issue,  enterprized  the  surprisal  of  the  Princes'  per- 
sons, hoping  thereby  to  put  a  period  to  the  future : 
and  to  this  purpose,  as  they  were  a-hunting,  sent 
a  party  to  lie  in  wait  for  them  at  their  return,  and 
pinnaces  at  the  sea-side  to  take  in  the  undertakers : 
which  pitiful  design  being  descried,  the  ambuscado 
made  use  of  legs  instead  of  hands,  and  glad  of 
an  escape,  some  went  to  their  long  home,  and  others 
by  a  willing  and  forced  mistake,  went  aboard  our 
fleet  instead  of  their  own.  This  treacherous  action 
made  the  Prince  more  careful  of  his  person,,  as  on 

1  "  Though  the  Prince  did  what  he  could  by  shooting,  and  all 
other  means,  to  divert  them  from  falling  in  among  the  English." 


1049.]     PRINCE  RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        305 

whom  so  many  and  much  depended  ;  and  that  they 
might  know  that  he  had  wit  as  well  as  courage,  he 
soon  after  endeavoured  a  requital ;  for  having  fitted 
a  bomb-ball  in  a  double-headed  barrel,  with  a  lock  in 
the  bowels  to  give  fire  to  a  quick-match,  sent  it 
a-board  their  Vice-Admiral  in  a  town-boat  with 
one  of  his  soldiers  clad  in  a  Portugal  habit,  to  put 
into  the  stern-boat  as  a  barrel  of  oil,  to  keep  it  for 
him  till  he  hailed  up  the  side  without,  'refreshing 
for  the  men  ;*  but,  being  come  to  the  ship's  stern, 
those  ports  being  unfortunately  shut,  before  he 
could  get  to  the  transom-port,  he  was  known,  and 
taken.1  His  Highness  being  now  strengthened  with 
the  ships  which  he  bought,  having  miscarried  in  his 
design,  and  seeing  no  positive  resolution  in  the  Por- 
tugal taken  as  to  his  business,  and  not  trusting  to  the 
wavering  affections  of  the  vulgar,  victuals  beginning 
to  fail ;  he  depended  on  the  Governor  of  the  Fort, 
who  promised  to  connive  at  his  passage,  resolution 
was  taken  to  fall  down  with  the  first  easterly  wind, 
and  either  to  force  a  passage  or  perish  with  them. 
But  this  fitted  not  the  temper  of  all  our  fleet, 
whereby  the  enemy  had  intelligence  given,  who  pre- 
sently weighed  anchor,  and  towed  out  of  the  river 
in  a  stark  calm,  and  came  to  an  anchor  at  the  river's 
mouth,  where,  not  long  after,  they  were  strengthened 
with  another  fleet,  of  which  the  Resolution  was 
Admiral.  Being  out  of  danger,  they  began  to 

1  He  was  afterwards  recovered  by  Rupert. 
VOL,  III.  X 


306         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [DEC. 

threaten  the  Brazil  fleet ;  yet,  through  the  persua- 
sions of  the  Conde  de  Miro,  who  was  told  by  them 
no  injury  was  intended,  the  King  sent  forth  that 
fleet,  most  being  English  ships  freighted  by  His 
Majesty  of  Portugal.  As  soon  as  they  were  forth 
the  river,  they  were  summoned,  came  to  anchor  under 
command,  and  were  made  prizes.  The  King  here- 
upon suspected  the  Conde  de  Miro,  dismissed  him 
for  a  time  from  his  presence,  the  better  to  be  assured 
of  his  fidelity ;  who  not  long  after,  by  his  creatures' 
means,  palliating  the  matter,  was  recalled  to  Court, 
and  employed  as  before,  yet  not  without  suspicion 
of  the  Parliament's  officers,  whose  interest  he  had 
so  highly  [in  disgrace]  maintained.  Certain  it  is, 
whatever  his  pretence  might  be,  that  he  intended 
by  weakening  the  fleet  and  exhausting  the  public 
treasure,  to  compel  the  King  by  necessity  to  comply 
with  their  demands,  for  in  all  his  proceedings  he 
expressed  more  of  passion  in  their  behalf  than  any 
consideration  of  the  kingdom's  affairs.1 

"  The  King  being  now  sufficiently  disabused  of 
their  pretended  friendship,  began  to  arm  his  fleet 
for  defence  of  his  coasts,  and  security  of  commerce ; 
whereupon  Don  Francisco  de  Pero  and  his  faction, 
to  ingratiate  again  with  the  King,  seemed  to  be  very 

1  About  this  time  I  find  the  following  pithy  note  in  Thurlow's 
State  Papers  (written  in  Portuguese)  : — 
FOR  PRINCE  RUPERT, 

Hearing  that  Prince  Maurice  intends  to  sail  from  our  ports 
with  letters  of  marque  against  Parliament  ships.  I  beg  it  may 
not  be  done. 

23rd  Dec.  1649.  P.  VlElRA  DA  SILVA. 


1649.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        307 

forward  in  this  expedition,  although  underhand  they 
retarded  all  they  could,  in  delaying  our  victual,  and 
other  stores  necessary  for  us  in  this  undertaking : 
nevertheless,  through  the  care  and  industry  of  his 
Highness,  our  victualling  was  at  last  completed  and 
embarked,  their  people  not  daring  to  act  anything 
that  might  shew  a  face  of  guilt,  fearing  the  Prince's 
vigilancy  and  inspect  to  their  designs ;  but  more 
subtlely  to  obtain  their  ends  employed  one  [Vara 
Zon]  Pora  John  to  command  the  first  fleet,  who 
at  his  first  council  of  war  discovered  their  intentions, 
or  at  least  gave  caution  what  was  to  ensue,  by  urging 
his  Highness  to  engage  to  lay  the  admiral  [the 
Prince]  aboard  himself,  a  thing  only  in  the  hands 
of  God,  whom  the  wind  and  the  seas  obey." 

[About  this  time  the  following  letters  appear  to 
have  reached  the  Prince.  The  second  "  draws " 
upon  Rupert's  last  prize  as  if  it  had  been  an  ordi- 
nary investment  made  in  the  royal  name. 

THE  MARQUIS  OF  MONTROSE  TO  PRINCE  RUPERT. 

SIR, 

Being  informed,  since  your  Highness's  parting,  that 
some  new  impostures  are  like  to  delude  our  sense,  and 
give  a  total  foil  to  all  hopes  of  recovery,  I  thought  fit  to 
direct  Bake,  this  bearer,  to  receive  your  Highness's  com- 
mands, and  to  impart  unto  you  what  is  not  so  fit  to  be 
hazarded  to  paper,  since  this  appears,  the  stroke  for  the 
party,  and  probable  conjuncture,  that  the  use  or  misserving 
shall  save  their  gain,  or  lose  the  whole  ;  but,  be  as  it  will, 
all  shall  serve  to  confirm  me  still  the  further,  sir, 

Your  Highness's  most  loving  Servant, 

Jan.  8,  1649-50.  MONTROSE. 

x  2 


308         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF          [JAN. 

THE    KING    TO    PRINCE    RUPERT. 

Right  dear  and  right  entirely  beloved  cousin  we  greet 
you  well.  Having  already  disbursed  for  the  fleet  a  consi- 
derable part  of  those  moneys  which  we  intended  for  our 
own  support  and  maintenance,  &c.,  being  now  totally  des- 
titute of  means  to  pay  the  debts  of  our  dear  brother,  the 
Duke  of  York  and  our  own,  and  to  provide  for  the  sub- 
sistence of  ourselves  and  family  we  are  no  ways  able  to 
discharge  the  debts  contracted  at  Helvoet  Sluys  for  the 
fleet,  and  we  intend,  therefore,  to  provide  for  the  satisfac- 
tion thereof  out  of  the  proceeds  of  the  goods  in  the  ship 
lately  taken,  if  it  prove  good  prize. 

Given  under  our  hand  and  seal,  at  the  Hague,  the 
27th  day  of  January,  1649. 

CHARLES  P. 


FROM  LORD  JERMYN. 
SIR, 

I  have  written  largely  to  my  Lord  Culpepper,  for 
which  cause  I  need  not  to  trouble  your  Highness,  the 
Queen  doth  desire  to  be  excused  to  you,  she  hath  had 
with  more  writing  of  late  than  she  hath  been  used  to,  a 
defluxion  in  her  eyes,  which  makes  her  not  write  now. 
Thus  far  I  had  written  and  finished  my  letter  to  my  Lord 
Culpepper,  and  in  this  instant  we  receive  the  English 
letters  which  do  more  confirm  me  in  the  opinion  of  the 
necessity  of  the  Princes  going  to  the  Scotch,  for  it  is 
much  to  be  feared,  without  his  presence,  they  will  not  be 
able  to  support  the  work  they  will  have  upon  their  hands, 
but  your  Highness  will  see  that  I  am  not  absolute  in  the 
opinion,  but  leave  all  to  your  wisdoms,  which  I  pray  God 
to  direct  and  prosper.  This  now  is  all  I  shall  trouble  you 
with,  I  am  most  truly, 

Your  Highness's  most  humble,  and 

most  obedient  servant,       HENRY  JERMYN.] 
St.  Germ[ains,  Augjust  19. 


1650.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        309 

"Having  now  a  fair  gale,  the  Prince  with  the 
first  opportunity  let  fly  the  standard,  and  weighed, 
desiring  the  Portugal  admiral  to  do  the  same ; 
but  the  anchor-fluke  had  so  good  hold,  that  we 
were  fair  up  with  the  enemy  before  he  set  sail.  The 
wind  shifting  to  the  offing,  we  could  not  engage 
them ;  but  keeping  our  wind,  we  chased  towards 
Cape  Pilchar,  the  enemy  doing  the  like,  having  the 
weather-gage  of  us.  Night  drawing  on,  and  the 
wind  slacking  upon  us,  so  that  we  could  not  weather 
the  cape,  we  tacked,  and  stood  for  the  northward, 
where,  the  tide  of  flood  being  spent,  we  came  in  six 
fathom  water,  near  the  Heckoups.  Next  day  we 
weighed  and  stood  to  sea,  fearing  the  surf  upon  the 
bank,  plying  to  and  fro  in  a  fog  before  the  harbour. 
The  Prince  descried  the  St.  George,  with  the  flag 
in  the  main-top,  and  two  frigates  to  windward  bear- 
ing with  him.  The  Prince  being  clear,  standing 
with  the  admiral,  commanded  not  to  fire  one  gun 
until  he  were  aboard  him ;  but,  being  within  shot, 
his  Highness's  fore-top-mast  was  unfortunately  shot 
by  the  board,  which  the  enemy  seeing,  having 
spent  their  broadsides,  tacked,  and  stood  off  to  sea. 
The  Prince  being  disenabled  to  work  his  ship,  gave 
over  the  chase ;  the  rest  of  the  fleet  were  so  far  to 
leeward  that  they  could  do  no  good.  The  enemy 
being  from  the  coast,  and  our  provisions  spent 
(which  was  but  for  fourteen  days  at  our  first  setting 
out),  the  King  commanded  us  into  the  river,  where, 
soon  after  our  being  in  harbour,  the  Portugal  ad- 


310          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JAN. 

miral's  behaviour  being  known,  he  was  divested  of 
his  command,  and  judged  incapable  of  ever  being 
employed.  The  enemy  having  spent  some  time  at 
sea,  returned  to  their  former  berth  before  the  river's 
mouth.  We  victualled,  and  fitted  new  for  another 
voyage,  and  as  before  the  Conde  de  Miro,  whose 
evil  genius  still  waited  on  us,  employed  another  of 
his  faction  in  this  second  expedition,  who,  not  less 
careful  of  his  person  than  the  former,  being  in  chase 
of  the  enemy's  fleet,  dragged  his  sheet-anchor  under 
foot,  and  being  leagues  astern,  made  sign  with  en- 
sign, and  fired  a  gun  for  the  rest  of  his  fleet  to 
retreat.  Nevertheless  we  continued  our  chase,  with 
seven  sail  and  two  fire-ships,  till  the  land  being 
shut  in,  we  espied  from  the  top-mast-head  twelve 
sail  more  coming  to  them,  which,  with  the  Portugal 
admiral's  valiant  action,  caused  us  to  retreat. 
Having  spent  some  time  at  the  river's  mouth,  we 
were  commanded  in,  and  the  admiral  rewarded  as 
the  former." 

[COPY  OF  A  LETTER  FROM  PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  THE  KING  : 
SIRE, 

My  last  to  your  Majesty  was  by  Choqueux,  which 
I  am  confident,  came  safe  to  your  Majesty,  since  which 
time  there  was  not  any  occasion  which  did  present  itself, 
whereby  I  could  give  your  Majesty  an  account  of  our 
voyage.  But  this  your  Majesty  be  pleased  to  remember 
our  last  resolution,  which  I  sent  by  Choqueux,  according  to 
which  we  made  for  the  North  Cape,  which  latitude  having 
made,  we  crossed  to.  And  again,  some  forty  leagues  from 
shore,  it  happened  that  in  the  night,  by  a  mistake  of  a 


1650.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       311 

light,  all  our  fleet,  except  Sir  J.  Mennes',  lost  me.  And, 
the  next  morning,  a  ship  appearing,  which  we  chased  all 
day,  but  in  vain,  we  were  put  to  leeward  of  our  first 
rendezvous,  the  Isle  of  Bayonne,  whither  we  imagined  our 
fleet  had  sailed.  We  therefore  plied  as  much  to  wind- 
ward as  we  could.  Two  days  after,  we  made,  early  in  the 
morning,  seven  ships  to  windward.  We  gave  chase  to 
them,  and  they  to  us,  which  proved  to  be  our  fleet.  Mar- 
shall being  come  in  with  a  prize,  and  my  brother  having 
taken  another,  made  up  the  seven  ships.  Marshall's  prize 
was  a  Newfoundland-man,  out  of  which  we  took  all  her 

fish  and  fried  the  half In  night,  being 

moonlight,  we  -made  two  great  ships  and  a  small  vessel, 
which  we  immediately  chased.  In  the  morning,  the  Black 
Lady,  the  Black  Knight,  the  Scott,  and  the  Mary,  over- 
took them.  The  small  ketch  bore  up  right  before  the 
wind,  which  the  Black  Knight  gave  chase,  but  in  vain. 
The  other  two,  being  proved  English,  did  not  alter  their 
course.  Our  small  ships  fell  to  work,  which  lasted  from 
seven  in  the  morning  till  almost  ten,  about  which  time 
their  Admiral's  main-top-yard  and  main-sail  shot  by  the 
board,  which  stopped  her  way  till  my  ship  came  up,  to 
which  she  struck  without  a  shot  of  ours  :  so,  when  she 
came  within  musket-shot  of  her,  after  which  presently 
this  other  yielded  also. 

These  prizes  being  considerable,  and  being  fearful  of 
some  disaster,  having  near  three  hundred  prize-men  aboard 
us,  it  was  generally  thought  fit  to  secure  and  sell  them, 
with  the  first  convenience  to  do,  which  no  place  was 
thought  more  convenient  nor  safe  than  Lisbon.  The 
reason  your  Majesty  knows  whether  we  arrived  ;  but,  as 
we  came  within  five  leagues  of  Cascales  Road,  we  took  an 
Englishman,  bound  for  Lisbon,  which  came  from  Brazil, 
which,  wanting  provisions,  we  were  fain  to  take  with  us. 
To  give  your  Majesty  a  particular  account  of  our  entertain- 
ment, which  was  with  all  civility,  would  but  be  a  trouble. 


312       MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF  [JAN. 

I  shall,  therefore,  go  to  the  business.  I  had  from  the 
Secretary  of  State,  at  first,  all  the  assurance  of  all  assist- 
ance I  could  desire  in  all  things  ;  even  the  Brazil  ship, 
as  I  am  certain  the  King  himself  often  expressed,  should 
be  totally  at  my  disposal.  So  I  went  on  with  .... 
.  .  .  .  our  commodities,  for  which  I  made  a  bargain, 
which,  I  verily  believe,  will  yield  40,000/.  ;  I  hope  more. 
What  tricks  since  have  been  played  in  this  business,  your 
Majesty  can  hardly  imagine ;  which,  when  I  have  a  more 
convenient  time,  I  will  send  to  your  Majesty's  Secretary 
at  large ;  which,  when  known,  I  hope  I  shall  not  more  be 
thought  impatient  for  the  sale  of  our  commodities.  I 
hope  I  have  passed  the  worst.  And,  for  the  other  ship  of 
Brazil,  I  have  put  the  King  here  to  it,  either  to  command 
the  ship  from  me,  which  he  will  not  do ;  as,  to  give  me  an 
assurance  which  may  serve  me  for  a  discharge  that  he  has 
freighted  the  ship,  which  I  am  sure  he  cannot  with  truth. 
The  answer  is  long  a  coming.  In  the  meantime,  I  will 
unload  the  ship,  and  fit  her  for  a  man-of-war.  Thus,  our 
business  hitherto.  All  the  ships  lie  now  between  Belim 
and  Lisbon,  out  of  command,  from  whence  either  I  will 
sell  or  carry  the  prizes,  in  spite  of  all  this  kingdom.  I 
have  one  thousand  two  hundred  men  aboard.  We  are 
now  re-victualling  for  four  months'  more.  These  ships 
will  not  hold,  I  hope  to  bring  unto  your  Majesty  who 
is  victualler  this  next  voyage  ;  a  very  considerable  sum 
before  they  are  spent.  All  the  want  in  our  business  will 
be  intelligence  from  you.] 

"  The  winter  coming  on,  the  enemy  came  no 
more  to  an  anchor,  but  plied  to  the  offing,  in  ex- 
pectation of  the  Brazil  fleet,  which  was  bound 
home.  Those  who  were  now  employed  to  victual 
us,  being  of  the  Conde  de  Miro  faction,  who,  to- 
gether with  him,  to  manifest  their  faithfulness  to 


1650.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        313 

our  enemies,  delayed  us  until  part  of  their  fleet  was 
taken ;  so  that  his  Majesty,  knowing  not  whom  to 
trust,  seeing  himself  betrayed  on  every  side,  was 
necessitated  to  come  down  in  person  to  the  ship's 
side,  and  desire  his  Highness  to  put  to  sea,  and 
endeavour  the  rescue  of  his  fleet,  which,  with  ten 
days'  provision,  was  undertaken ;  but  the  enemy 
having  their  booty,  stood  in  for  Lucar  [Gales],  so 
that  we  found  them  not  at  our  return.  The  King, 
having  no  more  use  of  our  ships,  victualled  our 
fleet,  and  fitted  us  with  such  other  stores  as  were 
necessary  for  us,  giving  the  Princes  many  thanks 
for  their  endeavours  to  preserve  the  fleet,  and 
assured  them  of  his  friendship.  Yet  not  long  after, 
by  means  of  the  faction  at  Court,  a  peace  was  treat- 
ed, and  a  cessation  made  between  them  and  our 
enemies,  conditionally  that  Prince  Rupert's  fleet 
should  have  no  protection  in  his  territories ;  so  that 
now  misfortunes  being  no  novelty  to  us.  we  plough 
the  sea  for  a  subsistence,  and,  being  destitute  of  a 
port,  we  take  the  confines  of  the  Mediterranean 
Sea  for  our  harbour ;  poverty  and  despair  being  com- 
panions, and  revenge  our  guide." 

"THE  VOYAGE  INTO  THE  STRAITS. 

(MlCHAELMAS-DAY,  1650.) 

"  The  fleet  being  ready,  we  set  sail  from  Lisbon, 
intending  for  the  Straits.  We  spent  some  time  on 
the  coast  of  Portugal,  to  wait  for  a  French  man-of- 
war,  that  desired  consortship  with  us  for  the  East 


314         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [SEPT. 

France ;  but  the  wind  being  fair,  and  she  not 
coming,  we  steered  along  the  coast  of  Andalusia, 
where  we  met  the  Malaga  fleet  in  the  night,  which 
being  dark,  we  took  but  two  of  them,  the  Second 
Charles  giving  chase  to  the  rest ;  who,  not  observing 
the  sign  of  retreat,  lost  company  of  the  fleet.  We 
lay  by  all  night,  and  next  day,  when  missing  the 
Charles,  we  made  sail  for  the  Straits,  and  stood  in 
for  our  first  rendezvous  at  Tetuan  Road,  to  look  for 
our  man-of-war ;  but,  not  finding  her  there,  we  stood 
over  for  the  coast  of  Spain,  where  we  found  the  Cul- 
pepper  at  anchor  under  Stypion  [Estepona]  Castle ; 
but  before  we  could  come  up  with  her  (knowing  our 
ships),  she  hauled  ashore,  so  that  we  could  not  lay 
her  aboard.  We  spent  some  broadsides  one  at  an- 
other, the  castle  doing  his  best  to  defend  her  ;  yet 
we  disabled  her  for  putting  to  sea,  but  could  not 
fetch  her.  Having  saluted  the  castle,  we  left  her, 
and  stood  away  for  Malaga ;  his  Highness  intending 
to  sail  into  the  road  by  night,  to  surprise  their  ships, 
gave  order  to  the  captain  of  the  Henry  frigate  to 
come  to  an  anchor  between  them  and  the  mole,  to 
prevent  their  going  in;  but,  unfortunately,  the 
frigate  being  fair  up  with  the  road,  some  of  the  new 
men,  by  neglect  of  the  officers,  stole  into  the  pin- 
nace, and  got  to  shore,  and  by  that  means  ruined 
our  design ;  for  the  ships  being  alarmed  from  the 
forts,  drew  all  into  the  harbour.  We  lay  before  the 
road  all  night.  Next  morning  came  one  of  the 
King  of  Spain's  galleys  to  view  us  ;  and  after  having 


1650.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE  CAVALIERS.       315 

hailed  us,  knowing  who  we  were,  saluted  the  ad- 
miral with  his  courser,  and  some  other  guns ;  they 
being  answered,  the  castle  and  forts  did  the  same, 
and  he  stood  in  for  the  shore.  We  thanked  their 
salutation ;  and  having  a  small  gale  of  wind,  stood 
off  to  sea  having  a  handsome  berth  from  the  land. 
We  stood  along  coast  for  Veles-Malaga.  The  next 
day  being  calm,  and  making  English  colours  in  the 
road,  all  the  boats  in  the  fleet  were  sent  to  tow  our 
Vice-Admiral  into  an  anchor.  The  English  ship  see- 
ing him  near,  hailed  ashore.  The  Admiral,  and  the 
rest  of  the  fleet,  having  a  small  gale,  were  soon  up 
with  her.  His  Highness  sent  ashore  to  demand 
those  English  ships,  as  belonging  to  rebels,  and  some 
of  them  instruments  to  raise  the  tumults  in  England 
and  cry  out  for  justice  against  his  Majesty ;  which 
the  governor  denied,  desiring  his  Highness  to  do  no 
act  of  hostility  in  the  road  until  he  sent  to  Madrid, 
to  know  his  King's  pleasure  concerning  the  same, 
for  until  then  he  was  bound  to  protect  them.1  His 
Highness  having  received  this  answer,  returned 
word  that  if  he  did  not  deliver  them  up  he  would 
search  his  ships  for  them,  for  nothing  should  protect 


1  Lords  Clarendon  and  Cottington  were  at  this  time  on  a  sort 
of  desperate  embassy  at  Madrid.  They  had  been  meanly  neg- 
lected until  it  was  known  "  that  a  royal  fleet,  commanded  by  a 
Prince  of  the  Blood,"  was  on  the  Spanish  coast  :  they  were  then 
as  meanly  flattered.  But,  when  a  Parliamentary  fleet,  still 
stronger,  came  ;  the  Cavaliers  were  denounced,  and  orders  sent  to  all 
the  ports  to  forbid  Prince  Rupert's  access.  Hence  his  hostility 
and  profitable  attacks  upon  their  commerce,  as  well  as  the  old 
quarrel  of  the  Palatinate. 


316    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

them  ;  continued  at  an  anchor  two  days,  until  he  had 
fitted  a  fireship  to  send  into  the  road ;  but  they  pre- 
vented that  design,  for,  all  things  being  made  ready 
to  sheer  aboard  with  them,  they,  suspecting  it  was 
to  board  them,  landing  their  best  goods,  set  fire  to 
their  ships,  and  escaped  to  land  by  the  light  there- 
of. Which  done,  we  fairly  saluted  the  castle,  and 
so  set  to  sea  before  day,  having  a  fresh  gale  of  wind, 
to  prevent  them  from  knowing  what  course  we 
steered ;  and,  as  before,  having  a  handsome  berth 
of  the  land,  we  stood  along  the  Coast  of  Moutril, 
where  we  arrived  the  next  day,  and  found  three 
English  ships ;  but,  being  to  leeward  of  them,  and 
night  drawing  on,  we  had  no  time  to  stand  off  to 
sea  to  gain  the  wind  of  them,  but  began  to  fire  at 
them  to  hinder  their  hailing  ashore.  Yet,  by  the 
assistance  of  the  country,  who  came  in  an  instant 
with  all  the  force  they  could  make,  they  warped 
aground,  under  protection  of  their  shot,  and  some 
small  guns  which  they  had  landed.  His  Highness 
perceiving  the  fort  to  be  in  trenches,  so  that  he 
could  not  beat  them  off,  manned  a  caravel  under  the 
command  of  Captain  Billingsley,  and  sent  her 
aboard  the  weathermost  ship,  and  the  fire-ship 
aboard  the  middlemost.  The  caravel  having  entered 
her  men,  and  finding  the  ship  half  sunk,  and  not  to 
be  brought  off,  set  fire  on  all  three.  Having  no 
more  roads  on  that  coast,  we  plied  off  and  on  be- 
twixt Cape  de  Gatte  and  Cape  Palos,  where  we 
met  with  the  Second  Charles  and  his  prize,  which 


1650.]       PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.          317 

she  had  taken  in  Tetuan  Roads  after  two  days'  fight. 
Being  both  very  leaky,  his  Highness  sent  them 
under  Cape  de  Gatte  to  stop  their  leak,  with  order 
to  come  to  the  rendezvous  at  Formentera.  In  the 
meantime  we  plied  off  on  Cape  Palos,  where 
[November  5th,  1650],  by  a  storm,  the  Admiral  and 
Vice-Ad miral  being  separated  from  the  rest  of  the 
fleet,  standing  in  for  land,  met  with  the  Marmaduke 
of  London,  bound  from  Archangel,  in  Russia,  for 
Leghorn;  who,  refusing  our  summons,  tacked,  and 
stood  towards  Barbary  shore.  We  gave  her  chase, 
and  at  eight  of  the  clock  the  Vice-Admiral  came 
up  with  her,  and  gave  her  a  broadside ;  but,  by 
reason  that  it  was  night,  and  a  stiff  gale  of  wind, 
durst  not  lay  her  aboard.  Next  day  being  stark 
calm,  we  began  with  her  by  break  of  day,  and  con- 
tinued until  eleven  at  noon ;  her  captain  being  kill- 
ed, and  her  mainmast  shot  by  the  board,  the  men 
called  for  quarter,  and  gave  her  up.  As  soon  as  we 
had  possession  we  made  Cape  Tunis  at  twelve  leagues' 
distance,  and,  having  manned  her,  stood  towards 
our  rendezvous,  to  meet  with  the  rest  of  our  fleet ; 
but  they,  contrary  to  order,  in  hopes  of  booty,  stood 
in  for  Cape  de  Gatte,  where  they  met  the  Parlia- 
ment fleet,  and  were  driven  in  the  harbour  of  Car- 
thagena,  hoping  to  fi-nd  protection  there ;  but,  con- 
trary to  the  law  of  nations,  the  Spaniard  suffered 
the  enemy's  fleet  to  take  their  advantage  in  the 
harbour.  Our  officers  being  not  able  to  defend 
themselves,  instructing  their  men,  run  their  ships 


318          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      LNOV- 

ashore,  making  them  unserviceable  ;  another  having 
landed  his  ammunition,  set  fire  on  his  ship,  so  as 
they  were  no  ways  profitable  to  the  enemy ;  only 
the  Henry  was  delivered,  by  treachery  of  the  com- 
mon men,  before  they  came  into  harbour,  having 
mastered  the  captain  [Burleigh,  of  the  Isle  of 
Wight],  and  the  officers.  His  Highness  not  finding 
them  at  the  rendezvous  appointed,  and,  ignorant  of. 
the  disaster  which  had  befallen  them,  left  a  packet 
of  letters  on  shore,  under  a  stone,  with  a  white  flag 
over  it,  to  give  them  advice  whither  we  were  gone ; 
the  place  being  uninhabited,  and  no  other  means  to 
give  them  notice.  We  directed  our  course  for  Tou- 
lon ;  but,  being  thwart  the  Gulf  of  Lyons  by  extre- 
mity of  weather  and  a  grown  sea,  the  admiral  was 
forced  to  bear  up,  and  so,  driven  to  leeward  of,  bear 
up  for  Sicily ;  the  greatness  of  the  sea  hindered  the 
rest  from  seeing  light,  by  which  means  we  were 
separated.  Prince  Maurice,  not  knowing  what  was 
become  of  his  brother,  and  fearing  the  worst,  stood 
in  for  his  intended  port  [Toulon],  where  he  arrived 
safely  with  his  prize." 

"THE    PROCEEDINGS    AT   TOULON. 

"  Being  within  the  great  road  of  Toulon,  the 
admiral  ship  of  France,  called  the  Queen,  under  the 
command  of.  Chevalier  Paul,  was  there  at  anchor, 
in  regard  the  town  stood  for  the  Count  Falaise, 
who  at  that  time  took  the  Prince  of  Condi's  part ; 
but  not  long  after,  in  obedience  to  the  French 


1650.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      319 

King's  command,  went  to  Court,  and  made  his  peace. 
Prince  Maurice  was  advertised  by  Chevalier  Paul  of 
those  disorders  that  were  in  those  parts,  withal  ad- 
vising him  to  be  very  cautious  of  his  person.  These 
differences  made  his  Highness  much  to  suspect  the 
safety  of  his  ships  in  that  place,  not  knowing  what 
either  party  might  do  for  its  particular  advantage ; 
yet,  being  kindly  welcomed  by  the  pavilion  of 
France,  and  forts  of  the  town,  it  removed  some  part 
of  this  suspicion ;  likewise  receiving  kind  messages 
from  both,  each  striving  to  outdo  the  other  in 
civility,  made  him  hope  to  accomplish  his  desires 
without  difficulty.  His  Highness  received  divers 
visits  from  the  magistrates  of  the  town,  and  from 
the  officers  both  of  the  forts  and  navy,  each  offering 
him  their  service  and  assistance  in  anything  that 
lay  in  their  power.  His  Highness  made  use  of  their 
offers,  and  procured  leave  to  buy  a  mast  for  his  prize 
out  of  the  King's  stores.  This  outward  courtesy 
persuaded  his  Highness  to  accept  the  reality  of  their 
promise  ;  but,  not  long  after,  the  heat  of  their  com- 
pliment being  over,  the  surveyor  of  the  stores  stop- 
ped the  mast  ashore,  under  pretence  that  the  King's 
ships  wanted  masts,  and  that  he  durst  not  send  it 
aboard  without  the  Admiral's  leave.  This  was  a 
plot  of  the  town  merchants,  thinking  thereby  to 
force  his  Highness  to  sell  the  prize  at  an  underrate 
in  that  port,  rather  than  to  hazard  it  in  another ; 
but  this  took  no  effect,  for,  having  no  lawful  pre- 
tence to  hinder  the  adjudication  of  it,  such  mer- 


320    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

chandize  being  much  required  in  those  parts,  and 
knowing  there  was  no  more  to  be  expected  that 
year,  the  merchants  having  time  to  repair  to  us 
from  all  places,  strove  to  outbuy  one  another,  so 
that  retarding  our  sail  benefited  our  market. 

"  The  magistrates  of  the  town  solicited  his  High- 
ness daily  to  come  ashore ;  who,  as  yet,  through 
grief  for  that  sad  separation  from  his  brother,  had 
not  gone  forth  of  his  ship,  yet,  by  persuasion  of 
Chevalier  Paul  (the  difference  betwixt  the  King  and 
the  town  being  compromised),  promised  to  go  ashore, 
hoping  by  his  presence  to  procure  what  by  his  mes- 
sages he  could  not.  The  day  appointed  for  his  land- 
ing being  come,  and  all  things  in  readiness  for  his 
reception,  it  pleased  Heaven  to  remove  all  obstacles 
of  sorrow  by  the  happy  tidings  of  his  brother's  safe- 
ty, who  came  that  day  to  an  anchor  in  the  same  road, 
and  went  to  shore  together,  to  celebrate  that  happy 
rencontre.  I  need  not  express  the  joy  of  their  em- 
braces after  so  long  and  tedious  absence,  with  the 
uncertainty  of  cither's  safety,  wanting  expressions  to 
decipher  the  affectionate  passion  of  two  such  bro- 
thers, who,  after  so  long  time  of  hardship  endured 
through  the  malice  of  enemies,  the  raging  of  wind 
and  seas,  now  found  themselves  locked  in  each 
other's  arms  in  a  place  of  safety. 

"  They  were  received  at  landing  by  Chevalier  Paul 
and  the  Lieutenant-General  of  the  Galleys,  with  all 
the  officers  both  of  town  and  navy,  who  accom- 
panied them  to  the  town-house,  where,  all  the  way 


1650.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       321 

as  they  went,  they  were  saluted  by  the  galleys  and 
fleet,  and  being  over  against  the  town-house,  the 
artillery  round  the  town  did  the  same.  The  consuls 
received  them  at  the  door  with  much  ceremony; 
both  magistrates  and  people  expressing  their  wel- 
come with  great  exclamations  of  joy.  The  cere- 
monies being  ended  in  behalf  of  the  town,  they 
were  conducted  to  Chevalier  Paul's  house,  where 
they  were  magnificently  treated.  At  their  return 
the  galleys  and  ships  discharged  as  before ;  the 
whole  communality  solemnizing  that  day  in  public 
assemblies,  where  they  daily  received  visits  from  the 
gentry  both  of  town  and  country ;  who  with  great 
civility  assured  them  of  their  service. 

"  The  sale  of  our  prizes  being  now  concluded  unto 
the  Leghorn  merchants,  we  began  to  deliver  our 
goods ;  which  spent  us  much  time,  by  reason  of  some 
difficulties  which  the  merchants  made  concerning 
the  payment  of  the  monies,  whether  they  should 
immediately  pay  the  whole  sum  before  the  delivery 
or  after  possession  had  of  part  of  the  goods.  It  was 
concluded,  for  security  of  both  parties,  that  the  bar- 
gain should  be  inviolably  kept  on  each  side ;  first? 
that  they  should  deposit  a  considerable  sum  in  his 
Highnesses  hands,  which  should  not  be  counted  until 
the  last  payment,  which  might,  in  case  of  revoca- 
tion, make  good  the  penalty,  and  as  they  received 
the  goods  to  pay  the  monies ;  which  was  according- 
ly performed,  to  the  content  of  both.  During  this 
time,  his  Highness  dispatched  a  gentleman  to  the 

VOL.  III.  Y 


322         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

Duke  of  Vendome,  then  Admiral,  to  procure  his 
licence  to  furnish  our  fleet  with  such  stores  as  were 
necessary  for  their  repair ;  which  he  very  willingly 
permitted.  The  messenger  being  returned,  and  our 
prize  delivered,  we  began  to  careen  our  ships,  and 
fit  the  prize  for  a  man-of-war.  While  we  were  thus 
fitting  for  a  summer  voyage,  the  captain  [Burleigh] 
of  the  Henry,  who  was  delivered  up  by  his  men, 
having  obtained  his  parole,  came  to  Toulon,  and 
brought  us  the  sad  tidings  of  our  lost  fleet,  which 
was  until  then  unknown  to  us.  Soon  after  came 
the  rest  of  the  captains  that  lost  their  ships  at  Car- 
thagena,  and,  by  endeavouring  to  excuse  themselves, 
impeached  each  other;  so  that,  without  examina- 
tion, the  truth  came  out  by  their  exclamations. 
Most  of  them  laid  the  fault  on  Captain  Allen  Eld- 
ing, who  had  been  put  in  the  Charles  prize :  he 
having  promised  the  captain  of  the  Second  Charles 
to  second  him  in  the  rescue  of  one  of  our  frigates, 
that  was  then  engaged,  broke  his  word ;  for,  the 
Charles  bore  up,  expecting  the  other  would  do  the 
same,  but  he,  more  careful  of  his  booty  than  his 
honour,  clapped  by  a  wind,  and  stood  in  close-hauled 
[away  for  the  harbour  of  Carthagena]  for  the  har- 
bour; which  probably  was  the  cause  of  their  loss. 
The  men  of  the  frigate  seeing  their  prize  stand  in, 
forced  their  captain  to  do  the  like,  which  pleaded 
for  him  not  guilty;  as  indeed  all  his  actions  had 
spoken  him  a  person  of  faith  and  courage.  His 
Highness,  being  within  another  Prince's  port,  would 


1650.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      323 

not  use  the  extremity  of  a  court-martial,  although 
the  crime  carried  its  sentence  with  it.     The  captain 
of  the  Henry  was  accused  by  the  rest  to  have  insinu- 
ated himself  into  Blake's  [the  Parliament's  General 
at  sea]  favour  by  giving  him  intelligence  of  our  ren- 
dezvous.    He  pleaded  that,  being  surprised  and  con- 
lined   by  his   men,  his   instructions   being  in    the 
cabinet  with  the  rest  of  his  papers,  they  were  taken 
and  made  use  of;  so  that  if  they  knew  our  rendez- 
vous it  was  no  fault  of  his.     This  accusation  was 
highly  urged  by  all   the   officers,  most  of  [them] 
agreeing  in  one  thing ;  yet  nothing  could  be  proved 
positively  against  him,  saving  his  too  much  fami- 
liarity with  the    enemy's  General,  which  gave  his 
Highness  just  cause  to  suspect  him,  and  credit  the 
accusation ;  yet,  by  reason  his  accusers  stood  like- 
wise charged,  and  their  proofs  not  very  clear,  but 
rather    savouring    of    malice,    his    Highness   only 
banished  him  from  the  fleet,  judging  him  incapable 
of  ever   being  employed  in  his  Majesty's  service. 
The  captain  of  the  Charles  brought  in  great  proof 
against  the  captain   of  the   prize,    which   certainly 
would  have  condemned  him  to  death ;  but,  the  day 
before  that  of  his  appointed  trial,  by  connivance  of 
some  friends  in  the  fleet,  he  made  his  escape,  by 
which  he  cleared  the  rest,  the  whole  blame  resting 
on  him,  and  they  accused  of  no  considerable  matter ; 
yet,  for  formality,  they  were  called  to  a  council  of 
war,  and  reproved  for  not  following  their  orders. 
This  being  past,  his  Highness,  seeing  himself  re- 

Y    2 


324    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

duced  to  three  sail,  strained  the  utmost  of  his  trea- 
sure, and  bought  another,  which  was  named  the 
Honest  Seaman ;  and,  being  but  weak  in  ships,  en- 
deavoured to  be  strong  in  men.  Before  his  levy 
was  perfected,  an  English  gentleman,  called  Captain 
Craven,  who  had  a  ship  at  Marseilles,  took  com- 
mission under  his  Highness,  and  joined  with  the 
fleet,  which  being  at  anchor  with  the  rest  of  his 
fleet,  was  named  the  Loyal  Subject.  Thus,  with  a 
squadron  of  five  ships,  conceiving  all  disasters  past, 
he  fixed  his  resolution  to  take  revenge  on  the 
Spaniard.  To  which  purpose,  the  fleet  being  in 
readiness,  his  Highness,  to  amuse  his  enemies,  dis- 
persed a  report  that  he  was  bound  for  the  Archipe- 
lago ;  inquiring  of  such  as  he  suspected  for  enemies 
the  best  advice  for  that  purpose,  whereby  to  oblige 
the  adverse  fleet  to  seek  after  him,  and  leave  the 
Straits  open ;  which  took  so  good  effect,  as  most  of 
them  remained  about  Cape  Corsica,  and  the  rest 
went  into  a  harbour  to  fit  for  a  summer  voyage. 

"THE   VOYAGE   OUT   OF  THE   STRAITS. 

"  His  Highness  being  ready,  set  sail  for  the  coast 
of  Barbary,  and  having  made  land,  stood  along  the 
shore  for  the  Strait's  mouth ;  where,  being  disem- 
bogued, we  took  a  Genoa  ship  of  good  force,  bound 
for  St.  Lucar,  although  intended  for  Lisbon,  her 
double  bills  of  lading  being  found ;  she  was  made 
prize  by  way  of  reprisal,  in  lieu  of  a  caravel  of  ours, 


1051.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     325 

taken  by  the  Genoese  in  the  Straits,  and  partly 
through  the  clamour  of  the  seamen,  who,  in  a  tumul- 
tuous manner  petitioned  her  confiscation,  being  bound 
for  a  Spanish  port ;  we  then  stood  along  the  coast  of 
Andalusia  to  Cadiz  and  St.  Lucar,  where  we  spent 
some  time  before  those  harbours,  in  expectation  of 
ships,  but  took  none,  until  sailing  towards  Cape  St. 
Mary,  we  met  with  a  Spanish  galeon  bound  from 
the  Indies  to  Cadiz,  which  we  surprised  by  putting 
out  the  Parliament  flag,  as  their  confederate. 

"  The  officers,  conceiving  us  their  friends,  came 
aboard,  who  might  else  have  run  their  vessel  ashore, 
being  betwixt  us  and  the  land,  arid  sailing  better 
than  we.  Having  landed  the  Spaniards,  and  manned 
the  ship,  we  stood  for  the  Island  of  Madeira,  under 
command  of  the  Portugal,  where  we  sold  part  of  our 
goods ;  the  rest  we  took  into  our  ships,  and  left  the 
galeon  there,  as  being  unserviceable.     The  Princes 
were  received  with  much  kindness,  and  assisted  with 
anything  the  island  afforded  for  refreshment.     The 
Governor  and  the  officers  of  the  island  waited  on 
them  aboard,  assuring  them  of  their  service,  which 
in  every  respect  they  performed  to  our  great  advan- 
tage.   His  Highness,  as   well  to   encourage  as  to 
gratify  the  Governor's  civility,  gave  him  a  visit  in 
the   fort,   where  he  entertained  them  with   great 
respect,  and  having  accompanied  them  to  the  sight 
of  what  was  worthy  seeing  on  the  island,  returned 
with  them  to  the  sea-side,  where  at  setting  off  he 
saluted  us  with  all  the   artillery  of   the  fort  and 


326         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

town.     But  while  we  enjoyed  these  welcome  free- 
doms and  correspondences  with  strangers,  the  seeds 
of  malice  and  discord  were  sowing  among  ourselves, 
for  some,  by  insinuating  themselves  too  far  in  his 
Highnesses  affairs,  discovered  his  intention  for  the 
West  Indies : — the  design  his  Highness  undertook 
as  being  the  only  means  for  our  security,  and  the 
probable  way  to  advance  our  fortunes,  many  of  those 
parts  having  (in  hope  of  our  assistance)  declared 
themselves    for    our   interest,    which    undoubtedly 
would  have  been  the  cause  of  strengthening  our- 
selves, relieving  them,  and  made  a  change  in  the 
condition  of  our  affairs — making  our  enemies  wait 
our  motion  at  a  vast  expense,  whilst  we  securely 
might  have  made  ourselves  masters  of  the  seas.  But 
this  agreed  not  with  their  dispositions,  whose  private 
interest  drew  their  inclinations  northward,  to  which 
effect  they  endeavoured  to  raise  factions  in  the  fleet, 
whereby  to  make  void  and  ruin  that  design,  to  bring 
their  own  to  pass.     His  Highness,  in  pursuance  of 
his  former  resolves,  having  refreshed  our  men  and 
taken   in    provisions,  stood  away   for   the    Canary 
Islands,  where  he  spent  much  time  in  visiting  the 
Roads,  but  finding  no  ships,  and  judging  if  that  we 
might  take  any,  it  would  not  countervail  the  expense 
of  time  and  provisions,  called  a  Council-of-war  to 
communicate   his   intentions   unto    them    of  going 
more  southwards,  thereby  to  demonstrate  his  will, 
that  all  actions  might  be  managed  by  general  con- 
sent, lest  some  pertinacious  minds  should  deprave 


1651.]      PRINCE  RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      327 

his  worth  by  imputing  all  casualties  to  his  impro- 
vidence. This  precaution  was  advised,  yet  succeeded 
ill,  for  they  being  forewarned  of  his  intents,  resolved 
to  undo  his  design  by  all  the  means  they  could.  It 
being  proposed  in  council  to  sail  to  the  Cape  de 
Verde  Islands,  to  new  victual,  secure  from  storms  or 
enemies,  it  was  carried  by  the  negative,  alleging 
many  frivolous  arguments  to  the  contrary;  the  major 
part  siding  with  it  in  regard  few  of  them  knew  the 
place,  or  had  been  so  far  southward ;  and  some 
made  it  their  business  to  engage  some  officers 
by  fair  promises  to  balk  the  design,  although  they 
formerly  approved  it.  His  Highness  not  being  ad- 
vertised of  this  combination,  was  surprised  to  find 
such  a  sudden  change  in  the  resolution  of  his  Coun- 
cil, and  fearing  the  effects  that  this  averseness  might 
produce  in  the  giddy  multitude,  consented  to  their 
vote,  which  was  declared  for  the  Isles  of  Azores, 
concluding  that  to  be  the  fittest  place  to  victual  in : 
giving  out  likewise  that  there  we  might  meet  with 
the  English  East  India  fleet.  But  they  neither 
considered  the  extremity  of  the  weather  subject  to 
those  places,  nor  the  time  we  were  to  consume  in 
victualling,  we  were  of  necessity  to  receive  it 
as  a  courtesy  from  others,  and  not  well  assured  of 
obtaining  it,  though  with  the  greatest  difficulties. 
Yet  to  avoid  the  censure  of  self-will  and  rashness, 
he  stood  for  those  Islands,  although  he  foresaw  part 
of  his  ensuing  disasters.  In  our  voyage  thither,  by 
stress  of  weather,  we  lost  company  of  the  Honest 


328    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

Seaman,  who  missing  us,  stood  for  the  appointed 
rendezvous  ;  but  our  separation  was  not  long.  The 
first  land  we  fell  in  with  was  the  Island  of  St. 
Mary ;  the  weather  being  slacked,  from  thence  we 
stood  for  St.  Michael's,  where  we  began  to  take 
order  for  our  victuals. 


"  THE   PROCEEDINGS   IN   THE   WESTERN   ISLANDS. 

"  As  soon  as  we  were  at  anchor  in  the  Porto  del 
Gado  Road,  in  the  Island  of  St.  Michael's,  having 
saluted  their  fort,  they  returned  us  thanks,  and  the 
Governor  sent  some  officers  to  welcome  his  High- 
ness, who  brought  with  them  a  present  of  refreshings 
according  to  the  custom  of  the  country,  and  to  assure 
us  of  all  the  assistance  the  island  could  afford; 
his  Highness  returned  him  thanks,  and  at  their 
departure  gave  them  guns.  The  next  day  his  High- 
ness sent  one  of  his  gentlemen  to  give  him  thanks, 
and  to  present  him  a  considerable  quantity  of  such 
goods  as  our  prizes  could  afford,  which  was  kindly 
received,  that  gentleman  being  reconducted  to  his 
boat  by  the  officers  of  the  island,  and  at  his 
putting  off,  was  saluted  from  the  fort.  His  High- 
ness having  spent  some  time  in  that  road  to 
take  order  about  victuals,  the  Governor  came  in 
person  aboard  to  visit  him,  and  with  expressions 
of  great  kindness  invited  the  Princes  to  come 
ashore,  assuring  them  that  himself  and  the  whole 
island  should  receive  it  as  a  great  honour :  at  his 


1651.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE  CAVALIERS.      329 

departure,  the  Prince  gave  him  nineteen  guns,  and 
the  fleet  proportionally,  as  he  passed  by.  As  soon 
as  he  landed,  we  were  returned  thanks  by  all  the 
guns  of  the  fort.  His  Highness,  being  desirous  to 
preserve  so  considerable  a  friend,  went  on  shore  to 
visit  the  Governor,  who  gave  him  a  gallant  reception 
with  all  the  soldiery,  and  having  waited  on  him  to 
all  the  monasteries  and  places  of  note,  desired  his 
Highness  to  use  his  freedom  there,  by  taking  what 
recreations  he  pleased  and  the  island  afforded ;  the 
night  approaching,  his  Highness  returning  to  go 
aboard,  was  accompanied  by  the  Governor  and  all  the 
persons  of  quality,  both  civil  and  military,  to  the  sea 
side,  when,  at  his  setting  off,  the  great  artillery  both 
of  town  and  fort  saluted  him,  and  all  along  the  shore 
volleys  of  small  shot.  Being  thus  assured  of  the 
Governor's  friendship  and  assistance,  he  left  such  per- 
sons ashore  as  were  necessary  for  his  victualling,  and 
stood  away  for  Terceira,  where  we  met  the  Honest 
Seaman.  As  soon  as  we  were  freed  of  the  land  of  St. 
Michael's,  we  descried  a  Spanish  galeon  about  three 
leagues7  distance  from  us ;  the  sea  being  calm,  we  put 
forth  our  galleries  and  towed  our  ships  towards  her; 
at  length  by  force  of  hands  we  fetched  her  up,  who 
at  first  summons  surrendered.  She  was  bound  from 
the  West  Indies  to  St.  Lucar  iti  company  with  the 
former  which  we  took,  but  by  extremity  of  wea- 
ther in  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  was  separated,  and 
losing  her  mast  was  forced  into  Porto  Rico ;  being 
now  in  the  Road  of  Angra  in  the  Island  of  Terceira. 


330         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

His  Highness  received  a  compliment  from  the  Go- 
vernor, by  which  he  offered  him  the  assistance  of 
the  island,  but  standing  on  his  gravity,  or  which  is 
more  likely,  being  of  the  Conde  de  Miro's  faction, 
came  not  aboard  himself  to  pay  that  respect  which 
was  due  to  so  great  a  person.  Nevertheless,  his 
Highness  made  use  of  his  proffer,  and  treated  with 
some  English  merchants  about  victualling  his  fleet, 
both  with  wine  and  flesh ;  which  being  agreed  upon, 
his  Highness  stood  again  for  St.  Michael's.  Being 
athwart  the  opening  of  the  island,  we  met  with  such 
foul  weather  as  we  could  hardly  bear  our  course, 
yet,  fearing  the  land,  we  strained  hard  to  keep  the 
seaboard.  In  this  unfortunate  gust,  the  Admiral 
sprung  a  leak,  that  they  could  hardly  keep  her  clear 
with  one  chain-pump.  The  next  day,  the  wind 
slacking,  we  stood  into  St.  Michael's  Road :  as  soon 
as  we  were  at  anchor  we  strove  by  stitching  of  bon- 
nets to  stop  the  leak,  but  could  not,  by  reason  we 
knew  not  certainly  where  it  was.  The  Governor 
sent  a  diver  aboard  his  Highness  to  search  for  it, 
but  to  no  purpose,  for  there  being  no  harbours,  we 
could  not  unload  our  ship,  nor  trench  the  bales  so 
low  as  to  find  it  out.  His  Highness  stood  for  Ter- 
ceira  to  hasten  his  business  there,  that  being  the 
greatest  part  of  his  victual  which  he  was  to  expect ; 
resolving  once  more  to  propose  the  southern  voyage 
to  his  Council,  hoping  they  would  consider  the 
necessity  of  the  fleet  as  well  as  their  own  interests, 
and  tracing  the  divisions  to  the  very  centre  whence 


1651.]       PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.      331 

they  derived,  endeavoured  to  smother  them.  But 
they  whose  souls  were  seized  with  a  fatal  cancer, 
suffered  their  undigested  venom  to  overflow  like  a 
raging  billow,  to  the  destruction  of  us  all.  So  high 
was  their  insolence,  that  they  infested  his  very  do- 
mestics, and  so  public  their  improvidence,  that  they 
concealed  not  their  intentions  in  their  cups,  making 
private  meetings  in  their  cabins,  where  they  con- 
ceived it  convenient  to  engage  any  man  to  their 
faction,  until  his  Highness,  full  freighted  with  such 
contempt  of  their  audacious  proceedings  and  actions, 
commanded  some  of  their  cabins  to  be  pulled  down, 
with  further  order  to  the  captain  of  his  guards  not 
to  suffer  any  meetings  after  setting  the  watch,  nor 
candle  to  be  lighted  betwixt  decks,  but  in  such 
places  as  were  appointed  for  the  ship's  use.  So  great 
and  violent  was  their  distemper  that  he  feared  the 
private  communication  of  his  men ;  our  provisions 
not  yet  being  made,  we  were  forced  out  of  the  har- 
bour by  stormy  weather,  being  clear  of  the  land,  we 
lay  a  try  under  our  main  course,  hoping  that  the 
weather  slacking,  we  might  stand  into  the  Road  to 
ship  our  provisions ;  but  the  wind  increasing,  and 
our  ships  labouring  in  a  ground  sea,  the  Admiral's 
leak  increased  so  much  that  both  the  pumps  could 
hardly  keep  her  free,  which  forced  them  to  bear  up 
before  the  wind,  hoping  thereby  to  ease  the  ship, 
but  the  leak  being  far  under  the  holdings,  strained 
the  more. 

"  The  Vice-Admiral  and  the  Honest  Seaman  bore 


332          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

up  with  them,  and  kept  as  close  as  the  water  would 
permit,  the  Spanish  prize  being  far  in  our  weather- 
quarter  ;  the  Revenge,  having  more  care  of  her  than 
the  Admiral,  kept  her  wind.  While  we  thus  stood 
before  it,  we  gave  her  over,  and  took  in  our  main- 
sail, as  before.  Whilst  we  thus  laboured  with  dis- 
turbed winds,  as  well  as  distempered  seas,  heaven 
frowning  on  our  disorders,  suffered  us  to  fall  into 
that  fatality  which  we  strove  to  prevent.  Men  may 
propose,  but  God  will  dispose;  for,  the  Admiral's 
pinnace,  being  too  large  to  be  hoisted  in,  was  moor- 
ed astern  with  two  halsers,  and  was  forced  from  the 
ship  by  rage  of  the  weather.  The  Vice- Admiral 
being  likewise  surprised  by  the  storm,  and  endea- 
vouring to  hoist  in  her  boat,  sunk  it  by  the  ship's 
side.  These  were  sad  presages ;  for,  three  days 
after,  the  wind  being  rather  enraged  than  abated, 
the  ship  straining  hard,  started  a  butt-head,  which 
added  so  much  water  as  no  pumping  could  keep  her 
free.  They  continued  firing  off  guns,  to  give  the 
other  ships  notice  to  keep  near  them.  This  disaster 
befel  them  about  six  in  the  morning,  keeping  that 
rate  until  about  ten.  By  force  of  hands  they  gain- 
ed upon  the  leak ;  and,  endeavouring  to  stop  it 
within  board,  thrust  down  one  hundred  and  twenty 
pieces  of  raw  beef  into  it,  and  stanchioned  them 
down.  This  gave  them  some  hopes  of  life ;  but  it 
lasted  not  long,  for  the  ship  setting  hard,  drove  in 
the  stanchion,  and  sprang  the  plank ;  so  that  now, 
being  past  hopes  of  recovery,  they  made  a  waft  with 


1651.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.        333 

the  standard  at  the  flagstaff-head,  to  let  us  know 
their  condition,  and  began  to  heave  their  guns  over- 
board, to  lighten  their  ship,  but  all  in  vain,  for  the 
water  gained  so  fast  upon  them  that  they  could  not 
stand  in  the  hold  to  bale,  the  casks  rolling  to  and 
fro,  beat  them  from  their  work.  Notwithstanding 
all  this  they  strove,  with  cheerful  resolution,  to  the 
last,  without  hope ;  for,  the  wind  was  so  high,  and 
the  sea  so  overgrown,  that  no  ship  dare  to  approach 
near  for  our  assistance,  lest  they  should  perish  to- 
gether. From  the  Admiral's  deck  they  waved1  the 
ships  so  confusedly  that  they  knew  not  what  to  do. 
The  Admiral's  mainmast  being  cut  by  the  board, 
the  Honest  Seaman  ran  aboard  on  the  weather- 
bow,  expecting  some  of  them  would  save  them- 
selves upon  it,  that  he  might  be  ready  to  take  them 
up ;  but,  their  resolutions  being  to  die  together,  not 
one  endeavoured  to  escape.  His  Highness  waved 
his  brother,  Prince  Maurice,  under  his  stern,  de- 
siring to  commit  such  things  to  his  knowledge  as 
was  fitting  to  declare  before  his  death,  resolving  to 
perish  among  his  men.  Prince  Maurice  bearing 

1  i.e.  "Signaled."  This  was  on  the  30th  September,  1651, 
as  appears  from  Captain  Fearnes'  report.  He  commanded  the 
Admiral,  and  accepted  of  safety,  whilst  his  heroic  comrades 
refused  to  leave  their  friends.  I  must  not  omit  the  following 
passage  from  his  relation  touching  this  brave  story  : — "  We  re- 
solved, however,  that  the  ship  to  be  our  grave,  and  every  man 
very  well  resolved  to  die  ;  and  the  minister  told  us  that  as  many 
as  would  receive  the  sacrament  he  would  administer  it,  and 
desired  that  we  would  give  him  notice  that  when  we  saw  that 
we  were  past  all  hopes,  to  come  to  the  place  appointed,  there  to 
receive  it  and  die  together." 


334         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

under  his  stern,  and  being  sadly  sensible  of  his  bro- 
ther's ruin,  was  not  apprehensive  of  his  own,  but 
commanded  his  master  to  lay  him  aboard,  resolving 
to  save  his  brother,  or  perish  with  him ;  but  the 
officers,  in  mutinous  words,  refused  to  obey  him  in 
such  a  case,  and  not  without  reason,  declaring  to 
him  the  certainty  of  their  own  destruction,  without 
any  hopes  of  assisting  his  brother.  The  Princes 
endeavoured  to  speak  one  to  another;  but  the 
hideous  noise  of  the  winds  and  seas  overnoised  their 
voices.  Prince  Maurice,  seeing  himself  deprived 
of  his  interest,  persuaded  his  officers  to  fit  a  small 
boat  which  he  had  aboard  to  procure  his  brother's 
safety ;  which  they  seemed  to  do,  but '  were  long 
about  it.  During  which  the  Admiral's  men,  per- 
ceiving his  Prince's  resolution  to  perish  with  them, 
were  not  only  content  to  die,  but  to  do  some  brave 
act  that  might  eternize  their  fame,  by  outdoing  all 
that  ever  was  done  in  the  like  exigent;  and,  like 
souls  of  a  new  stamp,  preferring  the  General's  safety 
before  so  many  lives  of  their's,  having  a  small  boat 
left,  beseech ed  his  Highness  to  secure  them,  by 
preserving,  if  possible,  himself.  But  he,  unwilling 
not  to  share  in  so  eminent  a  death,  and  scorning  to 
be  outdone  by  inferiors,  thanked  them  for  their  care, 
yet  refused  their  offer,  although  his  fate  were  cloth- 
ed in  a  more  horrid  shape ;  assuring  them,  as  they 
had  run  all  fortunes  with  him,  so  in  this  last  he 
would  participate  with  them.  Thus  did  either  strive 
to  breathe  their  last  in  unspeakable  magnanimity. 


1651.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.         335 

His  men,  seeing  supplications  would  not  prevail, 
having  selected  a  crew  of  undaunted  lads,  hoisted 
out  their  boat,  and  by  force  put  him  into  it,  desiring 
him  at  parting  to  remember  they  died  his  true  ser- 
vants. Being  from  the  side,  they  rowed  aboard  the 
Honest  Seaman,  which  was  the  nearest  ship.  His 
Highness  being  aboard,  sent  back  the  skiff  to  save 
as  many  as  they  could,  only  nominating  Monsieur 
Mortaigne,  Captain  Fearnes,  and  Captain  Billings- 
ley.  Fearnes  accepted  the  offer,  and  was  saved 
aboard  the  Vice-Admiral,  with  Mr.  Galloway,  his 
Highnesses  servant.  No  sooner  were  they  put  aboard 
but  the  skiff  sunk  by  the  ship's  side.  The  other 
two,  choosing  rather  to  die  among  their  soldiers  than 
save  themselves.  This  fatal  divorce  from  faithful 
friends  and  servants  touched  his  Highness  very  pas- 
sionately, who,  endeavouring  their  safety,  although 
with  hazard  of  his  own,  commanded  the  men  at  the 
helm  to  edge  towards  the  Blake,  hoping  thereby  to 
enter  their  men  on  his  bowsprit.1  But  she  was  so 
full  of  water  that  she  could  not  stir  a-head ;  so  that, 
being  past  all  hopes  of  having  means  to  escape 
death,  they  prepared  themselves  for  it.  Taking  a 
sad  farewell  of  their  friends,  by  making  sorrowful 
signs  one  to  another  ;  yet  all  this  could  not  move  the 
Vice-Admiral's  men  to  so  much  charity  to  hoist  out 

1  His  Highness  having  promised  the  men  to  do  his  utmost  to 
save  them,  made  them  steer  directly  for  the  Admiral,  which  had 
then  one  small  sail  left,  and  coming  near  her  that  sail  blew  out  of 
the  bolt-ropes,  so  that  the  Honest  Seaman,  having  all  her  standing 
rigging  made  more  lee  way,  and  so  could  not  fetch  her. 


336          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

their  boat  to  save  any  of  the  rest ;  which  savoured 
more  of  malice  than  excusable  judgment,  although 
they  pretended  several  excuses.  Thus  these  dis- 
tressed persons  kept  the  ship  above  water  until  nine 
at  night,  and  then,  burning  two  fire-pikes,  to  give 
us  notice  of  their  departure,  took  leave  of  the  world, 
being  at  that  instant  one  hundred  leagues  south  and 
by  east  from  the  island  of  Terceira.  In  this  wreck 
perished  333  men,  whose  actions  speak  their  merit. 
The  severest  censurers  will  confess  it  a  hard  matter 
to  set  a  full  value  upon  so  generous  a  crew.  The 
wealth  in  her  was  very  considerable,  yet  made  little 
impression  in  his  Highness  to  the  loss  of  the  men. 
The  next  day,  the  wind  beginning  to  slack,  Prince 
Maurice  fetched  his  brother  from  aboard  the  Honest 
Seaman  unto  the  Swallow,  when,  overladen  with 
the  grief  of  so  inestimable  a  loss,  he  returned  from 
the  Western  Islands.  Concealing  himself  for  a  time 
in  his  brother's  ship,  fearing  if  his  loss  were  known 
it  might  prove  prejudicial  to  his  designs  in  those 
parts;  the  governors  of  those  islands  being  very 
timorous,  considering  merely  by  outward  specula- 
tion things  as  they  appeared,  and  might,  upon  know- 
ledge of  so  great  a  disaster,  have  changed  their 
resolutions.  The  first  land  we  made  was  the  island 
of  Pico,  bearing  N.N.E.  from  us.  We  stood  into 
the  road  of  Fayal,  where  we  met  the  Revenge  and 
the  Spanish  prize.  To  welcome  his  Highness  after 
his  sad  loss,  he  saw  the  ruin  of  another  of  his  ships, 
called  the  Loyal  Subject;  which  by  storm  was 


1052.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        337 

driven  from  her  anchors,  and  cast  upon  a  rock, 
where  she  staved.  Thus  was  his  spirit  alarmed 
with  misfortunes,  and  kept  waking  with  new  trou- 
bles. Having  spent  some  time  in  that  road,  to 
refresh  ourselves,  and  take  in  part  of  our  victual, 
his  Highness  received  intelligence  of  a  Spanish  ga- 
leon,  which  was  driven  to  extremity  of  famine,  was 
at  that  instant  treating  at  the  island  of  Pico  to  sur- 
render themselves  for  victuals,  being  ready  to  starve 
aboard,  having  fed  upon  dried  hides  fourteen  days, 
which,  with  sugar  and  ginger,  was  their  lading  from 
Hispaniola.  Whereupon  we  despatched  two  frigates 
towards  that  road  to  make  demand  of  part  of  her 
lading  for  the  King  of  England,  according  to  the 
custom  of  the  sea,  that  being  an  open  road,  and  no 
ships  there  to  protect  her ;  but  before  our  frigates 
arrived  she  was  delivered  up  to  the  Portuguese ;  yet 
not  being  assured  thereof,  continued  plying  about 
the  road.  The  Portuguese,  fearing  our  ships  might 
attempt  something  upon  their  prize,  sent  to  the 
governor  of  Fayal  to  desire  Prince  Maurice  to  com- 
mand off  his  ships,  Prince  Rupert  being  as  yet  con- 
cealed. The  Prince  sent  one  of  his  gentlemen  with 
the  captain  of  Fayal  Castle  aboard  the  prize,  to 
inform  himself  whether  she  was  delivered  before  the 
appearance  of  our  ships ;  which,  if  it  were,  to 
acquaint  the  captain  that  it  was  his  Highness's 
pleasure  they  should  return  to  the  fleet.  The  gen- 
tleman, following  his  directions,  went  aboard  the 
Spanish  ship,  and  did  according  to  his  orders ;  for, 

VOL.    III.  Z 


338    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

finding  it  to  have  been  delivered  up  before  our  ships 
appeared,  took  the  captain  of  the  castle  along  with 
him  aboard  our  two  frigates,  that  he,  being  present 
at  the  declaring  of  the  Prince's  order,  there  might 
be  no  capricious  mistake.  Our  captains  offered 
him  their  assistance,  which  he  accepted.  Whilst 
we  thus  assured  him  of  our  friendship,  our  ships 
stood  nearer  in  to  lend  them  any  aid  they  could 
require ;  but  to  our  amazement  they  fired  at  us. 
The  captain  of  the  castle  went  aboard  them,  and 
pretended  to  give  notice  of  our  civility ;  but  being 
with  them,  they  continued  firing  at  us  for  an  hour, 
making  what  haste  they  could  to  hail  the  Spanish 
prize  to  shore;  so  that,  by  casting  her  away,  they 
might  covertly  take  the  goods,  and  lay  the  blame 
of  the  wreck  upon  us.  Which  the  captain  of  the 
Honest  Seaman  perceiving,  by  seeing  a  halser  seized 
on  land  for  that  purpose,  fired  at  their  warp,  to  pre- 
vent their  destroying  the  ship,  but  they  continued 
until  they  had  hauled  to  shore.  The  gentleman 
that  was  sent  from  the  Prince,  endeavouring  to 
make  things  clear  betwixt  us,  as  being  sensible  how 
necessary  their  friendship  was,  rowed  towards  them, 
to  know  a  reason  of  their  shooting  at  his  Highness's 
ships ;  who  made  no  other  answer,  but  waving  him 
from  them,  fired  guns  at  him,  one  with  case,  the 
other  with  round  shot.  Yet  he  resolved  to  speak 
with  them,  rowed  ashore ;  where  he  was  apprehend- 
ed by  a  company  of  foot,  and  conveyed  to  their  offi- 
cer, who,  instead  of  reasoning  the  matter,  after 


1652.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        339 

several  affronts  committed  him  to  the  custody  of  the 
fort.  The  captain  of  the  Honest  Seaman,  seeing 
him  not  return,  bore  into  the  road;  but  finding  it 
not  possible  to  relieve  him,  fired  some  guns  at  them, 
and  with  the  Revenge  stood  away  for  Fayal.  In 
their  way,  they  made  a  ship  to  the  offing,  which 
they  followed,  and  being  fair  up  with  her,  gave  her 
their  chase  guns ;  but  she,  standing  towards  the 
island,  put  forth  her  Portugal  flag,  which  gave  us 
occasion  to  desist  from  pursuing.  Yet  this  gave 
occasion  of  cavil  to  the  governor,  who  was  the  rather 
willing  to  justify  his  officer's  actions  by  how  much 
it  concerned  his  profit  to  make  prize  of  what  was 
best  in  the  ship,  and  conceal  it  from  the  King,  his 
master.  Upon  the  embroilment  they  imprisoned 
all  our  officers  which  were  on  land,  employed  about 
the  ship's  victualling;  and  by  night  brought  that 
gentleman  and  put  him  into  Fayal  Castle,  where 
they  intended  to  keep  him  until  they  might 
acquaint  the  King  of  Portugal  what  they  had  done, 
or  pleased  to  do  herein,  having  no  adversary  pre- 
sent, either  to  dispute  or  confute  their  complaints. 
Prince  Rupert,  foreseeing  that  these  disasters  might 
prejudice  much  his  affairs  by  continuing  unfriendly 
disputes,  and  being  in  no  capacity  to  revictual  his 
ships  without  their  permission,  whom  he  knew  to  be 
the  Conde  de  Miro's  creature,  discovered  his  being 
there,  and  withal  demanded  his  people,  assuring 
the  governor  he  should  be  very  much  contented  to 
continue  their  former  correspondence,  and  the 

z  2 


340          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

friendship  betwixt  the  King  of  Portugal  and  him- 
self, and  that  he  would  bury  all  injuries  past,  in 
case  things  might  be  reduced  to  their  former 
estate :  if  not,  he  would  endeavour  to  recover  his 
men  by  force,  and  would  write  the  King  of  Por- 
tugal a  particular  of  the  affronts  he  received.  The 
governor,  surprised  at  this  unexpected  news,  with 
the  sharpness  of  the  message,  immediately  freed  the 
prisoners,  and  sent  them  aboard,  rather  complying 
with  the  Prince's  demands  than  hazard  his  head  by 
making  a  breech  of  his  master's  friendship. 

"Matters  being  thus  palliated,  although  with 
difficulty,  we  took  in  our  victuals,  and  having  un- 
loaded our  Spanish  prize,  left  her  hulk  there  as  a 
wreck,  for  want  of  men  to  man  her.  Having  thus 
far  accommodated  our  business,  we  stood  away  for 
Terceira  to  do  the  like  there,  but  being  at  an  anchor 
before  the  Road,  we  understood  our  provisions  were 
stopped  there  upon  intelligence  given  them  of  our  dis- 
pute at  Fayal,  until  such  time  as  they  were  thoroughly 
informed  of  all  that  had  passed ;  when  being  fully 
satisfied  of  their  reconciliation  to  his  Highness,  our 
provisions  were  sent  aboard,  which  done  we  took 
our  leave  of  that  place  and  stood  for  St.  Michael's 
to  take  in  such  bread  and  other  stores  as  were  ready 
for  us,  resolving  to  make  all  dispatch  that  might  be 
from  those  islands,  to  find  some  secure  place  to  careen 
our  ships  in,  since  the  sudden  change  in  their  kindness 
gave  his  Highness  reason  to  suspect  what  appeared 
afterward  too  true ;  which  was,  a  treaty  betwixt  the 


1652.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      341 

King  and  our  enemies.  Thus,  by  the  averseness  of  a 
few  factious  men,  we  were  tossed  from  one  misfor- 
tune to  another,  whilst  our  enemies,  neglecting  no 
opportunities  that  might  contribute  to  our  destruc- 
tion, despatched  a  fleet  to  the  West  Indies  to 
prevent  our  designs.  Upon  knowledge  of  this  other 
expedition,  his  Highness  departed  from  those  islands, 
hoping  to  careen  his  ships,  and  come  time  enough 
to  assist  his  friends  in  the  Chariby  [Caribbee]  Is- 
lands ;  to  which  purpose,  having  found  his  former 
designs  crossed  by  faction  in  the  council,  sent  his 
secretary  to  the  officers  of  every  ship  to  require  their 
opinion  immediately  in  writing,  which  way  was 
safest  for  their  preservation.  This  ingenious  forecast 
prevented  the  malicious  intent  of  such  as  endea- 
voured to  cross  his  design,  for  being  thus  separated 
and  required  to  give  their  result  apart,  no  one  know- 
ing the  other's  resolution,  his  Highness  found  the 
major  part  of  his  opinion,  so  that  he  who  was  the 
author  of  the  faction,  finding  himself  outwitted,  took 
occasion  to  pick  a  quarrel  with  the  master  of  the 
Admiral,  whereby  to  have  the  more  just  pretence  to 
quit  the  fleet,  the  Prince  being  unwilling  to  harbour 
a  smothered  fire,  which  being  not  carefully  tended, 
might  unexpectedly  prove  a  dangerous  flame,  con- 
sented to  his  departure,  and  having  so  far  finished 
his  business,  took  the  first  occasion  to  go  his  south- 
ern voyage,  hoping  to  recover  lost  time. 


342         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 


"THE   DEPARTURE   FROM  THE   WESTERN    ISLANDS. 

"  His  Highness  having  learned  too  lately  by  dear 
experience  that  the  unsettled  and  self-interested 
minds  of  some  people  had  occasioned  the  former 
factious  and  unreasonable  divisions,  the  fleet  was 
disabled  from  prosecuting  any  fixed  resolves  to  pre- 
vent the  succession  of  any  the  like,  resolved  to 
commit  no  more  of  his  weighty  and  secret  affairs  to 
public  and  unprofitable  counsel,  but  rather  to  pass 
all  decrees  from  himself,  being  only  fit  to  retain  and 
dispose  things  of  so  great  concernment ;  and  having 
now  disposed  of  those  vapours  which  interposed 
betwixt  our  hopes  and  us,  began  anew  to  seek  our 
fortune  in  the  ensuing  voyage.  Having  spent  much 
time  in  the  Western  Islands  in  victualling  our  fleet, 
with  the  forementioned  difficulties,  his  Highness 
mistrusting  the  friendship  of  the  Portuguese,  having 
received  those  injuries  from  inferior  commanders  as 
also  receiving  intelligence  that  there  was  a  free 
trade  betwixt  our  enemies  and  them,  resolved  for 
the  Canaries,  hoping  to  meet  some  prizes  that 
might  recruit  us  with  rigging  and  other  necessaries 
for  the  ships,  of  which  we  were  in  want,  and  not  to 
proceed  in  our  design  without  it :  but  fortune  in- 
tending to  cross  him  with  winds  and  weather,  the 
general  English  fleet  was  passed  before  we  could 
recover  the  height  of  the  islands ;  so  that  seeing 
small  probability  of  the  weather's  changing,  his 


1652.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  TPIE  CAVALIERS.         343 

Highness  stood  away  for  Cape  Blanco,  in  the  King- 
dom of  Argin  in  Africa,  coasting  upon  Guinea  and 
under  the  obedience  of  the  Sant  of  Sale,  where, 
finding  a  very  good  harbour,  and  naturally  secure, 
also  far  from  Europe,  he  resolved  to  fit  our  ships 
there,  where  few  or  none  come  save  such  as  are 
distressed  by  leaks  or  the  like  mishaps  in  their 
traffic  southward.  The  first  land  we  fell  in  with  was 
Cape  des  Barbas,  from  whence  we  stood  along  the 
shore  to  Cape  Blanco,  where  we  came  to  an  anchor 
and  continued  there  that  night. 

"THE  PROCEEDINGS  AT  CAPE  BLANCO  IN  ARGIN. 

"The  wind  blowing  fresh,  we  weighed  with  the 
tide  of  flood,  and  plied  up  for  the  harbour,  but  not 
knowing  the  channel  well,  and  finding  shoal  water, 
we  came  to  an  anchor :  fearing  a  bank,  which  lies 
south-east  of  the  Cape,  within  a  league  of  the  shore, 
where  we  descried  a  small  Dutch  vessel  within  the 
harbour,  continuing  at  anchor  all  night.  The  next 
day  came  out  a  shallop  from  the  ship,  that  rode 
within  to  view  us,  she  came  so  near  that  the 
Admiral's  pinnace,  getting  the  wind,  brought  her 
aboard.  His  Highness  took  new  berth,  and  kept  her 
all  night  to  pilot  him  next  day.  The  ship,  seeing  her 
boat  not  return,  suspecting  us  for  enemies,  set  sail 
by  night,  and  got  away  between  the  land  and  the 
east  side  of  the  bank.  The  next  day  we  stood  in 
for  the  harbour,  where  we  came  to  an  anchor  in 


344    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

four  fathoms  water  near  the  shore;  his  Highness, 
having  rewarded  the  pilot,  dismissed  him  to  return 
to  his  ship  which  was  at  a  small  island  called 
Argentine,  under  the  command  of  the  Dutch, 
twelve  leagues  distant  from  the  harbour.  At  his 
going  off  he  agreed  with  the  master  of  the  Admiral 
to  bring  deal  boards,  and  such  other  things  unto 
us,  as  were  necessary  for  careening  and  sheathing 
our  ships.  We  began  to  set  up  our  tents  on  land  to 
lodge  our  goods  in,  while  we  heeled  the  ships  on 
ground  to  make  them  clean.  The  country  being 
barren,  there  was  small  likelihood  of  refreshing  our 
men,  saving  that  the  harbour  was  stored  with 
plenty  of  fish  of  all  sorts  in  great  abundance.  His 
Highness  was  desirous  to  have  spoken  with  some 
natives,  that,  if  possible,  we  might  trade  with  them 
for  cattle,  and  such  provision  as  the  country  afforded, 
but  could  by  no  means  prevail,  until  an  accident 
enforced  them  to  it,  being,  at  the  sight  of  our 
coming  in,  fled  up  into  the  country. 

The  inhabitants  were  a  kind  of  banditti,  who, 
refusing  to  pay  tribute  to  the  Sant[on]  of  Sale[e], 
secure  themselves  in  that  sandy  desert.  They  ob- 
served the  Mahometan  law,  and  are  governed  by  the 
eldest  of  their  family,  whom  they  obey  as  Prince. 
They  are  tawny  of  complexion,  habited  in  vests,  after 
the  Turkish  manner.  Their  arms  are  darts  and  lances, 
which  they  use  with  great  dexterity  and  skill.  They 
lodge  in  tents,  and  remove  with  the  cattle  from 
place  to  place  to  find  pasture  for  them,  whose 


1652.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.         345 

milk  is  their  only  sustenance  and  support  for 
drink,  there  being  no  fresh  water  in  the  country. 
They  assuage  the  cattle's  thirst  with  the  inlets  of 
the  sea,  knowing  no  other  refreshing.  We  were 
long  in  this  harbour  before  any  means  was  offered 
to  speak  with  them,  by  reason  of  their  wandering 
course  of  life.  The  1st  of  January  his  Highness, 
with  one  hundred  men,  marched  into  the  country, 
resolving  to  find  them  out.  About  six  leagues  dis- 
tance he  met  with  a  track,  which  led  him  into  the 
middle  of  their  tents ;  for,  the  morning  proving 
extreme  foggy,  we  were  upon  them  ere  aware  of  us. 
Upon  the  alarm  they  all  fled,  leaving  their  tents 
and  flocks  of  sheep  and  goats  behind  them,  to  the 
number  of  above  one  hundred ;  which  was  a  season- 
able relief,  the  milk  being  their  chief  sustenance. 
The  Prince  endeavoured  by  all  means  to  speak  with 
them;  but,  seeing  no  peaceable  motions  would 
prevail,  shot  one  of  their  camels.  The  rider  soon 
got  upon  another,  with  which  he  saved  himself  and 
wife,  but  for  haste  left  a  man-child  behind,  which 
by  fortune  was  guided  to  his  Highness  as  a  new 
year's  gift.1  The  poor  infant,  embracing  his  legs 
very  fast,  took  him  for  his  own  parent.  The  Prince, 
to  secure  his  booty  [of  cattle],  sent  them  before,  to- 
wards the  harbour,  and  marched  softly  after  in  the 


1  This  is  the  first  mention  I  have  met  with  in  these  papers 
of  January  the  1st  commencing  the  new  year,  instead  of  the 
25th  of  March. 


346         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

rear,  dividing  them  into  small  parties,  to  entice  the 
natives  to  rescue  their  loss.     The  Moors  drew  up 
together,  and  marched  after  us  at  a  distance  ;  but  we 
could  not  engage  them,  the  country  being  champaign 
[sand-hills],  and  they  mounted  on  camels.     They, 
seeing  no  probability  of  taking  stragglers,  having 
followed  us  to  the  sight  of  our  ships,  sent  out  two  of 
their  men  with  a  flag  of  truce ;  who,  with  much 
ado,  came  within  hearing  of  some  that  were  left  be- 
hind, to  know  their  desires,  but  would  not  adven- 
ture nearer  than  to  hear  one  another.     They  re- 
quested his  Highness  to  permit  them  to  treat  with 
him  touching  the  child  and  their  cattle,  which  was 
granted.    They  promised  to  return  in  two  days  from 
their  camp  about  it :  so  they  went  back,  and  we  to 
our  fleet.     The  3rd  of  January  they  appeared  on  the 
top  of  a  sandy  hill  not  far   from  our  tents,  from 
whence  they  desired  a  hostage  for  the  man  that  was 
to  come  to  us.     His  Highness,  unwilling  to  hazard 
any  man's  person,  would  not   command  one  forth. 
The  Prince  drew  forth  his  foot,  and,  having  set  his 
guard,    sent   a    soldier,    who    offered   himself,    for 
hostage,    and   received    their    man,    who   proposed 
nothing  to  the  purpose  we  expected,  which  was  to 
trade  with  them,  but  he  was  very  desirous  to  have 
the    child,    expressing    great   sorrow   for   the    loss 
thereof.     His  Highness,  suspecting  they  had  some 
treacherous  design  in  hand,  gave  command,  on  pain 
of  death,   that  no   man  should   pass   without   the 
guards.     Nevertheless  one  of  our  men,  over-curious 


1652.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      347 

to  his   own  destruction,  not   regarding   the    order, 
stole  behind   a    cliff,   and   got  beyond   the  limits; 
which  the  Moors  perceiving,  set  on  and  slew  him 
before  our  men  could  endeavour  his  rescue.   Having 
thus  broke  truce,   and,  conscious  of  their  villany, 
marched  away  with  main  speed,  the  Prince,  highly 
incensed,  committed  the  hostage  to  fifty  musketeers, 
and  pursued  them  with  all  speed ;  but  to  no  pur- 
pose.    We  found  the  blood  of  our  men,  but  not 
their  bodies ;  by  which   we    conjectured  they  had 
thrown  them  into  the  sea.     Whilst  we  were  thus 
busied  to  find  out  their  track,  the  hostage,  fearing 
his  life  should  answer  this  outrage,  boldly  attempt- 
ed his  escape,  which,   being  very  swift  of  foot,  he 
effected.     The  guard  fired,  and  out  of  fear  he  dropt 
twice  ;  yet  he  recovered   his   feet,  and,  being  ac- 
quainted with  the  country,  passed  a  flush  of  water, 
and   gained    his    companions.      We   followed   him 
within  sight  of  his  company ;  but,  night  approach- 
ing, and  our  men  tired,  his  Highness  gave  over  the 
pursuit,  and  returned   to   the  harbour;  and,  as  he 
drew  off,  left  ambuscades  to  entrap  them,  if  it  might 
be ;  but  they,  having  compassed  their  design,  kept 
at  a  distance.     His  Highness,  seeing  no  good  to  be 
done,  caused  his  men  to  come  off,  and  so  returned 
to  the  fleet.     The  next  day  arrived  the  shallop  from 
Argin,  with  such  provisions  as  had  been  agreed  for. 
The  man,  being  punctual  in  his  promise,  was  em- 
ployed a  second  time  for  a  small  recruit  of  water 
and  such  necessaries  as  the  island  could  afford  us ; 


348         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

and  withal  to  propose  to  the  master  of  the  ship  a 
voyage  for  France,  which,  if  he  would  undertake, 
then  he  was  to  come  himself,  and  make  agreement 
about  freight:  he  accepted  the  offer,  brought  his 
ship  and  took  in  his  load  of  ginger  and  sugar,  which 
his  Highness  sent  to  his  Majesty.  By  this  vessel 
the  Prince  dispatched  the  following  letters : — 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  KING  CHARLES  II. 

King.  Madame  de  Bregi. 

Duke  of  York.  De  Mapelle. 

Sir  Edward  Herbert.  Queen. 

Moqueux.  Lord  Jermain. 

M.  de  Soulere.  Mr.  De  Surges.1 

SIRE, 

By  several  ways  I  have  given  your  Majesty  a  general 
account  of  our  good  and  bad  fortunes  since  we  left 
Toulon,  but  fearing  some,  if  not  all,  may  have  had  worse 
fortune  than  I  am  confident  this  will,  I  have  a  more  par- 
ticular relation  to  Sir  Edward  Herbert  of  both,  to  which 
I  could  add  many  more  particulars,  to  shew  your  Majesty 
how  I  have  been  hindered,  a  design  which  truly  I  had 
hopes  to  do  you  most  eminent  service,  but,  sire,  I  shall 
leave  this  until  I  have  the  happiness  to  be  nearer  your 
Majesty.  In  the  meantime  I  have  sent  an  order  on  Mr. 
Carteret  with  some  goods,  to  pay  the  debts  of  your 
Majesty,  I  made  at  Toulon,  and  some  other  which  belong 
to  me,  my  brother,  and  the  seamen,  the  proceed  of  which 
I  have  ordered  to  be  put  into  Sir  Edward  Herbert's 
hands,  your  Majesty  for  yourself  or  your  brother's  neces- 
sity, be  pleased  to  command  what  you  please  of  it.  In  such 
case,  I  dare  say,  that  there  will  be  none  among  us  which 


1  The  names  stand  thus  at  the  head  of  Prince  Eupert's  copy  of 
his  letter.  They  appear  to  be  the  names  of  those  to  whom  Prince 
Rupert  wrote,  or  intended  to  write,  by  the  same  despatch. 


1652.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        349 

will  grumble  at  it ;  all  I  humbly  beg  is,  that  Sir  Edward 
Herbert  may  receive  your  Majesty's  commands  by  word  of 
mouth,  or  under  your  own  hand,  and  your  Majesty  be 
pleased  to  look  upon  us  as  having  undergone  some  hazards 
equal  with  others,  had  it  pleased  God  to  preserve  the 
Constant  Reformation,  I  had  loaded  this  vessel  with  better 
goods.  RUPERT. 

What  our  ship's  company  desired 
me  to  say  to  the  King. 

This  letter  seems  to  have  been  accompanied  by 
the  following  one  to  the  Chancellor  of  the  King's 
exhausted  exchequer,  but  they  are  both  without 
date. 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  SIR  EDWARD  HYDE. 
SIR, 

Pitts,  Watts  has  given  you  a  relation1  of  most 
passages,  yet  not  so  particular  as  I  could  wish  might  come 
to  his  Majesty's  knowledge.  The  loss  of  the  Constant 
Reformation  is  perfect  to  the  particulars  of  her  losses, 
among  which,  her  lading  was  not  the  greatest  to  me, 
though  of  good  value.  Dr.  Hart's  and  Pitts'  papers, 
besides  some  which  were  written  to  the  King  of  Spain's 
Council,  of  all  his  business  of  his  West  Indies,  stick  most 
with  me.  Most  [of  these]  I  have  perused,  and  have  found 
in  the  latter  enough  at  any  time  when  there  shall  be  in- 
struments to  anger,  if  not  undo  his  said  Majesty.  St. 
Domingo  had,  and  has  not  above  two  hundred  soldiers  in 
it,  unfortified  and  all  open.  Judge  you  whether  our 
design  of  going  thither  had  not  been  feasible.  I  had 
almost  forgot  to  tell  you,  that  all  the  prizes,  which  I  took 
this  voyage  have  been  adjudged  by  Dr.  Hart,  except  a 
little  New  England  man,  which  was  taken  since  his  depar- 

1  See  Appendix  for  this  relation. 


350        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

ture.  If  I  can  come  handsomely  to  the  Barbadoes,  and 
they  join,  I  may,  perhaps,  go  on ;  when  it  is  done,  it  is 
done.  I  need  not  tell  you  of  more.  I  sent  one  Mr.  Car- 
teret  with  some  goods  consigned.  As  you  shall  find,  he  is 
no  witch,  and  is  to  do  nothing  but  by  your  order.  If  his 
Majesty,  or  the  Duke  of  York,  be  in  necessity  themselves, 
pray  dispose  of  all  to  what  they  shall  have  need  of  for  their 
own  use,  I  mean  after  the  debts  I  made  at  Toulon  are 
satisfied  for  the  fleet.  I  wrote  word  so  to  his  Majesty. 

RUPERT. 

Apparently  from  Mr.  Pitts,   enclosing  his  rela- 
tion : 

TO  THE  EARL  OF  CRAVEN. 
MY  LORD, 

The  enclosed  I  left  in  this  place  to  be  sent  by  way  of 
Lisbon,  but  at  my  return,  either  find  them  in  the  gover- 
nor's hands  and  no  vessel  departed,  so  I  put  them  to  a 
second  adventure,  hoping  they  may  at  last  find  your  lord- 
ship, and  give  you  an  account  that  since  the  writing  of 
the  other  letters  we  have  taken  three  English  ships  ;  one 
of  them  a  Plymouth  man  of  twenty-two  guns,  bound  for 
the  West  Indies,  but  her  chiefest  goods  was  wine,  which 
came  seasonable  for  our  men  ;  the  other  two  ships  were 
salters,  and  only  supplied  us  with  provisions,  so  that  now 
we  are  indifferently  well  fitted,  and  got  up  to  five  good 
ships  and  a  fly  boat,  which  we  have  victualled  here. 

God  Almighty  make  our  voyage  prosperous,  that  we 
may  return  with  comfort  to  all  his  Majesty's  friends. 

Were  I  ascertained  that  this  might  find  your  Lordship, 
I  would  have  enlarged  myself,  but  now  I  shall  but  only 
tell  you  that  through  more  difficulties  did  never  Princes 
steer. 

God  Almighty  prosper  us  to  make  a  good  voyage  to 
answer  their  Highnesses'  expectations  ;  which  I  well  know 
will  be  most  welcome  news  to  your  Lordship,  and  a  com- 


1652.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.         351 

fort  to  his  Majesty  and  their  Highnesses'  friends,  that  have 
long  looked  after  our  success  ;  what  shall  happen  I  will 
not  fail  to  present  your  Lordship  with ;  desiring  I  may 
deserve  from  your  Lordship  to  be  styled 

My  Lord. 
May  5,  1652. 

Copy  of  letter  to  Lord  Craven,  by  the 
Madeira  merchant  going  to  voyage. 

The  ship  being  dispatched,  and  our  fleet  almost 
ready  to  put  to  sea,  the  Prince  resolved  to  take 
his  farewell  of  that  place,  by  seeking  the  Moors 
out  once  more.  For  this  purpose  he  sent  Captain 
Robert  Holmes,  with  sixty  men  to  land  six  or 
seven  leagues  to  east  south-east  of  the  Cape ; 
whilst  himself,  with  one  hundred  more,  marched 
on  the  other  side,  and  so  dispersing  themselves 
into  small  bodies  one  in  sight  of  another,  drove  the 
country  homewards,  yet  found  the  track  of  their 
whole  caravan  which  had  passed  further  into  the 
land ;  this  we  followed  three  leagues,  but  then  be- 
ing past  hopes  of  finding  them,  returned ;  the  next 
day  we  broke  up  a  small  unserviceable  vessel,  and 
set  fire  on  the  hulk,  resolving  with  the  first  [fair 
wind]  to  sail  further  southward. 


"FROM  CAPE  BLANC  TO  THE  ISLANDS  OF  CAPE  DE  VERD. 

MAT,    1652. 

"  Setting  sail  from  this  harbour,  we  shaped  our 
course  for  the  Islands  of  Cape  de  Verd;  where  we 
hoped  to  meet  with  booty,  the  time  of  year  drawing 


352         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

on  for  traffics  that  way.  The  first  land  we  fell  in  with 
was  the  Island  of  Saul,  where  we  came  to  an  anchor 
in  the  south-east  road,  and  continued  there  some 
days  in  expectation  of  the  Newfoundland  fleet,  who 
constantly  repair  thither  for  salt ;  hoping  by  them 
to  recruit  ourselves  with  sails  and  rigging,  those 
ships  being  commonly  well  stored  with  such  neces- 
saries. His  Highness  went  ashore  to  see  if  the  island 
could  afford  us  fresh  water,  but  finding  none,  we 
conjectured  that  to  be  the  reason  of  its  being  unin- 
habited ;  no  other  defect  being  in  the  place,  nature 
having  been  otherwise  profuse  in  bestowing  thereon 
a  salt  pan,  which  may  be  reckoned  among  the  won- 
ders of  the  world.  It  contains  about  forty  acres  of 
ground,  being  environed  with  mountains,  by  whose 
reflection  the  salt  is  baked  harder  and  better  than 
in  any  artificial  manner,  affording  it  in  abundance  all 
the  year,  being  nourished  by  salt  springs  issuing  un- 
der those  hills  from  the  sea,  so  that  it  requires  no 
other  labour  but  fetching  what  nature  hath  by  a 
liberal  hand  provided  for  the  whole  world.  Our 
water  beginning  to  fail,  and  finding  ourselves  afore- 
hand  with  the  season,  we  stood  away  for  the  island 
of  Bonavista,  not  far  distant  from  Saul.  The  wind 
blowing  "  Trade,"  we  arrived  there  the  next  day,  and 
came  to  an  anchor  in  the  weathermost  road,  where 
we  found  very  good  watering.  This  island  is  more 
spacious  than  the  other,  and  is  inhabited,  although 
with  but  few  people,  by  reason  that  the  Portuguese 
are  divided  into  many  plantations  so  far  remote 


1652.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.        253 

from  one  another,  as  they  cannot  supply  them  all 
with  fresh  colonies  of  their  own  nation ;  which,  to 
make  good,  they  buy  negroes  from  the  coast  of 
Guinea,  and  mix  them  with  the  white  men  in  all  those 
territories.  Moreover,  the  islands,  having  no  com- 
modity for  exchange  in  trade,  doth  not  invite  mer- 
chants otherwise  than  to  water,  when  bound  for  the 
southward.  It  is  abundantly  stored  with  wild  goats, 
which  is  a  great  refreshment  to  all  comers,  either 
for  East,  West  Indies,  or  Brazil.  The  inhabitants 
are  about  one  hundred  in  number,  of  a  mulatto 
kind ;  their  habits  and  language  being  Portuguese, 
and  the  goats  afford  them  both  food  and  raiment, 
being  clothed  with  their  skins.  They  have  a  natural 
defensive  fortification  on  the  top  of  a  high  hill, 
from  which  promontory  they  discover  the  sea  round 
the  island.  It  is  not  easily  accessible,  for  the  steep- 
ness ;  having  but  one  narrow  path,  and  that  through 
the  rocks.  In  this  place  they  treasure  up  their  best 
goods ;  and,  upon  sight  of  any  ship,  make  their  re- 
treat thither,  suspecting  all,  and  yet,  not  refusing  to 
trade  with  any,  which,  doubtless,  is  their  security. 
Whilst  our  water  was  providing  here,  his  Highness 
being  on  shore  hunting  of  goats,  there  appeared  to 
the  offing  a  great  English  ship,  with  a  ketch  follow- 
ing her.  She  stood  near  the  road,  and  having 
made  our  ships,  knew  us  not,  by  reason  of  our 
colours  ;  but  made  into  another  bay,  where  she  had 
intelligence  who  we  were,  and  straightway  she  made 
sail  for  the  island  of  May.  We  could  not  present- 

VOL.  III.  A   A 


354         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

ly  give  her  chase,  by  reason  our  cask  was  on  shore, 
which  we  could  not  quit ;  but,  making  haste  with 
many  hands,  we  got  them  aboard.  His  Highness, 
having  consulted  his  officers,  resolved  to  away  as 
soon  as  it  was  dark,  and  follow  her;  but,  being 
clear  of  a  ledge  that  lies  before  the  road,  suspecting 
that,  being  out  of  sight,  she  might  keep  her  wind, 
we  did  the  same  all  night,  standing  to  the  eastward. 
The  next  day  we  stood  for  the  Isle  of  May.  Having 
a  handsome  berth  between  the  lands,  we  slackened 
sail,  that  so  we  might  have  drift  enough  all  that 
night,  intending  to  fall  in  the  road  early  next  morn- 
ing, that  in  case  she  put  from  her  anchors,  we 
might  have  day  enough  te  chase  her.  By  break  of 
day  we  were  fair  up  with  the  land ;  but,  falling  into 
the  windward  of  it  before  we  could  get  to  the  road, 
she  descried  us,  and  was  under  sail.  She  fired  three 
guns,  to  command  some  of  her  men  aboard  that 
were  hunting  for  the  company;  but  before  they 
could  return  she  was  forced  to  leave  them :  her 
ketch  remained  behind,  to  take  them  in,  and  in  our 
chase  came  thwart  the  Admiral,  hoping  he  would 
have  delayed  time  in  speaking  with  her,  whilst  the 
ship  might  have  gotten  away.  But  the  Admiral,  not 
regarding  her,  pursued  her  chase,  and  left  her  to  the 
other  ships ;  and  they,  being  far  astern,  she  was 
gotten  over  to  the  coast  of  St.  Jago  before  they 
could  come  up.  The  Admiral  got  upon  the  ship  all 
the  morning,  till  he  came  within  a  little  more  than 
shot;  but  they,  having  trimmed  their  ship  about 


1652.]        PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     355 

one  in  the  afternoon,  stretched  from  us  apace.  His 
Highness,  perceiving  it  lost  labour  to  pursue  fur- 
ther, gave  over  the  chase,  and  slackened  sail  to 
bring  his  fleet  together.  We  lay  by  all  night,  and 
the  next  day  stood  into  St.  Jago's  Road,  where  we 
came  to  an  anchor,  and  began  to  take  order  for  re- 
cruiting of  victuals,  that  being  the  best  provided  for 
of  all  the  islands.  This  land  is  great,  and  well- 
peopled,  but  mostly  with  negroes  ;  that  being  the 
support  of  their  Guinea  trade,  and  the  protection 
of  the  neighbouring  islands,  as  likewise  a  receptacle 
for  the  Brazil  and  East  India  fleet,  which,  going  and 
coming,  touch  there  to  refresh.  The  Portuguese 
have  a  town  in  this  road  bearing  the  name.  It  is 
strengthened  with  divers  good  batteries  to  seaward. 
The  road  is  very  deep,  which  enforceth  all  ships  to 
ride  close  under  their  batteries  and  fort  before  they 
find  anchorage ;  the  fort  is  situated  upon  the 
highest  ground  near  the  town,  very  well  furnished 
with  artillery  and  magazines,  answerable  to  a  place 
of  so  great  consequence.  As  soon  as  we  were  at 
anchor  salutations  with  great  guns  passed  on  each 
side. 

"  The  governor  sent  his  deputy  to  welcome  the 
Prince  thither,  assuring  him  of  all  the  assistance  the 
island  could  afford.  His  Highness  returned  him 
thanks,  and  accepting  his  offer,  set  his  pursers  ashore 
to  provide  for  his  fleet.  The  next  day  the  governor 
sent  a  present  of  all  sorts  of  fruits  the  country 
yielded,  as  lemons,  oranges,  plantains,  bananas, 

A    A  2 


366         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

water-melons,  and  the  like.1  The  Prince,  in  return 
thereof,  sent  next  day,  by  one  of  his  gentlemen,  a 
present  of  commodities  our  ships  could  afford,  which 
was  kindly  received.  Thus,  having  continued  for 
some  days  in  exchange  of  civilities,  the  governor 
gave  the  Prince  notice  of  some  English  ships  trad- 
ing to  Guinea,  and  fortifying  themselves  in  the 
river  of  Gambia,  offering  his  Highness  both  pilots 
and  soldiers  to  guide  him  up  the  river,  and 
strengthen  him  for  attempting  their  fort;  this 
kindness  he  thankfully  accepted,  arid,  having  ship- 
ped the  pilots,  and  received  a  caravel  full  of  soldiers, 
stood  directly  for  Guinea.  The  caravel  lost  us  that 
night,  the  weather  being  fair,  so  as  it  could  be  in- 
terpreted no  otherwise  than  a  wilful  action,  which 


1  From  this  island  Prince  Rupert  wrote  the  following  letter  to 
the  King  of  Portugal.  The  generous  and  courageous  kindness  of 
that  monarch  deserved  acknowledgment,  and  our  Corsair  Prince 
seems  to  have  been  as  keenly  susceptible  of  kindness  as  of  injury : — 

COPY  (IN  THE  PRINCE'S  PAPERS)  OP  A  LETTER  FROM  HIS 

HIGHNESS  TO  THE  KING  OF  PORTUGAL. 
SIRE, 

Since  it  hath  been  my  fortune  to  arrive  here,  I  have  thought 
it  meet  to  acquaint  your  Majesty,  that  your  governor,  Don  Jorge 
de  Mesquita  de  Castello  Baranquo,  hath  used  me  with  great  civi- 
lity, for  which  I  give  your  Majesty  most  hearty  thanks,  desiring 
your  Majesty  would  be  pleased  to  esteem  of  what  he  hath  done 
to  me  ;  and,  moreover,  by  my  coming  hither  I  have  met  with  an 
occasion  to  serve  your  Majesty,  the  whole  design  your  governor 
hath  promised  me  to  acquaint  you  with  at  large.  Upon  his  word 
I  undertake  the  business,  because  by  him  I  am  assured  that  I  may 
not  only  advantage  your  Majesty,  but  also  benefit  and  preserve 
your  subjects,  which  is  the  earnest  desire  of,  sir, 

Your  Majesty's  most  humble  servant, 

St.  Jago  Island,  March  2,  1652.  RUPERT. 


1652.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        357 

made  us  suspect  it  was  a  design  upon  our  fleet ;  yet, 
having  the  pilots  aboard,  we  resolved  to  see  the  event. 
After  four  days'  sailing,  we  fell  in  with  Trefisco 
Road ;  but,  the  land  lying  very  low,  we  could  not 
see  it.  Yet,  finding  smooth  water,  the  master 
imagined  he  was  near,  and  caused  to  heave  the  lead, 
and  finding  but  five  fathom  water,  tacked,  and  stood 
off  to  sea  until  day ;  then,  making  the  land,  we  took 
a  handsome  berth,  and  stood  along  the  shore  for  the 
river  of  Gambia.  Where,  being  arrived,  and  mis- 
taking the  channel,  we  were  forced  to  chop  to  an 
anchor  in  so  shoal  water,  that  we  could  hardly  fleet 
free  of  our  flukes.  The  Admiral  came  foul  of  hers, 
but  got  no  harm.  We  continued  there  till  tide  of 
ebb,  to  sound  for  the  channel.  His  Highness  took 
his  pinnace,  and  sounded  near  the  shore;  where, 
being  open  of  the  southernmost  point  of  the  river, 
he  descried  a  small  vessel  of  ten  guns  at  anchor, 
with  a  Flemish  ensign  at  her  poop,  and  a  strange 
flag  at  the  main-top-mast  head ;  but  could  not  dis- 
cover what  it  was.  The  Prince,  not  finding  the 
channel,  returned  aboard ;  but  one  of  his  captains 
that  accompanied  him  staying  behind,  found  means 
to  speak  with  the  master  of  that  vessel,  and  brought 
him  aboard  the  Prince,  who  made  known  unto  his 
Highness  he  was  in  the  Duke  of  Courland's  service, 
and  that  the  fort  there  building  belonged  to  the 
said  Duke ;  and  withal,  finding  us  friends,  gave  us 
notice  where  the  English  ships  were  that  traded  in 
the  river,  and  offered  his  service  to  pilot  us  in.  The 


358    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

Prince  accepted  his  offer,  and  with  the  first  of  flood 
new  berthed  in  the  middle  of  the  channel,  and  con- 
tinued there  all  night.  Next  day  he  weighed  anchor 
with  the  flood,  and  stood  into  the  river.  There  we 
took  a. small  English  ship  called  the  John,  which  was 
bound  to  trade  along  the  coast  to  Cape  Mastras, 
where  we  took  a  negro,  who  was  their  interpreter, 
called  Captain  Jacus,  with  the  governor's  son  of 
Portodale,  to  whom  his  Highness  gave  liberty,  and 
treated  them  kindly,  which  proved  much  to  our 
future  advantage.  Having  manned  our  prize,  we 
came  to  an  anchor  by  the  Courland  ship,  resolving 
next  day  to  clear  the  river.  This  night  the  Duke 
of  Courland's  governor  came  to  tender  his  respects 
to  his  Highness,  and  to  acquaint  him  how  matters 
stood  in  the  river,  and  to  assure  him  of  his  assist- 
ance and  the  fort's^  in  case  of  necessity.  The  Prince 
thanked  him,  and  at  his  departure  gave  him  guns. 
After  this  we  sailed  up  the  river ;  and,  being  in- 
formed of  a  Spanish  pink  of  ten  guns,  and  an  Eng- 
lish ketch,  that  rode  at  Tulfrey,  over  against  the 
Courland  fort,  the  Prince  manned  his  prize  apeak, 
under  the  command  of  one  of  his  gentlemen,  and 
sent  her  close  to  the  shore,  she  drawing  but  little 
water,  to  lay  the  Spaniard  aboard.  But,  as  soon  as 
they  made  us  open  of  the  point,  they  slipped  their 
anchor,  and  sailed  through  betwixt  the  island  where 
the  fort  stands  and  the  main,  on  the  north  side  the 
river.  Being  over  against  the  fort,  they  saluted  us 
with  all  their  artillery.  His  Highness  returned 


1652.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     359 

thanks,  and  followed  his  chase.  We  took  the 
Spanish  pink  ;  but  the  ketch  got  into  the  river  Vin- 
taine,  which  is  a  small  arm  out  of  the  side  of  the 
river  Gambia,  where  their  Admiral  lay,  with  a  pink 
of  eight  guns,  to  take  in  such  merchandise  as  the 
place  yielded;  it  being  also  a  reasonably  healthy 
place,  they  stayed  there  to  expect  the  return  of  their 
barges,  which  they  had  sent  up  the  river  to  a  gold- 
mine not  long  before  discovered  by  that  company, 
but  had  as  yet  cost  more  than  they  got.  It  being 
low- water,  we  could  not  follow  the  ketch  ;  but  were 
forced  to  stop  that  tide.  The  next  flood  the  fleet 
weighed  to  enter;  but  the  Admiral,  being  like  to 
touch  upon  a  bank  that  lies  off  the  east  point, 
was  forced  to  drop  his  kedge,  so  that  he  lost  that 
tide.  Prince  Maurice  got  in ;  but,  by  reason  night 
drew  on,  he  came  to  an  anchor.  Prince  Rupert 
sent  the  captain  of  his  guards  ashore,  with  forty 
men,  to  prevent  the  ship  from  removing,  by  over- 
cowing  their  men  from  handling  their  sails ;  but 
they,  quitting  their  mooring,  made  use  of  the  tide, 
and  drove  in  further  over  against  the  town  of  Bin- 
tan.  The  next  day,  while  the  fleet  weighed,  Prince 
Maurice  stood  up  with  their  Admiral,  and,  after 
some  guns  given,  promising  them  good  quarter,  and 
the  captain  his  freedom,  took  both  her  and  the  pink. 
There  was  some  dispute  made  by  them  after  surren- 
der, by  reason  their  merchant  was  not  included  in 
the  conditions.  The  Prince,  to  avoid  censure,  offer- 
ed them  their  ship  in  her  former  freedom,  and  so 


360  MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

dispute  it  by  force ;  but  they  rather  obeyed  the  first 
conditions  than  hazard  their  lives.  Notice  was 
given  by  a  negro  where  the  ketch  lay  hid  in  a  creek. 
His  Highness  sent  his  pinnace,  and  fetched  her  off; 
and,  having  manned  her,  put  her  under  the  captain 
of  his  guards,  and  sent  her  to  find  out  another  small 
vessel  which  was  going  higher  up  the  river,  while  the 
prizes  took  in  the  rest  of  our  goods ;  but  the  natives 
understanding  them  to  be  our  enemies,  and  the  rea- 
sons thereof,  were  glad  of  the  Prince's  arrival,  and, 
hoping  to  gratiate  with  him,  cut  off  those  people  of 
the  ketch  we  went  to  seek.  His  Highness,  abhorring 
to  countenance  infidels  in  shedding  Christian  blood, 
signified  his  displeasure  thereof  through  the  Portu- 
guese living  among  them.  Our  people  being  as 
high  as  Elephant  Island,  which  is  about  fifty  leagues 
up  the  river,  finding  themselves  prevented,  returned 
to  the  fleet,  which  they  found  watering  at  Tulfrey. 
This  place  is  too  considerable  to  pass  over  without 
particular  observation.  I  shall,  therefore,  make  a 
short  relation  of  its  situation  and  traffic.1 

The  island  is  low  and  even,  a  very  fertile  soil, 
well  peopled,  and  stored  with  provisions  and  traffic, 
both  good  and  in  abundance.  They  have  divers 
sorts  of  wild  beasts,  which  are  not  unprofitable  to 


1  The  Prince  undertook  to  lead  a  squadron  to  this  coast  in 
1661,  and  to  establish  a  trade  there.  A  company  was  formed  for 
this  purpose,  with  a  capital  of  40,000£  The  King  (Charles  II.) 
objected  to  the  risk  of  Prince  Rupert's  life  in  such  a  climate,  and 
Captain  Holmes  was  sent  in  his  place.  For  an  account  of  this 
voyage,  see  Appendix. 


1652.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       361 

them,  as  the  elephant,  tiger,  leopard,  monkey.  The 
natives  affirm  that  there  are  many  unicorns  in  their 
country,  relating  their  shape,  and  how  they  go,  ac- 
companied with  other  beasts,  to  the  water,  who  will 
not  drink  until  he  hath  dipped  his  horn  therein. 
The  river's  extent  is  three  hundred  leagues,  by  re- 
port of  the  Portuguese  who  live  there,  and  of  the 
English  who  went  to  discover  the  mine,  which  is 
almost  at  the  end  thereof.  Many  other  considerable 
rivers  vent  themselves  into  this ;  and  some  report 
there  is  an  arm  of  it  crosseth  the  main  to  the  river 
of  Senegal  which  makes  them  two  communicable ; 
which  must  convince  those  who  think  to  assure 
their  traffic,  without  planting  a  considerable  colony. 
This  mine  is  reported  to  be  a  firm  rock  of  gold  of  a 
great  bigness,  which  might  countervail  the  greatest 
charges  as  may  be  expended  in  finding  of  it.  But, 
whether  it  be  so  or  no,  certain  it  is  that  the  first  dis- 
coverers were  so  satisfied,  as  they  never  used  the  sea 
afterwards.  The  common  traffic  here  is  in  elephants7 
teeth,  wax,  hides,  and  ambergris,  which  they  ex- 
change for  bars  of  iron,  coral,  crystal,  amber,  beads, 
blue  cotton  cloth,  manillos  of  brass,  and  strong  li- 
quors. They  adore  a  divinity,  and  incline  somewhat 
to  the  Mahometan  law  ;  but,  as  every  canton  hath  a 
peculiar  Prince,  so  have  they  several  sects  among 
themselves,  conformable  to  the  opinions  of  their 
Princes,  yet  they  all  agree  in  their  national  govern- 
ment and  customs  of  their  country ;  which  sheweth 
that  their  policy  is  not  bound  up  to  particular  in- 


362         MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

terests.  The  commons  bear  an  obsequious  reverence 
to  their  superiors,  which  I  observed  by  divers  occa- 
sions among  them,  and  shall  touch  upon  one  that 
may  conclude  the  rest  to  be  alike.     The  King  of 
Gillifry's  brother  and  his  son  came  aboard  to  visit 
the  Prince.  His  Highness  made  them  very  welcome, 
and  caused  chairs  to  be  brought  forth  for  them  to 
sit  on ;  but  they  excused  themselves,  and  would  by 
no  means  accept  thereof.     His  Highness  requiring 
the  reason,  they  answered,  the  King  sat  on  such,  and 
therefore,  they  being  unworthy,  would  not  sit  there- 
on ;  besides,  it  would  be  accounted  a  crime  in  them. 
They  are  very  severe  in  punishing  such  as  transgress 
the  rules  of  morality,  which  I  observed  by  a  law 
among   them,  that  if  any  man  made  a  lie  which 
tended   to  the  prejudice  of  the  commonwealth,  he 
is  presently  made  a  captive,  and  sold  to  the  next 
Christians  that  trade  with  them.     This  law  makes 
them  keep  their  words  inviolable ;  which  sheweth 
they  incline  to  a  civil  government.     His  Highness 
having  cleared  the  river,  the  time  of  year  drawing 
near  for  their  tornados,  which  are  excessive  storms 
of  wind  and  rain,  which  begin  in  these  parts  in  the 
month  of  May,  and  continue  until  the  end  of  July 
without  intermission.     Our  ships  being  not  in  con- 
dition to  oppose  such  boisterous  weather,  we  thought 
a  certain  security  better  than  to  hazard  the  fleet  by 
staying  for  the  return  of  their  barges  with  their  trea- 
sure ;  therefore,  the  fleet   being   in   readiness,   we 
broke  up  the  Spanish  pink,  being  unfit  for  service. 


1652.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      363 

Having  disposed  of  her  lading,  and  left  her  hulk  and 
some  guns  for  the  Courlanders'  use,  we  fell  down  to 
the  river's  mouth  with  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  where 
we  came  to  an  anchor,  and  continued  there  that 
night.  Before  we  parted  from  Tulfrey,  Prince 
Maurice  quitted  the  ship  he  was  in,  and  went  into 
the  great  prize,  conceiving  her  to  be  the  better 
sailer ;  the  Vice-Admiral's  flag  being  saluted,  she 
was  named  the  Defiance.  We  left  this  place,  and 
plied  up  to  Cape  de  Verd,  to  get  the  wind  of  those 
islands,  where  we  were  to  take  in  our  victuals ;  but 
being  over  against  Reatch,  which  is  a  small  town 
lying  to  the  south  of  Cape  Mastras.  Missing  some  of 
his  ships,  the  Prince  came  to  an  anchor,  and,  having 
the  afore-mentioned  Captain  Jacus  on  board,  hoped  to 
gain  some  refreshment  from  the  shore  while  he  stayed 
there  to  bring  his  fleet  together.  At  our  arrival  the 
people  seemed  to  be  friendly,  trading  with  us  for 
such  things  as  the  country  did  afford,  both  for  suste- 
nance and  profit,  and  coming  daily  aboard  us  with- 
out any  suspicion.  Some  of  them  stole  off  in  one  of 
their  canoes  a  sailor  of  Prince  Maurice's,  a  native  of 
that  place,  who  lived  long  among  Christians,  and  was 
become  one  himself;  but  upon  promise  of  the  others 
that  he  should  return  aboard  again,  he  went  with 
them  to  visit  his  parents.  His  Highness  resenting 
this  as  a  great  injury,  yet  cautious  to  adventure  his 
men  against  these  heathens,  endeavoured  by  fair 
words  to  procure  the  surrender;  but,  finding  that 
not  to  take  effect,  resolved  to  fetch  him  by  force,  or 


364          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

take  a  just  revenge.  To  which  purpose  he  put  one 
hundred  men  into  the  ketch,  which  he  commanded 
himself,  and  sent  a  small  boat  to  find  a  secure  land- 
ing-place within  a  salt  creek  that  runs  close  by  the 
town ;  but  the  sea  [surf]  going  high,  the  boat  was 
cast  away:  the  men  got  to  the  shore,  unto  whom 
the  negroes  began  to  gather  in  numbers.  His  High- 
ness, suspecting  they  might  receive  injury,  immedi- 
ately commanded  one  of  his  gentlemen,  Holmes, 
whom  he  had  formerly  employed,  to  take  the  yawl 
with  him,  and  some  musketeers,  to  endeavour  their 
security,  which  he  strove  to  have  done ;  but,  being 
near  the  shore,  the  greatness  of  the  surf  brought 
home  their  grapnell,  driving  the  boat  to  land,  and 
overset  her,  leaving  the  men  in  as  bad  a  condition 
as  the  former.  By  this  time  Captain  Jacus,  seeing 
a  tumult  on  the  sands,  came  towards  them  with  his 
friends ;  where,  finding  our  people  in  such  an  estate, 
caused  what  things  of  theirs  could  be  found  should 
be  restored,  and  took  them  up  to  his  house,  where  he 
gave  them  kind  entertainment.  His  Highness,  being 
unsatisfied  with  these  ill-successes,  commanded  the 
captain  of  the  guards  to  take  the  pinnace  and  row 
close  to  the  shore  as  high  as  the  town  reached,  and 
try  if  he  could  bring  off  our  men  ;  and,  in  case  Cap- 
tain Jacus  came  along  with  them,  to  row  aboard  the 
Admiral ;  but  if  not,  to  come  directly  to  him  again. 
The  captain  went,  and  gained  them  all  aboard  ;  but 
mistaking  his  orders,  told  the  gentleman  that  it 
was  his  Highness's  pleasure  to  bring  Captain  Jacus 


1652.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     365 

along  with  him,  who  went  ashore  again  with  only 
one  man  to  effect  it.  In  this  space,  one  of  their 
canoes  being  off  at  sea  was  taken  by  Prince 
Maurice's  pinnace,  and  unfortunately  by  a  shot  one 
of  the  negroes  in  her  was  slain ;  which  being  per- 
ceived by  them  ashore,  they  seized  upon  the  gentle- 
man and  his  friend,  and  kept  them  under  a  strong 
guard.  The  captain  returned  to  his  Highness  and 
told  him  what  was  fallen  out,  who,  extremely  moved 
at  this  disaster,  resolved  to  bring  them  off  or  perish, 
being  by  him  employed  ;  which  argued  a  princely 
resolution  and  encouragement  to  the  whole  fleet,  in 
seconding  it  by  his  actions,  whereby  he  spared  not 
to  hazard  his  own  person  :  nevertheless,  finding  them 
inclinable  to  treat,  he  thought  it  safer  to  hearken 
thereunto  than  adventure  his  people.  Captain  Jacus 
having  got  some  off  clear,  hoped  to  do  the  same  by 
the  rest,  and  promised  faithfully  to  endeavour  it. 
One  day  passed  in  expectation,  and  nothing  was 
done ;  next  morning  his  Highness  went  in  his  pin- 
nace near  the  shore  to  treat  with  them  about  it, 
giving  orders  to  the  several  ships  to  man  their  pin- 
naces with  store  of  men ;  and  in  case  of  such  a  sign 
given,  to  make  towards  him  with  all  speed ;  and  to 
the  Vice-Admiral,  in  case  of  a  contrary  one,  to  let  go 
the  canoe.  The  Prince,  anchoring  near  the  shore,  had 
conference  with  some  by  Captain  Jacus,  who  told 
his  Highness  they  desired  to  see  their  canoe  clear 
from  our  ship,  and  then  they  would  send  the  pri- 
soner aboard.  His  Highness  made  the  sign,  and  it 


366     MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

being  done,  and  Captain  Jacus  perceiving  his  coun- 
trymen's treachery,  ran  down  to  the  sea-side,  and 
desired,  if  possible,  to  retake  her,  for  that  they  in- 
tended to  keep  the  gentleman  prisoner.     We  gave 
her  chase,  but  before  we  could  fetch   her  up,    she 
was  got  to  shore.    The  Prince  came  to  an  anchor 
within  half  shot,  and  began  to  fire  at  them,  making 
sign  for  his  pinnaces,  resolving  to  land  as  soon  as 
they  came  up.     By  this  time  the  shore  was  covered 
with  the  natives,  who  very  bravely  defended  their 
coast  with    resolution.      They  sent  a  considerable 
party  of  men  into  the  sea,  as  high  as  their  necks,  to 
impede  our  landing ;   who,  as  soon  as  they  saw  us 
present  at  them,  dived    under  water  to  avoid  the 
execution  of  our  shot ;  and  then  appearing,  gave  us 
a  volley  of  arrows :  thus  we  exchanged  shot  in  ex- 
pectation of  our  pinnaces,  until  one  of  their  arrows 
unfortunately   struck  his   Highness  Prince   Rupert 
above  the  left  pap,  a  great  depth  into    the  flesh, 
who  called  instantly  for  a  knife,  and   cut  it  forth 
himself.      While    we  were    thus    disputing,  Prince 
Maurice's  pinnace   rowing  by  the  town  of  Reatch, 
the  greatest  part  of  the  negroes  being  against  us  in 
another   bay,  Captain   Jacus  gained  a  party  of  his 
friends  together,   and  conveyed  the   other  prisoner 
aboard  the  pinnace ;  which  act  being  both  an  ex- 
ample of  gratitude  and  fidelity,  may  teach  us  that 
heathens   are    not   void    of  moral    honesty.      Our 
prisoner  being  safe  aboard,  we  rowed  to  our  ships  : 
the   fleet  being  all  come  together  (except  the  pink, 


1652.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       367 

which  being  supplied  with  new  men,  for  the  most 
part  mastering  the  officers,  carried  her  away),  his 
Highness  sent  to  give  Captain  Jacus  thanks,  assuring 
him  if  he  would  make  his  escape,  to  take  him  in  at 
Trefisco  Road,  and  to  reward  him  for  his  faith  and 
pains ;  but  he,  wishing  us  good  fortune,  presented 
his  humble  service  to  the  Prince,  saying  he  had 
done  nothing  he  should  need  fear  to  justify.  The 
boat  returning  aboard  with  this  answer,  we  weighed 
in  the  night,  and  plied  for  Cape  de  Verd,  where  con- 
ceiving ourselves  sufficiently  to  windward  of  the 
islands,  we  stood  for  them  to  perfect  our  business 
there.  We  fell  in  with  those  lands  betwixt  Bo- 
navista  and  May,  but  being  to  leeward  of  the  first, 
we  stood  for  the  other,  where  we  found  in  the 
weathermost  road  two  English  ships,  which  we  took 
to  be  frigates,  appearing  to  us  at  a  distance  very 
snug,  with  taut  masts ;  but  coming  nearer,  we  found 
them  to  alter  very  much,  the  one  being  a  high-carved 
ship,  and  the  other  a  fly-boat.  They  quitted  their 
anchors,  and  stood  away  to  the  southward;  but 
being  clear  of  the  land,  the  greatest  lay  close  hauled, 
to  whom  the  Admiral  gave  chase,  and  the  Vice- 
Ad  miral  to  the  other,  who,  bearing  her  top-sails 
aloft  (the  weather  freshening  upon  them),  sprung  her 
main-topmast,  which  forced  her  to  put  before  it, 
and  trust  to  her  head-sails.  The  Vice- Admiral  fol- 
lowed her  until  he  was  open  of  St.  Jago's  Roads,  but 
then  seeing  that  he  rather  lost  than  got  upon  her, 
fearing  to  be  too  far  leeward  of  his  port,  gave  over 


368  MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

the  chase.  The  Admiral,  about  shutting  in  of  night, 
came  up  with  the  other,  who  at  first  summons  sur- 
rendered herself:  having  manned  her,  we  lay  by, 
putting  forth  many  lights,  and  making  false  fires  for 
the  rest  of  our  ships  to  see  us.  About  nine  at  night 
we  came  altogether,  saving  the  Vice-Admiral  and 
the  Honest  Seaman  who  stood  into  St.  Jago's  Road. 
The  next  day  we  stood  for  the  Isle  of  May,  and 
came  to  an  anchor  in  the  weathermost  road;  but 
finding  little  fresh  water,  his  Highness  left  the  Re- 
venge there,  and  stood  himself,  with  the  rest  of  his 
ships,  into  the  leemost,  where  we  found  very  good 
watering.  Four  days  after,  there  came  into  the 
weathermost  a  Hamburger,  with  two  English  fly- 
boats,  who  came  to  an  anchor  close  by  the  Revenge, 
supposing  her  a  merchantman,  most  of  her  guns 
being  within  board.  The  Admiral  having  notice  of 
them,  stood  for  the  other  road ;  but  being  apprised 
of  it,  the  captain  of  the  Revenge  had  already  com- 
manded the  English  masters  aboard,  and  made  them 
prizes. 

These  ships  gave  us  notice  of  others  that  were  at 
the  Island  of  Sal,  with  which  his  Highness  resolved 
to  speak ;  and  having  manned  his  prizes,  sent  them 
with  the  rest  of  his  ships  to  St.  Jago's,  and  kept 
only  the  Revenge  with  him  upon  this  design  :  but 
plying  to  windward,  and  being  clear  of  St.  Nicholas 
and  St.  Lucia,  the  captain  of  the  Revenge  having 
(by  persuasion  of  the  merchant  we  took  in  the 
river  of  Gambia)  been  too  covetous  of  new  men, 


1652.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE  CAVALIERS.      369 

fetching  a  long  stretch  to  westward,  while  we  stood 
in  the  eastward,  was  overmastered,  and  carried  to 
England.  The  Prince,  being  ignorant  hereof,  plied 
up  still  for  the  island,  where  we  found  only  one  ship 
in  the  south-west  road,  who  had  topmast  struck,  and 
yards  a-portlings  ;  but  by  reason  of  night  we  did  not 
lay  her  aboard.  The  next  day,  having  discovered 
what  we  were,  she  set  sail  and  stood  for  the  west- 
ward :  his  Highness  gave  her  chase,  but  finding  her 
sail  much  better  than  he,  his  ship  being  foul,  gave 
her  over.  The  Prince  missing  the  Revenge,  sus- 
pected her  disaster :  but  not  knowing  what  course 
they  steered,  we  stood  for  Bonavista,  to  inquire  if 
they  had  touched  there ;  where  not  finding  her,  we 
gave  her  over  for  lost,  and  stood  for  the  Isle  of  May, 
We  stayed  two  days  in  that  island  to  make  an  end 
of  our  watering.  The  second  night  there  appeared  a 
ship  to  the  offing ;  but  the  master  making  her  to  be 
a  caravel,  would  not  give  her  chase.  This  proved  to 
be  a  Spaniard  bound  for  St.  Jago  to  trade  for 
negroes,  having  yearly  licence  to  trade  thither. 
He  came  to  an  anchor  in  the  road  called  Laproy, 
where  being  affrighted  with  the  report  of  Prince 
Rupert's  being  on  that  coast,  he  landed  thirty  asse- 
negos-load  of  plate,  which  the  Governor  of  the  place 
having  in  possession,  confiscated  to  the  King  of  Por- 
tugal's use,  notwithstanding  their  licence  to  trade 
thither.  Having  made  an  end  of  watering,  we  stood 
for  St.  Jago  \vith  the  rest  of  our  fleet.  His  Highness 
was  very  kindly  received  there,  all  being  according 

VOL.    III.  B    B 


370    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

to  his  expectations.  One  of  the  prize-master's  mates 
having  endeavoured  to  betray  his  trust,  and  good 
evidence  being  brought  against  him,  was  condemned 
by  a  council  of  war,  and  executed  the  same  day. 
The  provisions  being  ready,  we  took  them  in,  and 
slighted  [dismantled]  one  of  the  English  fly-boats, 
being  a  slug :  his  Highness  bestowed  the  hulk  upon 
the  religious  people  of  the  Charity.  Thus,  having 
finished  his  business,  he  made  a  handsome  present 
to  the  governor  in  acknowledgment  of  his  civilities, 
and  took  his  leave  of  those  islands. 


THE    VOYAGE   TO   THE    INDIES. 

"  We  set  sail  from  St.  Jago,  directing  our  course 
for  the  Caribbee  Islands,  resolving  to  begin  with  the 
weathermost,  and  so  visit  them  all  by  degrees, 
hoping  as  yet  to  find  them  our  friends.  Being  by 
our  account  within  fifty  leagues  east  from  the  Island 
of  Barbadoes,  we  made  a  ship  to  the  southward  of 
us,  to  whom  we  gave  chase;  but  bearing  hard  for  it, 
the  Admiral  sprang  so  great  a  leak  abaft  that  we 
had  much  ado  to  keep  her  free  by  baling :  the  limber 
holes  being  stopped,  the  water  could  not  come  to  the 
pumps ;  so  that  in  this  extremity  we  were  forced  to 
give  over  our  chase,  and  put  before  the  wind  to  trench 
our  bales,  that  the  water  might  have  free  passage. 
Thus  being  in  confusion,  we  overran  our  reckonings, 
and  passed  Barbadoes  in  the  night  without  seeing 
it.  Next  day,  about  sun-set,  we  saw  land  to  the 


1652.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        371 

westward,  which  proved  to  be  the  Islands  of  Granada 
and  St.  Vincent.  Being  past  our  intended  port,  and 
no  possibility  of  beating  up  to  it  without  great 
hazard  of  our  ships,  we  stood  for  the  Island  of  St. 
Lucia  to  seek  some  means  of  stopping  our  leak,  it 
having  increased  very  much  upon  us,  and  our  men 
being  almost  spent  with  extreme  labour.  This  night 
we  lost  company  of  our  fly-boat,  who  taking  in  too 
much  of  her  sail,  and  observing  the  Admiral's  light, 
flagged  to  leeward.  The  next  day  the  fleet  came  to 
an  anchor  under  Point  Comfort  in  the  said  island, 
where  by  stitching  of  bonnets  we  stopped  our  leak, 
insomuch  that  we  gave  over  baling  to  the  great  ease 
of  our  men  and  comfort  of  us  all.  We  spent  four 
days  in  this  road  to  take  in  fresh  water,  here  being  a 
very  good  river  and  convenient  watering.  This  land 
was  formerly  inhabited  by  the  English ;  but  their 
numbers  being  small  were  cut  off  by  the  Indians, 
and  their  dwellings  laid  waste.  The  place  is  spacious 
and  fertile,  well  stored  with  wood  and  water,  and 
having  divers  fresh  rivers  in  it ;  and  on  the  leeward 
side  two  very  good  harbours.  It  hath  also  great 
store  of  wild  hogs,  goats,  and  other  provisions. 
The  French  pretend  to  this  island,  as  well  as  to  the 
two  former  of  Granada  and  St.  Vincent,  being 
neighbours  to  the  Island  of  Martinique,  which  they 
possess,  but  cannot  the  other.  By  degrees  we 
found  out  our  leak,  and  made  shift  to  stop  it  so 
well  that  we  spared  one  of  our  pumps.  The 
General  of  the  French  upon  Mettalina,  alias  Marti- 

B  B    2 


372         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

nique,  as  soon  as  he  heard  of  the  Prince's  being  there, 
sent  a  shallop  with  divers  of  his  officers  to  welcome 
him  to  those  parts,  to  assure  him  of  his  service, 
and   what   else   lay  in   his  power,    and  withal    to 
invite  him  thither.     His  Highness,  having  refreshed 
his  men,  stood  for  that  island,  where  he  met  with  a 
fleet  of  Dutch  men-of-war,  who,  with  the  forts   of 
the   island,  saluted  him    with   abundance  of  great 
~  ordnance.    Our  ships  having  returned  thanks,   the 
captains  of  the    several  ships  came   to   tender  his 
Highness  their  services,  who,  having  received  them 
very  courteously,  at  their  departure  gave  them  guns. 
As  soon  as  they  were  returned  aboard,  the  whole 
fleet   gave  thanks.     The   French   General  sent  his 
Deputy-Governors   aboard    the  Prince  to    confirm 
what   his  other  officers  intimated  unto  him,  and  to 
give  him  notice  that  the   English  islands  were  all 
surrendered    to   the    Parliament;     so    it    was   now 
resolved  to  visit  them  as  enemies.     His  Highness 
gave  him   kind  welcome,   and    sent    a   gentleman 
to  visit  the  Governor,  and  render  him  thanks,  and 
withal   to  let  him   know  the  present  time  would 
not  permit  him  to  receive  his  courteous  offer,  but  he 
should  endeavour  a  grateful  satisfaction  for  his  kind- 
ness when  it  should  present  itself.     The  gentleman 
was  accompanied  back  to  the  sea-side  by  the  officers, 
and   at  his  putting   off  was  saluted  by   the  forts. 
This  island  is  far  larger  than  any  of  the  neighbour- 
ing ones :  very  fertile,  abounding  in  provisions  and 
traffic,    the   chiefest  whereof    consists  in   tobacco, 


1652.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        373 

which  for  the  goodness  is  preferred  before  that  of 
the  other  plantations.     It  is  inhabited  by  a  consider- 
able colony,  which  defends  both  that  and  their  title 
to  the  other  islands,  being  befriended  by  the  Indians, 
who  daily  trade  with  them ;  by  which  means  they 
bring  some  of  them  to  use  their  customs,  and  ac- 
knowledge them  their  proprietors.    This  place  were 
much  more   to  be   esteemed  were   it   not  for  the 
abundance  of  serpents  that  it  is  troubled  with ;  yet 
the  inhabitants  by  degrees  find  means  to  destroy 
them,  so  that  now  they  have  not  many  upon  their 
clear  ground.     Having  despatched  our  business,  we 
set  sail  that  night  for  the  other  islands,  resolving  to 
coast  them  all  along  to  see  if  we  could  meet  with 
any  English  or  Spanish  traders.  Next  day,  being  over 
against  Dominique,  which  is  inhabited  by  Indians, 
they  came  to  us  with  divers  Periagos  to  trade,  and 
brought  us  divers  sorts  of  fruits  for  refreshing,  which 
we  exchanged  for  glass  beads,  and  such  like  commo- 
dities.     They  are   naturally  inclining  to  a   tawny 
complexion ;  but  to  avoid  the  stinging  of  the  merry- 
wings    and   mosquitoes,   they    anoint     their    skins 
thick   with  a  red  paint,  which  they  call  rockow,  in 
which   colour   they   think    themselves    very   fine ; 
having  broad  and   flat  faces,  their  hair  black  and 
hard,  which   they  wear  very  long,  with  two  locks 
before  :  they  bind  up  the  rest  behind  like  women, 
in  which  they  commonly  wear  a  mackaw's  or  parrot's 
feather,  with  a  string  of  fishes'  teeth  about  their 
neck :  some  bore  holes  in  their  noses,  lips,  and  ears, 


374         MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

in  which  they  hang  brass  rings.  The  French  that 
trade  amongst  them  report  they  worship  the  devil, 
who  sometimes  speaks  to  them  through  a  wooden 
image ;  and,  if  any  time  displeased  with  them,  they 
are  soundly  beaten,  but  know  not  by  whom,  which 
ever  aweth  them  from  turning  Christians.  They 
are  naturally  of  a  revengeful  nature,  persecuting 
injuries  to  the  fourth  generation,  whereby  they  are 
in  perpetual  war.  Breach  of  word  they  hold  the 
greatest  crime.  They  are  extremely  jealous  of  their 
wives,  but  not  of  their  daughters :  perfidious  to  all 
strangers.  Nature  provides  them  food,  their  country 
being  stored  with  fruits  of  many  sorts,  with  fish  and 
fowl  in  abundance ;  and  many  strange  creatures, 
as  guyanas,  armadillos,  land-crab,  and  the  soldier. 
This  last  is  so  called  from  having  the  fore  part  armed 
with  a  shell  like  a  lobster ;  the  hinder  part  being 
naked,  which  he  hides  in  other  fishes'  shells,  and  as 
he  grows  in  bigness,  shifts  his  cover.  Their  coast  is 
likewise  well  stored  with  tortoises  of  divers  sorts, 
their  flesh  serving  for  food,  and  their  shell  for 
traffic.  Their  bread  is  cassava,  which  is  made  of  a 
root,  out  of  which  they  squeeze  the  juice,  and  after 
grate  it,  and  then  bake  it  on  a  stone  like  a  cake. 
Our  commodities  for  traffic  were  beads,  glass,  coral, 
cristal  and  amber,  penknives,  looking-glasses,  bills, 
hatchets,  saws,  and  strong  liquors,  for  which  they 
exchange  tortoiseshells,  fine  cotton  yarn,  and  green 
stones,  which  they  bring  from  the  main-land,  having 
many  virtues  in  them,  as  curing  the  falling  sickness, 


1652.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      375 

and  easing  women  in  labour,  others  to  dry  their  milk, 
being  merely  worn  about  them.  They  have  many 
sorts  of  gums  and  balsams  of  great  esteem,  which 
nature  bestows  on  them  without  labour ;  only  the 
green  stones  they  make  with  clay  under  water  in 
what  form  they  please,  which,  by  the  virtue  of  the 
sun,  is  changed,  and  becomes  so  hard  a  substance  as 
can  hardly  be  broken.  Their  arms  are  bows  and 
arrows :  they  have  another  weapon,  which  they  call 
boricon,  which  is  a  piece  of  iron-wood,  being  extremely 
hard  and  heavy ;  they  make  it  an  inch  thick,  three 
inches  broad  at  the  one  end,  and  six  at  the  other. 
When  they  kill  any  man  with  this  club,  they  leave 
it  beside  him,  that  it  may  be  known  who  did  the 
act:  they  never  carry  them  but  in  time  of  war. 
They  reckon  their  seasons  and  ages  by  moons,  having 
no  knowledge  of  other  times. 

"  From  hence  we  sailed  to  the  Island  of  Guada- 
loupe,  which  is  inhabited  by  a  considerable  colony 
of  French  :  it  yields  the  same  commodities  as 
the  former.  This  government  lays  claim  to  Do- 
minique, Todos  los  Sanctos,  Marygolent,  and 
Grantare, l  all  which  are  not  yet  inhabited  by 
Christians.  His  Highness  came  not  to  anchor, 
but  sent  his  secretary  ashore,  who  being  returned, 
we  stood  for  Montserrat,  inhabited  by  the  Eng- 
lish, where  we  arrived  the  next  day,  being  Whit- 
Sunday,  1652.  We  sailed  to  windward  of  it,  and 

1  Now  Saintes ;  Marie-galante ;  Grenada. 


376         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

came  about  the  north  point,  where  standing  into 
the  old  road,  and  finding  no  ships,  we  bore  up  to 
Nevis ;  but  a  small  French  ship  that  consorted  with 
us  for  her  security,  put  forth  her  flag  as  a  sign  of 
ships,  which  made  us  tack  and  stand  for  the  other 
road,  where  we  took  two  small  vessels.  We 
anchored  there  till  night  to  man  our  prizes,  and 
prevent  them  from  knowing  our  course ;  but  his 
Highness  finding  one  of  the  ships  to  belong  to  one 
of  the  King's  friends,  restored  both  ship  and  goods. 
This  is  esteemed  the  best  island  for  sugar :  it  makes 
little  of  any  other  commodities,  only  some  tobacco 
to  windward,  which  is  valued  more  than  any  other 
of  the  English  plantations.  Night  being  come,  we 
stood  for  Nevis,  where  we  arrived  on  Whit-Sunday, 
the  Admiral,  leaving  the  rest  of  the  fleet  astern  a 
league  for  fear  of  discovery,  fell  in  by  break  of  day 
with  Pelican  Point.  We  sailed  into  the  usual  road, 
where  were  great  store  of  ships,  who,  having  made 
the  whole  fleet,  began  to  shift  for  themselves,  some 
endeavouring  to  escape  by  sailing,  others  by  running 
to  shore.  His  Highness  laid  the  fairest  aboard, 
being  close  under  the  fort ;  which  endeavoured  her 
security,  but  in  vain  ;  for  being  entered,  we  straight 
brought  her  with  our  shot,  and  with  our  pinnace 
fetched  off  another  that  was  hauling  ashore.  They 
spent  divers  shot  both  from  fort  and  ship,  but  we 
lost  but  one  man,  which  was  his  Highnesses  secre- 
tary, being  killed  close  to  him  before  the  Vice- 
Admiral  and  the  rest  could  get  in.  Their  ships 


1652.]      PRINCE  RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      377 

were  fast  aground,  so  as  we  could  bring  no  prizes  off. 
They  exchanged  shots  freely,  and  seeing  no  good 
could  be  done,  we  steered  for  St.  Christopher's. 
His  Highness  Prince  Maurice  only  lost  two  men, 
being  his  master  and  a  volunteer.  We  got  into 
the  French  road,  called  La  Bastare1  Road,  by  eleven 
of  the  clock,  and  sailed  from  thence  along  the  coast 
for  the  old  road,  where  the  English  inhabit.  Being 
fair  up  Stone's  Point,  the  fort,  having  advanced  the 
Parliament  flag,  began  to  pay  us  hard.  His  High- 
ness luffing  close  to  it,  received  their  shot,  and 
returning  them  his,  passed  into  the  road  the  whole 
fleet  during  the  night.  But  the  Prince  perceiving 
theirs  to  be  hauled  close  to  the  shore,  and  their 
cables  chained,  knew  nothing  was  to  be  done  there, 
for  fear  of  being  becalmed,  the  land  lying  very  high 
and  they  close  under  it,  so  as  we  must  expose  our 
masts  to  the  malice  of  the  fort  guns.  These  consi- 
derations kept  us  from  going  further,  but  passing  by 
them  we  exchanged  broadsides,  and  so  came  to  an 
anchor  in  Sandy  Point  Road,  on  the  French  ground, 
where  his  Highness  was  kindly  saluted  by  their  forts 
and  visited  by  their  officers.  The  Prince  new  berthed 
and  stayed  two  days.  In  the  night  we  weighed  and 
came  to  La  Bastare  Road  again,  where  his  Highness 
intended  to  stay  some  time  to  provide  himself  with 
necessaries.  As  soon  as  we  were  at  an  anchor  the 
forts  saluted  us,  and  the  French  General  sent  aboard 

1  Basse-terre. 


878        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

to  welcome  the  Princes :  the  Princes  returned  him 
thanks,  and  the  next  day  sent  a  gentleman  to  repay 
his  visit,  and  to  desire  permission  to  take  in  water, 
which  he  very  willingly  granted  ;  but  proposing 
other  matters  which  might  have  been  for  his  advan- 
tage found  him  averse  to  it ;  which  made  us  conclude 
there  could  be  no  certain  security  in  case  of  danger 
in  regard  of  the  strict  league  betwixt  them  and  the 
English,  and  therefore  we  resolved  to  quit  that  road 
with  the  soonest.  His  Highness  fortunately  found 
there  some  Dutch  men-of-war,  who  had  taken  a 
Portuguese  ship  bound  for  Brazil  with  provisions, 
which  they  exchanged  with  us  for  prize  goods. 

"Having  finished  our  business,  we  sailed  to  the  Vir- 
gin Islands  to  careen  our  ships,  where  we  came  to  an 
anchor  in  "  Dixon's  Hole,"  otherwise  named  "  Ca- 
valiers' Harbour,"1  where  we  unloaded  the  Admiral, 
and  fitted  her  for  the  careen.  We  were  here  three 
days  before  we  could  find  fresh  water ;  and  fearing 
the  want  thereof,  his  Highness  sent  the  Sarah  to 
Santa  Cruz  to  water  the  fleet,  where  she  met  the 
pink  we  lost  off  St.  Lucia,  which  by  foul  weather 
was  driven  so  low:  they  returned  together  to  our 
harbour.  Her  officer,  having  given  an  account  of  his 
voyage,  was  employed  back  to  the  same  place  to  pro- 
cure cassava-roots  out  of  the  ruined  plantations  to 
help  our  victuals ;  but  the  ground  being  overgrown, 
he  could  find  but  few.  While  we  were  fitting  to 

1  Now  called  "Rupert's  Bay." 


1652.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      379 

careen  the  Admiral,  the  carpenters  were  sent  ashore 
to  cut  stanchions  and  bars  to  haul  down  by :  some 
of  them,  being  new  men,  got  possession  of  the  pin- 
nace, and  leaving  the  others  ashore,  ran  away 
with  her  to  Porto  Rico,  an  island  inhabited  by 
Spanish,  near  the  place  where  we  were.  His  High- 
ness knowing  their  intelligence  might  do  us  injury, 
provisions  growing  very  short,  was  enforced  to 
retrench  our  provisions,  allowing  to  each  man  four 
ounces  of  bread  per  diem ;  and  the  like  of  all  other 
viands,  and  himself  no  more ;  which  abstinence  of 
his  made  every  one  undergo  their  hardship  with 
alacrity. 

These,  which  are  called  Virgin  Islands,  are  many, 
lying  within  a  league  of  one  another,  through  which 
goes  a  sound,  in  length  eighteen  leagues,  that  hath 
in  most  places  twelve,  fifteen,  twenty  and  twenty-five 
fathoms'  depth,  and  good  anchorage  everywhere, 
having  in  most  of  them  very  good  harbours,  besides 
the  sound:  they  are  not  inhabited,  by  reason  no 
small  party  dare  adventure,  having  the  Spaniards  for 
too  near  neighbours.  The  harbour  we  careened  in 
was  very  spacious,  clear,  good,  and  very  well  land, 
locked,  but  somewhat  small  at  the  entrance  :  as  you 
sail  in,  it  is  good  to  borrow  of  the  larboard  side, 
where  you  have  twelve  fathom.  In  the  channel 
there  is  a  rock  on  the  starboard-side,  which  is  some- 
what dangerous  to  come  near ;  but  being  within,  the 
shore  is  bold  enough  in  most  places.  There  are 
several  creeks  within,  where  you  may  bring  a  ship's 


380         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

side  to  the  land,  and  careen  by  the  trees,  having 
four  fathom  water  close  aboard  it.  Our  business 
finished  here,  we  burnt  the  Sarah,  the  John,  and 
the  Mary,  being  all  unserviceable ;  and  disposed  of 
their  goods  into  other  ships,  and  passed  betwixt 
two  islands  to  west  of  it,  called  the  Passages  :  hauling 
close  by  the  wind,  we  stood  into  twelve  degrees, 
the  wind  blowing  trade  at  east-north-east :  betwixt 
that  and  the  north-east,  we  tacked  to  weather 
those  islands.  We  stood  to  the  southward  until  by 
computation  we  were  within  twelve  leagues  of  the 
island  Anguila,  bearing  south  and  by  east  from  us. 

There  began  a  stress  of  wind  at  north,  which 
they  call  in  all  those  parts  a  hierecane  [hurricane]  ; 
it  forced  us  to  take  in  all  our  sails,  except  the 
main-course,  with  which  we  tried  until  eight  of  the 
clock ;  but  then  the  storm  increasing  tore  our  sail 
from  the  yard,  though  of  new  double  canvas.  Roll- 
ing now  in  the  trough  of  the  sea,  we  strove  to  set  our 
mizen  to  keep  her  up,  but  as  soon  as  the  foot  was 
open  the  sails  blew  quite  away,  so  that  being  desti- 
tute of  all  human  help,  we  lay  at  the  mercy  of  God. 
Being  near  a  lee  shore,  and  the  weather  so  thick,  we 
could  not  discern  our  ship's  length  before  us,  the 
bolt-ropes  and  running  rigging  keeping  our  men 
from  the  deck,  so  as  they  could  not  stand  to  any 
labour ;  but  the  Divine  Providence  taking  compas- 
sion on  us  in  this  helpless  and  deplorable  condition ; 
being  twelve  of  the  night,  within  half  a  league  of 
a  high  rock,  called  Sombrero ;  we  guessed  afterwards 


1652.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     381 

that  we  drove  betwixt  that   and  an   island  called 
Anguilita  (where   never  ships  were  known   to  sail 
before)  without  seeing   or  knowing   anything   but 
the  general  calamity  and   danger ;  being    between 
the  land  about  one  in  the  morning,  although  un- 
known to  any  man.     The  wind  shifted  to  eastward, 
and  we  drove  until  day,  when  not  seeing  any  of  our 
fleet,  we  set  our  sprit-sail  to  bring  her  head  about 
to  seek  some  land  before  night,  or  know,  if  possible, 
where  we  were.     Having  cast  our  ship,  the  master 
commanded  to  take  in  the  sail ;  but  Heaven,  which 
never   left  us,   made  use  of  weak  instruments  to 
manifest  his  mercy,  for  as  they  were  taking  it  in,  it 
blew  out  of  the  bolt-ropes,  so  that  being  past  reco- 
very, let  it  stand  :  this  hastened  our  way  so  much  as 
it  brought  us  within  sight  of  danger  by  three  in  the 
morning,  we  standing  directly  on  a  ledge  of  rocks 
that  are  in  length  ten  leagues,  which  lies  betwixt 
jEregados1  and  the  Virgins,  so  that  if  we  had  been 
benighted,  we  had  undoubtedly  all  perished,  with- 
out a  miracle,  which  in  part  was  declared ;  for  having 
cut  the  balancing  of  our  fore-yardarm,  and  set  that 
with  much  ado,  we  brought  another  sprit-sail  to  the 
yard  by  force  of  hands,  endeavouring  (though  with 
small  hopes)  to  weather  the  ledge.  As  we  drew  near 
to  it,  the  wind  scanted  upon  us :  yet  it  pleased  God  to 
preserve  us  in  this  extremity;  for  being  within  half  a 
league  of  our  ruin,  the  wind  veered  two  points  to 

1  The  Anagadas,    on  which   sixty-three  ships  were  wrecked 
between  1811  and  1831. 


382    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

the  eastward,  so  that  we  weathered  to  the  rocks, 
and  got  sight  of  the  Virgin  Islands,  where  we  came 
to  an  anchor  in  the  sound  in  twelve  fathom  water. 
The  next  day  the  hurricane  ceased,  and  we  sailed  to 
our  former  harbour,  where  we  spent  three  days  to 
fit  ourselves  for  sea  again,  both  our  topmasts  being 
spent  [sprung?],  and  our  ship  left  like  a  wreck, 
without  rigging  or  sails.  In  this  dismal  storm  we 
lost  the  Vice-Admiral,  and  the  fly-boat  [tender  ?], 
who  by  all  probability  perished  on  those  lands  which 
we  escaped  in  the  night,  being  a  league  to  the 
windward  of  us.  When  the  hurricane  began,  the 
Honest  Seaman  was  driven  to  leeward  as  far  as  His- 
paniola,  where  she  was  afterwards  cast  ashore,  and 
lost  in  Porto  Pina  by  the  ill- working  of  the  master. 

If  my  memory  had  been  so  treacherous  as  to  have 
forgotten  my  duty,  I  should  condemn  myself  of  a 
crime  unpardonable;  therefore  give  me  leave  to 
make  a  contracted  value  of  what  we  lost  in  this  dis- 
aster; and  having  read  it,  confess  with  me  it  was 
inestimable.  In  this  fatal  wreck, — besides  a  great 
many  brave  gentlemen,  and  others, — the  sea,  to  glut 
itself,  swallowed  the  Prince  Maurice,  whose  fame  the 
mouth  of  detraction  cannot  blast,  his  very  enemies 
bewailing  his  loss.  Many  had  more  power,  few  more 
merit :  he  was  snatched  from  us  in  obscurity,  lest, 
beholding  his  loss  would  have  prevented  some  from 
endeavouring  their  own  safety : — so  much  he  lived 
beloved,  and  died  bewailed. 

Our  ships  being  fitted,  we  left  the  harbour,  endea- 


1652.]      PRINCE  RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      383 

vouring  to  ply  to  windward,  and  either  to  procure 
provisions  or  perish  in  the  acquisition  ;  but  being  to 
the  eastward  of  those  islands,  we  met  with  a  south- 
west wind,  which  never  left  us  until  we  were  within 
sight  of  Montserrat,  so  that  we  were  not  long  in 
bearing  up.  We  were  six  days  becalmed,  ten 
leagues  distant  from  thence,  and  could  gain  no 
nearer,  between  the  current  and  Guadaloupe  heaving 
and  setting  us  too  and  fro,  until  at  length  the  wind 
freshing  upon  us,  we  got  up  with  it.  We  stood  into 
the  road  by  night,  and  having  made  a  small  vessel 
at  anchor  (which  we  hoped  was  a  New  Englandman 
laden  with  provisions),  by  reason  it  was  dark,  we 
stood  off  till  day ;  when  making  her  under  sail,  we 
gave  chase,  and  took  her  before  she  could  get  free  of 
the  point  of  the  island  called  Brambsbies  Island 
Point.  This  done,  we  stood  along  the  shore  to  the 
northward,  and  being  open  off  Antigua,  we  descried 
a  Spanish  galeon  off  Five  Island  Harbour,  to  whom 
we  gave  chase ;  but  she  sailing  better  than  we,  we 
gave  her  over,  and  tacked  and  stood  for  Guadaloupe, 
where  we  came  to  an  anchor  next  day,  and  were 
kindly  welcomed.  The  Governor  sent  the  Major  of 
the  Island  aboard  his  Highness  to  assure  him  of 
what  assistance  the  island  could  afford,  which  he 
worthily  performed,  for  a  speedy  course  was  taken 
to  replenish  us  with  provisions,  their  storehouses 
having  order  to  sell  their  wine  unto  us,  which  must 
be  acknowledged  a  great  favour.  Two  days  after 
the  Governor  sent  his  brother  to  wait  on  his  High- 


384    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

ness,  who,  with  an  expression  of  zeal,  offered  his 
utmost  power  to  serve  the  Prince.  While  we  were 
here  arrived,  a  Dutch  ship  bound  for  Antigua, 
who  having  received  some  affront  (to  revenge 
himself)  told  us  of  two  English  ships  that  were  in 
Five  Island  Harbour,  which  invited  the  Prince  to 
make  speedy  sail  thither ;  where  arriving,  he  landed 
fifty  men  under  command  of  a  gentleman  (Sir  Ro- 
bert Holmes),  who,  upon  landing,  beat  them  off  from 
the  fort,  upon  which  the  ships  surrendered.  One  of 
them  by  disaster  was  sunk  before  our  arrival ;  her 
goods  we  took  out,  and  brought  the  other  to  Guada- 
loupe,  a  little  harbour  that  lies  to  the  north  of  the 
corner  road.  While  we  lay  in  that  road,  we  saw 
New  Englandman,  laden  with  provisions  in  the 
offing,  and  so  took  him,  and  brought  him  into  the 
little  harbour  again,  which  (like  manna  from  heaven) 
fell  into  our  hands,  supplying  us  at  such  a  season 
when  our  necessities  were  greatest,  being  homeward 
bound. 

THE  RETURN  FROM  THE   INDIES. 

The  Admiral  being  alone,  his  prizes  took  up 
many  of  his  men,  which  disenabled  him  from  un- 
dertaking any  design  but  to  return  northward, 
having  small  hopes  to  recover  any  of  those  ships 
which  were  separated  from  him  by  the  hurricane : 
yet,  resolving  to  visit  the  English  islands  once  more 
he  sailed  to  Montserrat,  where,  arriving  as  soon  as 
it  was  light,  he  stood  close  under  the  land,  until  he 


1653.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     385 

came  to  the  Indian  bay,  where  he  took  two  shal- 
lops, and  kept  them  from  giving  intelligence. 
Coasting  along  the  islands,  he  came  to  Meirs,1  where 
they  had  raised  two  new  batteries,  and  from  them 
discharged  many  shots  at  us.  His  Highness  thought 
it  not  convenient  to  hazard  all  for  small  gains,  and 
so  departed  from  thence  to  the  island  of  Statins,2 
inhabited  by  the  Dutch.  He  came  to  an  anchor, 
and  stayed  there  some  days  to  take  in  fresh  water; 
from  thence  he  stood  for  the  Virgin  Islands,  where 
he  disembarked,  directing  his  course  for  the  north- 
ward. We  were,  by  computation,  within  twelve 
leagues  of  the  Bermudas,  but,  being  foggy  weather, 
could  not  discern  it :  from  thence,  meeting  with  west- 
erly winds,  we  sailed  for  the  Azores.  The  first  land 
we  fell  in  with  was  the  islands  of  Flores  and  Corvo : 
from  thence  we  stood  for  Fayal,  thinking  to  refresh 
our  people,  and  inform  ourself  how  affairs  went ;  but 
when  in  the  road,  and  expecting  nothing  less  than 
friendship,  we  saluted  the  forts,  they,  instead  of 
thanks,  returned  a  shot  which  struck  the  Admiral  in 
her  bow.  The  Prince  wondering  at  such  rude  treat- 
ment, sent  his  boat  ashore  to  inform  the  governor 
of  his  being  there,  and  to  know  a  reason  why  that 
shot  was  made ;  but  his  boat  rowing  towards  the 
landing-place,  was  waved  to  keep  off,  and  not  suf- 
fered to  come  within  speech.  The  Prince  having  put 
some  Portuguese  in  on  whom  he  had  relied — their 

1  St.  Christopher's  ?  '  2  St.  Eustatius  ? 

VOL.  III.  C    C 


386         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

ship  being  cast  away, — sent  the  boat  again ;  not- 
withstanding whose  relation  of  their  kind  usage,  our 
men  were  not  permitted  to  land,  but  received 
answer,  that  there  was  no  reception  for  us,  without 
any  reason  shewed.  His  Highness,  being  unsatisfied 
with  that  abrupt  answer,  sailed  to  St.  Michael's, 
hoping  there  to  receive  a  better  welcome  from  that 
governor,  whose  friendship  he  had  obliged  by  former 
civilities ;  but  coming  there,  within  half-shot  of 
their  fort,  they  fired  two  guns,  whose  shot  passed 
over  the  ships,  as  advice  for  us  not  to  anchor  there. 
At  the  same  instant  appeared  a  ship  in  the  offing, 
to  whom  we  gave  chase,  she  was  a  Frenchman,  with 
whom  having  spoken,  we  stood  to  the  northward, 
betwixt  St.  Michael's  and  Terceira,  where  we  met 
foul  weather.  The  gust  being  past,  we  directed 
our  course  for  the  coast  of  Brittany,  intending  for 
the  river  of  Nantes,  there  to  put  off  our  merchan- 
dize. Being,  by  computation,  in  the  height  of  Cape 
Finesterre,  having  men  at  topmast-head  to  descry 
land,  they  made  two  ships  under  the  lee-bow,  to 
whom  the  Prince  gave  chase ;  but  by  the  ill  conning 
of  the  mates,  the  ship  was  brought  to  leeward, 
which  caused  the  Prince  to  conn  her  himself,  until 
he  came  within  shot  of  the  leewardmost ;  but  by 
reason  of  a  ground-sea,  and  the  discovery  of  seven 
or  eight  sail  more,  his  Highness  was  persuaded  not 
to  lay  her  aboard,  for  fear  of  disabling  his  own  ship 
from  working,  in  case  the  rest  should  bear  up  with 
him,  and  so  giving  over  his  chase,  stood  all  night 


1653.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        387 

under   a   pair   of  courses,    the    prizes    being   with 
them,    commanded    by    Sir   Robert    Holmes,    con- 
temning  their   chase,   in    case    they   intended    it. 
Next  day,  expecting  to   hear  further  from   them, 
he  found  a  clear  sea,  and  not  a  ship  to  be  seen. 
Having  made  the  Cape,  he  stood  for  his  intended 
port.     Being  far  within  the  bay,  he  caused  the  lead 
to  be  heaved,  and  found  sixty  fathoms  water,  which 
proved  to  be  sounding  of  rock   Bon,  a  sunk  rock 
that  lieth  ....  leagues  off  the  river  of  Nantes,  and 
is  very  dangerous,  by  reason   there  is  no  mark  for 
it.     Two  days  after,  about  nine  at  night,  we  saw 
the  island  of  Belleisle  right  a-head,  which  we  no 
sooner  made,  than  we  tacked  the  ship  for  fear  of 
broken  ground  which  lieth  off  that  island  ;  but  the 
moon  was  so   foully  eclipsed,  as   the  ships   could 
hardly  see  one  the  other.     In   this   haven  Provi- 
dence  is   to   be   remembered,  that  we   should   so 
fortunately  make  that  island  before  that  darkness, 
for  otherwise  this  last  adventure  might  prove  as 
perilous  as  any  of  the  former,  that  coast  being  very 
rugged.     We  stood  to  sea  all  night ;  next  day  came 
into  the  river  of  Nantes,  where  we  anchored  against 
St.  Lazar,  and  continued  there  that  night ;    next 
day  we  weighed  anchor,  to  get  higher  up  the  river 
to  Pameboeuf ;  but  as  soon  as  he  was  under  sail,  the 
pilots  of  the  country,  who,   according   to   custom, 
were  taken  in,  brought  the  ship  on  ground  upon  a 
bank,  which  lieth  about  the  middle  of  the  channel, 
where  she  was  in  danger  of  wreck,  for  the  tide  of  ebb 

c  o  2 


388          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

being  long  spent,  and  the  bank  steep,  she  had  like  to 
have  overset.  The  men,  despairing  of  getting  her  off, 
were  desirous  to  quit  her,  as  they  were  able  to  shift 
for  themselves ;  nevertheless,  through  the  industry 
and  care  of  his  Highness,  the  guns  were  brought 
over  to  the  grounded  side,  and  so  kept  her  to  rights, 
until,  at  half  flood,  the  tide  setting  very  strong,  she 
began  to  cast  and  heel,  insomuch  as  the  water  came 
into  her  ports,  when,  shifting  her  guns,  they  righted 
her  again,  and  at  high-water  brought  her  off  safe  to 
an  anchor  before  Pameboeuf.  Thus  having  over- 

o 

come  all  misfortunes,  the  Prince  ended  his  voyage ; 
and  having  taken  order  for  the  security  of  his  prizes, 
he  sent  his  own  ship  to  Crosiack,  on  the  north  side, 
without  the  river's  mouth;  thinking  to  repair  and 
fit  her  for  sea  again.  Here,  however,  like  a  grate- 
ful servant,  having  brought  her  princely  master 
through  so  many  dangers,  she  consumed  herself; 
scorning,  after  being  quitted  by  him,  that  any  infe- 
rior person  should  command  her ;  so  as  he  might, 
with  Caesar,  say  to  his  men,  they  carried  Rupert 
and  his  fortune.1 

1  This  diary  is  endorsed  with  the  following  memoranda  of  in- 
formation to  be  sought  concerning  certain  passages,  from  the  per- 
sons named  as  the  best  authorities. 
Queries  to  persons. 

Holstein  and  that  action,  Sir  F.  Daniel,  Sr.  Bret.  Lord  Craven. 

The  Prince's  actions  in  Flanders  and  Choqueux,  Sir  R.  Holmes. 

At  Sea,  Mr.  Ferns— Sir  R.  Holmes,  who  was  a  prisoner  with 
him  in  Guinea. 

Helvoetsluys,  Lord  Gerrard. 

Ireland,  Sir  Thomas  Allen. 


Ki53.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       389 

[The  MS.  closes  here  :  the  Prince  received  the 
following  letter  amongst  others  on  his  arrival  at 
Nantes  : — 

SIR, 

I  am  infinitely  joyed  to  hear  that  your  Highness  is 
safely  arrived  at  Toulon,  and  considering  how  much  cause 
there  was  to  fear  that  you  would  not  have  had  even  so 
favourable  an  issue  of  the  storms  and  enemies  you  have 
had  to  deal  with,  I  again  assure  your  Highness  that  I  am 
infinitely  joyed  to  hear  you  are  there,  and  before  I  enter 
upon  any  other  matter  I  entreat  your  Highness  to  believe 
I  am  as  much  concerned  in  this  safety  of  your  person  by 
my  affections  to  it  and  devotion  to  your  service,  as  any 
man  living  can  be,  of  which  I  will  give  you  proofs  of 
doing,  in  the  present  all  things  that  my  understanding  can 
direct  me  to  for  the  good  of  your  service,  with  all  the  dili- 
gence and  industry  that  can  be  brought  to  it,  and  here- 
after all  those  that  your  commands  shall  direct  me  to, 
with  most  punctual  obedience,  so  that  «your  Highness 
shall  perceive  I  am  not,  nor  have  ever  departed  from  the 
memory  of  my  professions  to  you,  nor  shall  ever,  from  the 
just  discharge  of  them  in  any  occasion  that  I  shall  meet, 
or  shall  be  presented  to  me,  and  this  is  all  I  shall  say  to 
your  Highness  of  this  subject,  which  I  entreat  you  to 
believe  as  a  most  perfect  and  inviolable  truth,  touching 
your  affairs,  you  must  be  pleased  to  take  notice  that  those 
of  this  place  are  so  employed  that  it  is  not  possible  to  give 
you  any  other  account,  than  that  we  are  watching  the  first 
occasion  that  can  be  taken  to  speak  of  them,  and  that  we 
do  consult  with  great  care  of  all  that  we  have  to  propose 
here,  and  offer  in  advice  to  you,  and  that  very  shortly,  we 
shall  dispatch  Choqueux  to  you  with  the  resolutions,  and 
to  let  you  see  how  absolute  a  necessity  there  is  for  you  to 
expect  a  while,  T  will  tell  you,  in  short,  something  of  the 
state  of  this  place,  the  Duke  of  Orleans  is  declared  against 


390    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

the  cardinal,  goes  daily  to  the  Parliament  and  solicits  there 
"  the  "  removing  him  from  the  Ministry,  hath  already 
obtained  a  supplication  from  the  Parliament  to  that  pur- 
pose, many  other  public  particulars  of  this  kind  are  past, 
that  the  bearer  will  relate  to  you.  The  Princesses  are  sent 
to  Havre,  nobody  knows  whether  to  have  their  liberty,  or 
only  to  be  treated  with  concerning  it,  in  fine,  where  all 
this  will  end  only  God  and  the  angels  know,  no  man 
knows  how  to  guess.  But  in  fine,  the  present  state  is  that 
no  other  business  can  be  spoken  of.  I  was,  last  night,  with 
the  cardinal,  about  you  and  your  aifairs,  but  was  remitted 
by  him  till  a  day  or  two  be  past,  nobody  knows  yet  whom 
to  address  to  for  any  despatch,  nor  where  this  strange  con- 
fusion of  things  will  end,  only  it  is  the  general  sense  that 
this  condition  of  them  cannot  last  more  than  very  few 
days.  I  am  come  within  this  day  or  two  from  Holland, 
where  I  left  your  Highness's  friends,  of  that  place,  very 
well.  Seymour,  that  came  some  eighteen  days  ago  from 
the  King,  came  along  with  me,  he  left  the  King  well,  to 
be  crowned  the  day  after  his  parting,  and  all  parties  in 
Scotland,  at  last,  but  I  fear  too  late,  united  for  his  service, 
they  will  have  once  more  a  very  numerous  army,  and  if 
they  be  not  presently  overrun  before  they  accustom  their 
men  to  their  arms,  and  that  they  learn  the  ways  of  their 
own  defence,  I  am  confident  we  shall  yet  have  where- 
withal to  struggle  for  our  recovery,  and  there  will  be  place 
to  consider  at  least  what  may  be  done,  and  to  have  another 
blow  or  two  for  it,  if  not  many.  But  of  this  subject,  too, 
your  Highness  shall  be  more  at  large  entertained  when 
Choqueux  attends  you,  I  will  now  hold  you  no  longer,  God 
of  heaven  keep  you  in  all  your  dangers,  and  give  you  at 
length  some  quiet,  and  the  fruits  of  them;  I  am  most 
truly,  Sir,  your  Highness's  most  humble  and 
most  obedient,  faithful  servant, 

HENRY  JERMYN.] 

Paris,  February  6,  1652. 


1646.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE    CAVALIERS.      391 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE  KING'S  DEATH  :   ITS  CONSEQUENCES. 

THE    KINO    AT    NEWPORT,  AT   HURST    CASTLE,   ST.  JAMES'S. — HIS    TRIAL   AND 
HIS    DEATH. 


"  How  died  he  ?     Death  to  life  is  crown  or  shame." 

Samson  Agonistes.     MILTON. 

"  I  '11  sing  thy  obsequies  with  trumpet  sounds, 
And  write  thine  epitaph  in  blood  and  wounds." 

MONTEOSE. 

"  For  our  martyred  Charles  I  lost  my  lands, 

For  his  son  I  spent  my  all ; 
That  a  churl  might  dine,  and  drink  my  wine, 

And  preach  in  my  father's  hall. 
That  father  died  on  Marston  Moor, 

My  son  on  Worcester  plain  ; 
But  the  King  he  turned  his  back  on  me, 
When  he  came  to  his  own  again." 

The  Cavalier.     DOYLE. 

WHEN  Rupert  left  England  in  the  summer  of 
1646,  the  Cavaliers  had  "  lost  all  except  honour.51 
They  had  lost  even  their  King.  From  the  moment 
of  his  surrender  to  the  false  Scots,1  Charles  appears 
to  have  resigned  himself  to  the  abandonment  of 

1  It  is  to  be  remembered,  to  the  everlasting  shame  of  these 
traitors,  that  Charles  had  ever  shewn  the  greatest  indulgence  to 
their  nation,  especially  to  those  through  whose  instrumentality  he 
was  sold.  M.  de  Montreuil,  the  unlucky  agent  of  his  surrender 


392          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE    OF 

all  reservation,  except  of  those  principles  by  which 
he  had  resolved  to  stand  or  fall.  We  have  read  the 
King's  orders  from  Newcastle  l  to  his  brave  garri- 
sons of  Newark,  Oxford,  and  finally  to  all  others  in 
arms  for  him,  to  make  the  best  terms  possible  for 
themselves,  and  to  think  of  him  and  his  lost  cause 
no  more.2 

to  the  Scots,  thus  reports  to  the  French  Minister  the  state  of 
patriotic  Scotland  on  the  1st  of  January,  1646  : — 

"  J'ai  trouve  le  Parlement  d'Ecosse  divise  en  trois  factions : 
celle  des  Argiles,  qui  veulent  detruire  le  Roi  et  la  monarchic,  et 
qui  le  professent  ouvertement ;  celle  des  Hamiltous,  qui  temoignent 
desirer  la  conservation  de  1'une  de  1'autre,  et  qui  travaillent  puis- 
samment  sous  main  a  la  ruine  de  tous  les  deux ;  et  la  troisieme 
de  ceux,  qui  en  dependent  ni  les  Hamiltons,  ni  des  Argiles,  qui 
veulent  se  semble  maintenir  le  Roi,  et  conserver  la  monarchic, 
mais  qui  ne  se  croient  pas  assez  fort,  ou  qui  ne  sont  pas  assez 
genereux  pour  prendre  les  moyens  qui  seroient  necessaires  pour  y 
parvenir." — M.  de  Montreuil,  Jan.  1,  1646. 

1  It  was  at  Newcastle  that  one  of  the  truculent  Scotch  minis- 
ters took  advantage  of  the  King's  being  in  the  church  to  revile  his 
Majesty  from  the  pulpit.     Not  contented  with  this  outrage  to- 
wards God  and  man,  the  divine  gave  out  for  the  concluding  psalm 
these  verses  : — 

"  Why  dost  thoti,  tyrant,  boast  thyself 
Thy  wicked  works  to  praise  ?  " 

When  the  King  arose  and,  in  a  calm,  clear  voice,  called  for  the 
fifty-sixth  psalm  : — 

"  Have  mercy,  Lord  !  on  me,  I  pray, 
For  men  would  me  devour." 

The  congregation  joined  without  hesitation  with  the  Head  of  the 
Church. — See  Kennett's  History,  p.  166. 

2  The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  last  report  that  Rupert 
received  from  any  of  his  old  officers.     It  is  from  William  Cam- 
pion, the  Governor  of  Bostal  House,  who  encloses  the  terms  of  his 
capitulation,  and  deplores  not  having  been  able  to  see  the  Prince 
before  his  departure  from  England  : — 

I  now  leave  it  to  your  high  judgment  whether  I  have  done 
handsomely  or  no.  Your  Highness  knows  by  experience  that 
innocence  itself  is  not  free  from  detraction.  The  chiefest  object, 


1647-1      PRINCE    RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      393 

At  Holdenby,  the  King  found  himself  once  more 
under  his  own  roof:  this  palace  had  been  given  to 
him  in  happier  days  by  his  mother.  When  the  ruf- 
fianly Joyce  came  to  remove  him  thence,  and  shewed 
a  pistol  as  his  only  authority,  the  King  believed  that 
lie  was  going  to  his  death  :  his  sanguine  spirit,  how- 
ever, soon  revived  when  he  found  that  his  presence 
was  hailed  with  such  triumph  by  the  army :  he  be- 
lieved that  he  had  still  a  great  game  to  play.  The 
deluded  Presbyterians  had  now  awakened  to  a  sense 
of  their  own  dangerous  position ;  they  saw  the  sword 
substituted  for  the  sceptre  which  their  blind  improvi- 
dence had  broken,  and  they  would  fain,  in  order  to 
save  themselves,  have  now  used  that  King,  whom  they 
had  striven  to  destroy.  Had  Charles  possessed 
either  that  knowledge  of  character  in  which  Crom- 
well excelled,  or  that  tact  which  is  the  best  sub- 
stitute for  the  higher  quality,  he  might  have  made 
himself  arbiter  between  the  two  great  factions. 
But  Charles  the  First  was  singularly  deficient 
both  in  tact,  and  in  those  large  sympathies  which 
enable  men  to  understand  and  to  make  use  of  the 
passions  of  others.  Besides  the  King's  prejudices, 
those  of  the  Parliament  who  wished  him  well 

therefore,  that  I  aim  at  is  his  Majesty's  and  your  Highness's 
satisfaction  ;  of  which,  if  I  may  have  the  least  intimation  from 
your  Highness,  it  shall  outbalance  all  detractions.  And  I  [shall 
be]  thereby  obliged  for  ever  to  remain,  your  -Highness's 

Most  true  admirer  and  servant, 

WILLIAM  CAMPION. 
London,  July  6,  164G. 


394    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

had  a  great  difficulty  to  contend  with  in  his  utter 
absence  of  sincerity  ;  a  vice  proceeding  rather  from 
his  infirmity  of  purpose  than  from  any  moral  ob- 
liquity. Every  negotiation  failed ;  the  Independent 
party  became  more  violent ;  the  Presbyterian  more 
timorous.  The  balance  was  thus  lost,  and  with  it 
all  chance  for  the  safety  of  the  King.  Cromwell 
found  it  was  necessary  to  his  own  views  to  take 
away  his  sovereign's  life,  and  he  soon  provided  him- 
self with  a*pretext  for  doing  so.  As  if  to  remove 
the  King's  last  chance  of  safety,  the  vain  and  giddy 
Ashburnham  joined  him  at  Hampton  Court  whilst 
escape  might  have  been  yet  possible  with  a  prudent 
counsellor.  At  the  Isle  of  Wight  opportunities  were 
unpardonably  trifled  with,  and  yet  more  devoted 
and  loyal  lives  were  lost  through  the  King's  want 
of  decision,  and  his  favourite's  imbecility.1 

I  do  not  speak  of  the  treaty  of  Newport  as 
affording  Charles  any  honourable  means  of  safety. 
Sorrow  and  trial  had  ennobled  his  character,  and 
prevented  him  from  stooping  to  what  he  considered 
an  apostasy,  in  order  merely  to  save  his  life.2 

Never  had  he  appeared  to  such  advantage  as  at 
this  trying  time :  even  Sir  Harry  Vane  professed  to 


1  Sir  John  Berkeley's  Memoirs. 

2  A  great  authority,  whom  no  one  will  suspect  of  using  dis- 
paragingly the  name  of  Parliament,  gives  the  King  credit  for 
rejecting  the  Parliamentary  terms.     Mr.  Fox  ("  History  of  James 
II.,"  p.  11),  seems  to   attribute  the  failure  of  this  negotiation 
rather  to  the  "  ambition  of  the  Parliamentary  leaders  than  to  the 
suspicions  justly  entertained  of  the  King's  sincerity." 


1648.]    PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        395 

admire  his  bearing,  and  his  discourse.1  The  King 
knew  well  that  he  refused  his  life  when  he  rejected 
the  Parliamentary  conditions.  He  said  at  parting 
to  the  Commissioners :  "  My  Lords,  I  believe  we 
shall  scarce  see  each  other  again ;  but,  God's  will 
be  done  !  I  have  made  my  peace  with  Him,  and 
shall  undergo  without  fear  whatever  He  may  suffer 
man  to  do  unto  me  :"2  and  so  speaking  he  turned 
away,  and  let  fall  some  of  "  the  biggest  tears  that 
were  ever  seen  in  human  eye." 3 

Almost  every  hope  had  left  the  King,  and  yet 
Prince  Charles  was  even  then  with  a  powerful 
fleet,  wasting  his  time  at  the  Downs,  when  he 
might  without  opposition,  if  not  without  conni- 
vance, have  borne  away  his  father  in  safety  from 
his  enemies.  But  the  fatal  destiny  of  the  King 
raised  up  an  enemy  in  his  own  consort :  under  the 
appearance  even  to  herself,  perhaps,  of  solicitude 
for  the  King's  interest  and  honour,  he  was  left  to 
die.  His  escape  to  France  was  denounced  by  her  to 
whom  alone  he  was  sincere  :  her  word  had  ever 
been  his  law  :  she  was  now,  as  she  had  ever  been,  the 
instrument  of  his  ruin.  Afterwards,  when  she  wrote 
to  the  King  that  a  ship  was  at  length  provided 
in  which  she  advised  him  to  escape,  it  was  too  late.4 

1  "  Sir  Harry  Vane,"  says  Sir  Edward  Walker,  "  told  me  they 
were  much  deceived  in  his  Majesty,  who  represented  him  as  a  weak 
person  :  he  found  far  otherwise,  that  he  was  a  person  of  great  parts 
and  abilities." 

2  Evelyn's  Memoirs,  Appendix. 

3  Sir  Philip  Warwick. 

4  Sir   John  Berkeley's    Memoirs.     [The   faithful    Will  Legge 


180          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

Hurst  Castle  is  now  a  gloomy  ruin  of  what  was 
once  a  gloomier  fortress  :  it  occupies  one  of  the  few 
dismal  situations  on  the  pleasant  southern  coast  of 
England,  and  is  well  known  as  a  landmark  to  yachts- 
men and  other  navigators  of  the  Solent.  Hither 
the  doomed  King  was  now  conveyed,  as  he  believed 
to  be  assassinated.  Soon  afterwards  his  suspicions 
were  confirmed,  when  the  drawbridge  was  heard  to 
fall  in  the  dead  of  night,  and  the  tramp  of  armed 
men  was  heard  entering  those  forbidding  walls. 
That  night  was  passed  by  the  King  in  preparation 
for  immediate  death ;  and  when  his  removal  to 
Windsor  was  announced  next  morning,  he  felt 
as  if  restored  to  life.  He  mounted  his  horse  with 
alacrity ;  he  admired  the  soldierlike  aspect  of  his 
Puritan  Guards,  and  he  even  complimented  Harri- 
son on  their  appearance  and  his  own.  Respited  from 
the  fear  of  assassination  he  believed  in  no  other 
danger :  the  atrocious  but  magnanimous  idea  of 
bringing  him  to  a  public  trial  had  never  presented 
itself  to  his  imagination. 

But  at  length  the  necessity  of  escape  forced  itself 
on  his  mind  :  the  same  exalted  sentiments  that  had 
prevented  him  from  yielding  up  the  Church  and  his 
most  devoted  friends  as  the  price  of  his  safety,  had 
rendered  his  parole  sacred  during  his  residence  in 

passed  three  months  in  disguise  upon  the  coast,  endeavouring 
with  Lovett  and  Ashburnham  to  assist  the  King's  escape.  Legge 
was  taken  prisoner  for  the  fourth  time,  and  kept  closely  in 
Arundel  Castle.  He  escaped,  however,  in  time  to  attend  Charles  IT. 
to  Worcester  fight,  where  he  was  taken  prisoner  for  the  fifth  time.] 


1648.]      PRINCE  RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      397 

the  Isle  of  Wight.     He  was  now  released  from  that 
bond,  and  he  lent  a  willing  ear  to  the  still  active 
and  devoted  Lady  D'Aubigny.     This  lady  and  her 
husband,  Lord  Newburgh,  had  arranged  a  plan  for  the 
King's  escape,  and  though  it  was  romantic,  it  appeared 
feasible.     He  had  to  pass  through  Windsor  Forest, 
every  glade  and  pathway  of  which  was  well  known 
to  him :  his  horse  was  to  be  lamed  at  the  last  rest- 
ing place ;  the  "  fastest  steed  in  England  "  was  to 
be  offered  to  him  as  if  by  chance ;  he  was  to  take 
advantage  of  some  hoped-for  chance  to  ride  away 
from  his  guards  to  an  appointed  spot,  where  the  first 
of  a  series  of  relays  awaited  him ;  and  so  to  speed 
on  to  where  a  swift  pinnace  lay  at  anchor  by  a  lonely 
part  of  the  Sussex  coast.     Everything  was  in  readi- 
ness ;  the  horses  had  been  diligently  exercised,  but 
the  choicest  had  been  disabled  by  an  accident.    The 
King's  anxious  heart  beat  quickly,  doubtless,  as  he 
remounted ;  but  all  was  vain,     Harrison's  vigilant 
eyes  seemed  to  have  anticipated  the  whole  plot ;  a 
hundred   troopers  rode   near   with  pistols    cocked; 
Charles  was  kept  by   their  leader's  side,  and  con- 
signed  by  him  to  Windsor  Castle  in  all  security. 
He  was  soon  afterwards  transferred  to  Saint  James's 
Palace,  where  he  was  treated  with  contumely  and 
insolence  :    from  this  his  last  resting  place,  he  was 
only  taken  to  his  trial  and  his  execution.1 

1  During  his  trial  the  head  of  his  cane  fell  off,  and  that  simple 
circumstance  seems  to  have  affected  him  more  than  serious  mis- 
fortunes. So  slight  "  a  straw  may  break  the  camel's  back."  The 


398         MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

The  remembrance  of  that  trial  is  deeply  impressed 
on  every  mind,  as  if  both  ear  and  eye  had  marked  its 
progress.  There,  in  his  own  Royal  Hall  of  West- 
minster, the  King  of  England  vindicated  the  in- 
nate nobleness  of  his  nature :  there  he  exhibited 
the  majesty  of  mind,  and  the  heroic  patience  that 
still,  despite  of  all  his  earlier  errors,  renders  his 
name  honoured  in  every  chivalrous  heart. 

The  30th  of  January,  1649,  was  the  day  appointed 
for   the   great   sacrifice;    the   greatest  in   profane 
history,  when  all  its  solemn  circumstances  are  con- 
following  incidents  are  curious,  as  having  happened  in  an  impres- 
sible age,  when  omens  were  much  thought  of  by  the  vulgar  of  all 
ranks.     When  Charles  I.  was   proclaimed  at  the  court-gate   of 
Theobald's  by  Sir  Edward  Lovel,  he  styled  the  young  King  "  the 
rightful  and  dubitable "  heir,  but  was  corrected  by  his  secretary. 
When  the  bust  of  Charles  by  Bernini  was  being  carried  to  White- 
hall, some  drops  of  blood  from  a  wounded  falcon  fell  upon  the 
neck.     He  was  chief  mourner  to  his  mother,  brother  (Henry), 
and,  thirdly,  to  his  father.     The  plague  was  raging  at  the  time 
of  his  accession.     The  two  great  plagues  were  both  generated 
in  Whitechapel,  broke  out  on  the  same  day,  and  in  the  same 
house. — Rennet.      Senhouse,    Bishop   of  Carlisle,   preached   his 
coronation  sermon  on  the  ominous  text,  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto 
death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of  life." — Rev.  ii.  10.     The 
wing  of  the  golden  dove  was  found  to  have  been  broken  off.     His 
robe  of  state  was  of  white  instead  of  purple.     He  refused  to  ride 
in  state  through  the  City.     At  his  funeral  the  snow  fell  thick 
upon  his  pall :  "  It  was  all  white,  the  colour  of  innocency ;  so 
went  the  White  King  to  his  grave." — Herberts  Memoirs,  286. 
When  his  picture  was  conveyed  to  Rome  for  his  bust  to  be  taken 
therefrom,  the  sculptor  (Bernini  1)  observed,  "  it  was  the  most 
unfortunate  he  had  ever  seen,  and  by  all  the  rules  of  art  the 
original  must  die  a  violent  death." —  Welwood,  p.  80.     He  was 
much  struck  by  the  head  of  his  cane  falling  off  as  he  leant  upon 
it  at  his  trial.— Sir  P.  Warwick,  339.     On  the  head-board  of  his 
bed  at  Cowes  was  engraved  in  gilt  letters  "  Remember  thy  end." 
The  anecdote  concerning  the  Sortes  Virgilianse  is  told  by  Wel- 
wood, p.  90. — Jesse. 


1649.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       399 

sidered.  It  was  not  only  that  an  illustrious  and 
gallant  man  was  doomed  to  die ;  it  was  not  only  the 
sacrifice  of  an  ancient  monarchy  to  the  vulgar  am- 
bition of  a  demagogue ;  but  it  was  the  annihilation 
of  the  time-honoured  and  most  ancient  sentiment  of 
religious  loyalty.  Never  again  was  the  inevitable 
bondage  of  humanity  to  be  ennobled  by  belief  in 
the  Divine  nature  of  its  government ;  never  again 
was  the  proudest  spirit  to  bend  reverently  before 
its  King  as  before  the  "  anointed  of  the  Lord ! " 
From  that  day  forth  the  People  were  wiser,  not 
happier,  from  their  dread  experience.  The  grace- 
ful ideal  of  sovereignty  was  turned  into  bloody 
dust  before  their  eyes;  and  in  its  place  rose  up 
the  harsh  and  capricious  authority  of  brutal  force. 

Some  years  passed  on,  and  Cromwell  was  a  King 
in  all  but  name  and  nature.     He  then  recognised 

o 

the  power  that  still  lingered  in  that  sacred  name. 
He  was  already  in  enjoyment  of  all  the  irresponsible 
power  that  ever  cursed  our  earlier  Kings;  he  had 
already  exercised  such  despotism  as  no  Stuart  had 
ever  dared  to  speak  of;  he  had  raised  his  country's 
preeminence  among  the  nations ;  he  had  stimulated 
her  energies,  revived  her  prosperity,  flattered  her 
pride,  and  laid  broadly  the  foundations  of  her  future 
glory.  Nevertheless,  England  cursed  him  in  her 
heart.  The  nation,  down  to  his  own  creatures,  in- 
dignantly rejected  him  as  King.  He  saw  his  power 
departing  from  him  before  he  died ;  and  then  the 
people  took  refuge  even  in  the  vices  and  imbecility 


400         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

of  the  Second  Charles  from  the  revolting  mockery 
of  a  Protectorate. 

Every  imagination  is  familiar  with  the  closing 
scene  of  the  Civil  War's  dark  tragedy.  The  scaffold 
erected  in  ghastly  contrast  to  the  fair  architecture 
of  the  banqueting  hall;  the  bolts  driven  into  the 
floor  in  the  fashion  of  shambles  by  the  human 
butchers:  the  headsman's  block  so  low  that  the 
King  was  obliged  to  lie  along  the  floor  in  order  to 
reach  it  with  his  neck.1 

The  fierce  array  of  fanatic  troopers  round  the  scaf- 
fold; the  uncovered  masses  of  the  people,  reaching  far 
away  towards  the  green  hills  that  bounded  the  vista 
of  old  streets,  or  visible  through  the  archway  that 
opened  towards  the  venerable  Abbey  of  Westmin- 
ster. And  high  above  the  heaving  and  tumultuous 
masses  of  people  and  soldiers  stood  the  King,  with 
the  headsman  by  his  side :  the  Royal  victim  shewed 
a  manly  and  cheerful  bravery  towards  his  fellowmen, 
a  trusting  and  deep  humility  towards  God.  His 
voice  was  calm  and  musical  as  he  uttered  his  dying 
words — brief,  eloquent,  and  full  of  forgiveness,  of 
prophecy,  and  prayer ;  his  eye  was  vividly  bright  as 
he  laid  his  neck  upon  the  scaffold.2  One  moment's 
pause,  and  the  King  gave  the  signal  with  his  hand ; 
the  axe  flashed  through  the  dark  group  on  high  ; 

1  This  refinement  on  humiliation  has  not,  I  think,  been  gene- 
rally noticed.     I  have  seen  two  prints  of  the  execution  taken  at 
the  time,  in  which  the  King  is  thus  represented  :  they  are  to  be 
found  in  the  Sutherland  Clarendon  in  the  Bodleian  Library. 

2  Lilly. 


1649.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        401 

and  from  below,  "  one  dismal  universal  groan"  burst 
forth  from  a  nation's  breast,  and  all  is  over. 

Charles  Stuart,  slaughtered  by  hypocrites,  fana- 
tics, and  traitors,  lay  calmly  in  his  coffin,  in  the 
midst  of  the  Banqueting  Hall,  in  the  darkness  and 
silence  of  midnight.  His  destroyer  was  not  so  calm 
though  he  had  conquered :  impelled  by  a  horror  of 
suspense,  he  went  to  visit  the  dead  King.  Did  he 
not  envy  the  dead  Majesty  that  lay  there  in  calm 
repose,  its  lifework  done  ? 

When  the  next  morning  came,  and  the  scaffold 
was  removed,  and  the  streets  were  thronged  again 
with  their  usual  busy  crowds,  the  people  doubtless 
marvelled  to  think  how  simple  a  matter  it  was  to 
kill  a  King,  and  yet  how  powerful  must  be  those 
who  slew  him.  But  even  those  who  sought  the 
life  of  Charles  acknowledged  the  grandeur  of  his 
death,  and  Cromwell's  own  laureate  celebrated  the 
event  in  worthy  English  verse.  The  partizan  was 
lost  in  the  poet,  and  Andrew  Marvell  has  left  us 
this  noble  picture  of  the  scaffold  scene  : 

***** 

"  While  round  the  armed  bands 
Did  clasp  their  bloody  hands  : 
He  nothing  common  did,  or  mean, 
After  that  memorable  scene ; 

But  with  his  keener  eye 

The  axe's  edge  did  try ; 
Nor  called  the  gods  with  vulgar  spite 
To  vindicate  his  helpless  right, 
But  bowed  his  comely  head 
Down,  as  upon  a  bed."  1 

1  Aubrey   de  Vere,  in   poetry  worthy   of  the   time  and  the 
VOL.  III.  D   D 


402          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [AUG- 

I  have  not  spoken  of  the  King's  last  sorrowful 
hours  ;  of  his  parting  with  his  children ;  of  his  fre- 
quent and  fervent  prayer,  and  Christian  resignation  ; 
of  his  interview  with  the  unhappy  Duke  of  Hamil- 
ton, who  had  done  more  to  cause  his  death  than  any 
other  person  except  Cromwell  and  the  Queen :  of 
his  dying  speech  and  prayer: — all  these  must  be 
read  where  they  are  largely  treated  of,  and  elo- 
quently recorded.  The  subjoined  brief  note  relates 
all  that  is  left  for  me  to  tell.1 

The  Cavaliers  had  not  been  idle  during  the  long 
interval  between  the  King's  betrayal  by  the  Scots, 
and  his  execution.  In  England,  in  Ireland,  and  even 
in  Scotland,  the  fallen  standard  of  the  King  had  been 
raised  with  generous  rashness  by  those  whose  gallant 
hearts  disdained  the  novel  tyranny  of  the  Close 
Committee.  The  very  misfortunes  of  the  King  had 
won  converts  to  his  cause ;  Lord  Callendar  in  Scot- 
land, Lord  Inchiquin  in  Ireland,  had  gone  over  to 
his  party.  The  Duke  of  Hamilton's  was  the  most 
striking  conversion  of  them  all :  his  Grace  became 
sincere.  In  August,  1648,  a  strangely  allied  army  of 
joyous  Cavaliers  and  grim  Presbyterians  marched  out 

occasion,  has  celebrated  this  scene.     Lord  John  Manners  also  in 
"  England's  Trust." 

1  The  body  was  carried  to  St.  James's  Palace,  and  there  ex- 
posed for  a  whole  day  to  the  view  of  the  people.  The  Duke  of 
Richmond,  the  Marquis  of  Hertford,  Earls  Lindsey  and  South- 
ampton had  leave  given  them  to  pay  him  their  last  duty ;  and 
having  carried  the  body  to  Windsor,  they  interred  it  in  the 
Royal  Chapel  near  Henry  VIII.,  with  this  inscription  on  the 
coffin,  "CHARLES  THE  FIEST,  KING  OF  ENGLAND." 


CJEL&JRJLE 


ENGRAVED  BY   PERMISSION   FROM   THE    ORIGINAL  PICTURE   IN   THE 


THE    RT  HON.  THE    EARL   DE    GREY. 


1648.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      403 

of  Scotland  under  Hamilton's  command.  At  Preston 
they  were  encountered  by  Cromwell,  and  utterly 
discomfited ;  the  jealous  Scots  apparently  rejoicing 
in  the  overthrow  of  their  present  associates,  until 
they  found  the  ruthless  sword  of  their  former  allies 
at  their  own  throats.  Sir  Marmaduke  (Lord) 
Laugdale  was  taken  in  disguise  at  Nottingham ;  the 
Duke  of  Hamilton  was  forced  to  surrender  soon 
afterwards  at  Uttoxeter:  he  lived  to  receive  the 
blessing  of  the  King  whom  he  had  betrayed,  and 
soon  afterwards  redeemed  his  noble  name  by 
an  honourable  death  upon  the  scaffold.  In  the 
month  of  May  in  the  same  year,  the  gentlemen  of 
Kent  had  raised  considerable  forces  in  the  King's 
name.  Goring,  now  Earl  of  Norwich,  was  chosen 
to  command  these  undisciplined  troops,  assem- 
bled at  Maidstone ;  but  Fairfax  and  his  veterans 
defeated  and  utterly  dispersed  them,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  about  one  thousand  men  who  were  trans- 
ported into  Essex.1  In  that  county  also,  the  Royal 
Standard  had  been  raised.  Lord  Cape],  Sir  William 
Compton,  Sir  Charles  Lucas,  Sir  George  Lisle,  and 
many  other  officers  of  note,  had  collected  about 
three  thousand  men  at  Chelmsford.  On  the  llth  of 
June,  these  forces  obtained  possession  of  Colchester, 
chiefly  by  means  of  Sir  Charles  Lucas ;  and  there 


1  Mr.  Gr.  P.  R.  James  has  given  a  very  vivid  and  faithful  ac- 
count of  this  brief  campaign  in  his  novel  of  "  Masterton."  He 
has  also  very  skilfully  adopted  Lord  Digby's  romantic  adventures 
into  his  "  Arrah  Neil,  or  Times  of  Old." 


D    D 


404         MEMOIRS  A1S7D   CORRESPONDENCE  OF       [AUG. 

they  hastily  fortified  themselves  to  wait  the  result 
of  the  Scottish  invasion  of  the  North.  Fairfax  was 
soon  before  the  weak  walls,  and  a  siege  was  sus- 
tained for  several  weeks :  now  a  fiercer  spirit  than 
formerly  seems  to  have  actuated  the  soldiers  as  well 
as  their  officers,  as  appears  from  the  following  letter ; 
[it  is  to  be  observed,  that  bullets  "  chawed,"  or  other- 
wise jagged,  were  supposed  to  make  mortal  wounds.] 

ARTHUR  LORD  CAPEL  AND  SIR  CHARLES  LUCAS 

TO  LORD  FAIRFAX. 
MY  LORD, 

We  are  informed  by  divers  of  our  people,  both  pri- 
soners and  others,  that  those  people  of  ours  were  stripped 
and  wounded  after  they  were  taken  yesterday.  "We  assure 
you  our  usage  to  yours  has  been  far  more  civil,  as  your 
own  men  can  justify.  We  desire  to  know  how  you  will 
proceed  for  the  future  ;  and  further,  we  give  you  notice 
that,  since  our  last  to  you,  we  have  found  divers  bullets 
which  were  chawd  [chewed]  in  our  wounded  men,  and  in 
some  of  the  prisoners'  muskets  that  were  taken. 

Your  servants, 

ARTHUR  CAPEL. 
CHARLES  LucAS.1 

Langdale  and  his  cavalry  were  anxiously  ex- 
pected from  the  North,  and  meanwhile  the  garrison 
suffered  severely  from  famine,  having  been  long 
reduced  to  feeding  upon  horse-flesh.  At  length 
tidings  reached  the  besieged,  that  the  Cavaliers  had 
been  finally  defeated  at  Preston,  and  the  soldiers 
clamoured  for  a  capitulation :  Fairfax  and  Ireton 

1  Ellis's  Original  Letters,  iii.  304. 


1648.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      405 

were  in  an  angry  mood,  however,  and  offered  only 
the  stern  conditions  of  "  surrendering  to  mercy.' 
Even  these  were  accepted  by  the  desperate  soldiers, 
and  the  officers  were  obliged  to  consent.  On  the 
28th  of  August,  the  Royal  Standard  gave  way  to  that 
of  the  Close  Committee ;  Fairfax  entered  the  town  in 
triumph,  and  Ireton  was  so  far  able  to  influence  his 
gallant  but  stolid  nature,  as  to  procure  the  execu- 
tion of  Lisle  and  Lucas.  It  is  inconceivable  how 
Fairfax  could  have  been  brought  to  incur  this  foul 
reproach  on  his  otherwise  fair  fame.  His  only  de- 
fence for  the  cold-blooded  murder  of  these  two 
gallant  officers  was  stated  in  his  own  Memoirs :  he 
says,  that  "  being  mere  soldiers  of  fortune,  and  fall- 
ing into  our  hands  by  chance  of  war,  execution  was 
done  on  them."1  Goring  and  Capel,  "being  con- 
siderable for  estates  and  families,"  were  sent  pri- 
soners to  London. 

The  doomed  Cavaliers  heard  their  sentence  with 
astonishment,  but  without  dismay.  They  were  to 
die  before  sunset ;  they  requested,  but  in  vain,  to 
be  allowed  to  live  until  the  following  morning, 
"  that  they  might  settle  some  things  in  this  world, 
and  prepare  their  souls  for  another."  They  were 
only  allowed  time  for  some  brief  prayer,  and  to 
receive  the  sacrament.  At  seven  o'clock  they  were 
hurried  out  to  a  green  spot  beneath  the  castle 
walls ;  three  files  of  musketeers,  with  Ireton, 

1  Fairfax's  short  Memorial  of  himself. 


406          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [AUG. 

Rainsborough,  and  Whalley,  received  them  there. 
Sir  George  Lisle  was  removed  out  of  sight  of  his 
comrade's  execution,  but  the  volley  that  announced 
his  death  rang  upon  his  ear.  The  gallant  Lucas 
had  died  as  he  had  lived,  with  the  unostentatious 
courage  of  a  gentleman :  he  knelt  down  upon  the 
green  sward,  and  prayed  fervently  for  a  little  while ; 
then  rising,  he  stood  erect,  with  a  cheerful  counte- 
nance, before  his  executioners;  he  opened  his 
doublet,  and  bared  his  manly  bosom  to  their  fire : 
"See,  I'm  ready! — Rebels,  do  your  worst!"  were 
the  last  words  he  uttered;  before  he  ceased  to 
speak,  the  Roundheads  fired,  and  he  fell  lifeless ; 
four  bullets  had  pierced  his  heart.  Sir  George 
Lisle  was  now  brought  forward  :  he  knelt  down  and 
kissed  the  dead  face  of  his  friend,  with  lips  that 
were  in  a  few  moments  to  be  as  cold.  Then  rising, 
and  looking  upon  the  firing  party,  he  told  them 
that  they  stood  too  far:  one  of  them  replied, 
" Never  fear,  sir;  I  '11  warrant  we '11  hit  you  !"  The 
Cavalier  smiled,  as  he  said,  "  I  have  been  nearer 
you  when  you  have  missed  me."  Then,  after  a 
short  prayer,  he  too  gave  the  order  to  fire,  and 
nearly  in  the  same  words  his  dying  friend  had 
used, — "I'm  ready! — Traitors,  do  your  worst!" 
That  moment  he  fell  dead. 

I  have  detailed  this  circumstance  at  some  length, 
partly  because  it  was  a  singular  instance  of  such 
ferocious  vengeance  in  this  war,  and  partly  because 
it  throws  light  on  the  character  of  the  nobler  Cava- 


3048.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     407 

liers.  Fairfax  vainly  endeavoured  to  justify  the 
execution  to  the  Parliament;  his  apology  was  at 
first  received  in  cold  silence,  and  then  denounced 
by  two  fearless  members  as  an  act  of  private  ven- 
geance.1 The  friends  were  not  divided  in  their 
death  ;  they  sleep  together  in  St.  Giles'  Church,  at 
Colchester,  and  over  them  is  a  black  marble  slab, 
with  this  inscription  :  —  "  To  the  memory  of  Sir 
Charles  Lucas  and  Sir  George  Lisle,  by  command 
of  Sir  Thomas  Fairfax,  General  of  the  Parliament 
army,  in  cold  blood  barbarously  murdered."2 

For  some  unexplained  reason,  Lord  Holland  too 
had  adopted  the  Royal  cause,  had  made  a  con- 
temptible demonstration  at  Kingston,  had  fled  to 
St.  Neot's,  been  made  prisoner  there,  and  died 
upon  the  same  scaffold  with  the  Duke  of  Hamilton. 


1  Sir  Charles   Lucas  was  a  brother  of  Margaret  Duchess  of 
Newcastle,  who  has  left  some  interesting  records  of  this  gallant 
man  in  "  a  relation  of  her  birth,  &c."     In  the  foregoing  details  I 
have  chiefly  followed  "  A  memoir  of  the  life  of  Sir  Charles  Lucas, 
drawn  up  by  Thomas  Philip,  Earl  de  Grey  and  Baron  Lucas." 
This  very  interesting  little  volume  was  privately  printed,  but  it 
well  deserves  a  wider  circulation.     It  is  written  in  a  manly  and 
generous  spirit,  and  with  a  military  simplicity  that  suits  the 
subject  well. 

2  A  tradition  of  the  place  says  that  George  Villiers,  Duke  of 
Buckingham,  who  married  Fairfax's  only  daughter,  applied  to 
Charles  II.  to  have  this  inscription  erased.     The  King  mentioned 
it  to  Lord  Lucas  (the  brother  of  Sir  Charles),  who  said  that  he 
would  obey  his  Majesty's  commands,  if  his  Majesty  would  allow 
the  following  to  be  substituted  :  "  Sir  Charles  Lucas  and  Sir 
George  Lisle  were  barbarously  murdered  for  their  loyalty  to  King 
Charles  the  First,  and  King  Charles  the  Second  ordered  the  me- 
morial of  their  loyalty  to   be   erased."     Thereupon   the   King 
ordered  the  inscription  to  be  cut  more  deeply  than  before.  —  Lord 
De  Grey's  Memoir. 


408       MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF     [MARCH, 

Another  far  nobler  victim  shared  the  fate  of  these 
too  late  repentant  traitors.  Arthur  Lord  Capel 
was  one  of  the  best  and  bravest  of  the  Cavaliers : 
he  was  one  whose  very  association  with  the  Royal 
cause,  conferred  upon  it  grace  and  strength :  true- 
hearted,  high-minded,  eloquent,  and  brave,  he  spoke 
and  acted  on  the  scaffold  as  nobly  as  he  had  always 
done  in  the  Council  or  the  field.  He  was  among 
those  who  were  taken  at  Colchester,  and  sent 
to  London  for  trial.  Goring,  Lord  Norwich, 
shared  his  prison  but  not  his  fate.  Cromwell  pro- 
nounced a  high  panegyric  on  the  virtues,  the  graces, 
and  the  endowments  of  Lord  Capel,1  and  in  the 
same  speech  exhorted  the  now  slavish  Commons 
to  doom  him  to  death.  Lord  Norwich  had  not  one 
single  virtue  to  redeem  his  crimes,  yet  was  acquit- 
ted by  the  Parliamentary  usurpers. 

1  Arthur  Lord  Capel  succeeded  to  the  family  estate  on  the 
death  of  his  grandfather,  Sir  Arthur,  and, "  following  the  example 
of  his  ancestors,"  says  Collins,  "  was  very  eminent  for  his  hospi- 
tality to  his  neighbours  and  great  charities  to  the  poor,  which 
endeared  him  to  the  hearts  of  the  people,  who  chose  him  to  serve 
in  Parliament  for  the  County  of  Hereford  in  1639  and  1640.  In 
the  following  year  he  was  advanced  to  a  barony  by  Charles  I." 
Lord  Clarendon  gives  him  the  noble  character  of  a  man  in 
whom  the  malice  of  his  enemies  could  discover  but  very  few 
faults,  and  whom  his  friends  could  not  wish  better  accomplished ; 
whose  memory  all  men  loved  and  reverenced,  though  few  followed 
his  example.  "  In  a  word,  he  was  a  man  that,  whoever  shall  after 
him  deserve  best  of  the  English  nation,  he  can  never  think  him- 
self undervalued  when  he  shall  hear  that  his  courage,  virtue,  and 
fidelity  are  laid  in  the  balance  with  and  compared  to  that  of  Lord 
Capel."  Dr.  Kippis  candidly  remarks,  "  those  who  differ  the  most 
in  political  sentiments  from  Lord  Capel  should  be  ready  to  do 
justice  to  his  integrity  and  fortitude." — Park's  Notes  to  Lord 
'Orford. 


1649.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.        409 

The  brave  old  Sir  John  Owen  was  brought  up  for 
judgment  at  the  same  time.1  He  was  voted  to  be 
hanged,  as  being  untitled,  a  distinction  which  these 
Republicans  made  of  great  account.  Some  manlier 
spirits  among  them,  however,  felt  for  the  wounded 
honour  of  an  old  soldier  and  gallant  gentleman,  and 
they  prevailed  to  have  him  beheaded ;  a  mercy  which 
he  acknowledged  with  tears  of  gratitude.  Ulti- 
mately he  was  pardoned,  and  wrote  the  subjoined 
letter,  which  scarcely  maintains  the  high  tone  that 
the  rest  of  his  character  bespeaks.2 


1  The  capriciousness  with  which  the  Parliament  spared  or  exe- 
cuted those  who  were  in  their  power  is  thus  happily  characterized 
by  Butler ; — 

"  And  let  him  fast  in  bonds  abide 
In  Court  of  Justice  to  be  tried  j  '  ^}[ 
Where  if  h'  appear  so  bold  or  crafty 
There  may  be  danger  in  his  safety, 
If  any  member  there  dislike 
His  face,  or  to  his  beard  have  pique  ; 
Or  if  his  death  will  save  or  yield, 
Revenge  or  fright,  it  is  reveal'd, 
Though  he  hath  quarter,  ne'ertheless 
Y*  have  power  to  hang  him  when  you  please." 

Hudibras,  Part  i.  Canto  2. 

2  SIE  JOHN  OWEN  TO  [SIR  THOMAS  FAIRFAX?]. 
SIR, 

Though  I  desire  humbly  to  magnify  and  admire  the  signal 
hand  of  God  in  interposing  between  a  friendless,  dying  man  and 
death,  when  the  outward  means  of  friends  and  other  interests  that 
was  much  made  use  of  on  behalf  of  others,  proved  ineffectual  j  yet 
I  cannot,  without  much  ingratitude,  but  humbly  acknowledge  the 
favour  of  those  whom  God  and  not  man  hath  stirred  up  to  be 
instruments  of  my  safety.  Amongst  the  rest,  sir,  I  am  truly 
sensible  of  what  God  hath  done  by  you  in  relation  to  your  reprieve 
and  safety  of  my  life ;  and  as  I  have  received  life  from  the  honour- 
able House  of  Parliament,  by  yours  and  other  worthy  gentle- 
men's means  (a  very  unexpected  means  I  must  confess),  so  I 


410          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [FEB. 

Most  of  the  leading  Cavaliers  who  survived  the 
sanguinary  war,  were  abroad  or  in  prison.  The 
Dukes  of  Richmond  and  Buckingham,  Lords 
Montrose,  Newcastle,  Hertford,  Ethyn,  Hopton, 
and  Digby,1  were  on  the  Continent,  for  the  most 
part,  haunting  the  young  King's  shadowy  Court. 
There  also  were  Hyde,  Culpepper,  and  Nicholas. 
By  far  the  greater  number,  however,  of  those  whose 
letters  have  filled  these  pages  were  at  rest  in  their 
honourable  graves.  Will  Legge  was  a  prisoner  as 
usual ;  Lord  Astley,  and  many  others,  shared  his 
fate,  and  lay  withering  in  the  dungeons  of  a  govern- 
ment that  thought  it  rendered  God  good  service  in 
avenging  him  of  those  it  called  his  enemies.  The 


desire  to  hold  my  life  by  no  other  title  than  a  tenure  of  their  free 
donation,  and  never  again  to  turn  the  use  of  such  a  gift  to  their 
disservice.  And,  sir,  for  your  particular  and  so  highly  obliging 
favour,  though  I  assure  myself  you  had  rather  do  many  such 
favours  than  receive  thanks  for  one,  I  desire  as  really  to  serve 
you  with  that  life  as  I  have  truly  received  in  a  very  great  mea- 
sure by  your  means  under  God.  Sir,  I  pray  excuse  this  trouble, 
that  comes  from  him  that  would  be  much  troubled  if  he  should 
not  truly  be,  as  he  professes  himself  to  be,  sir, 

Your  most  faithful  and  humble  servant, 

JOHN  OWEN.* 

1  The  following  sketch  seems  to  have  been  made  for  Lord 
Digby  :— 

"  He 's  reason's  renegade  ;  one  with  whom 
The  word  consider  is  too  troublesome  ; 
Who  doth  obey  his  passion  and  affection  ; 
Whose  cogitation  is  the  child  of  action ; 
With  all  his  undertakings  he  goes  on 
At  the  same  moment  they  are  thought  upon." 

Jordan,  1640. 

*  From  Mr.  Ormsby  Gore's  MSS. 


1646.]    PRINCE  RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        411 

"  Malignants " 1  who  were  still  at  large,  suffered 
severely  for  their  loyalty  by  fines,  insults,  and  in- 
security.2 

For  the  Marquis  of  Worcester  there  remained 
only  the  proud  consciousness  of  faithfulness  to  his 
King ;  and  then,  the  penalty  he  had  yet  to  pay  for 
that  sad  honour.  Scarcely  had  the  King  left  Rag- 
land  Castle  for  the  last  time,  when  the  Parliament 
proceeded  to  confiscate  the  great  estates  "of  the 
Earl  of  Worcester,  Lord  Herbert,  and  Sir  John 
Somerset"  (they  denied  the  King's  lately  given 
titles).  In  the  month  of  February  following, 
1646,  the  Marquis  was  besieged  in  his  Castle  of 
Ragland,  by  General  Morgan,  and  "  the  Com- 
missioners of  Monmouth."  The  castle  was  stoutly 
held  until  the  cause  it  stood  for  was  utterly  lost.  In 
August  it  was  surrendered  on  honourable  conditions 


1  "A  Malignant"  was  defined  by  "Mercurius  Aulicus"  to  be 
"  a  person  who  did  not  set  the  ordinances  of  a  portion  of  the 
present  Parliament  above  all  laws  made  by  former  Parliaments." 

2  The  following  letter  affords  an  amusing  instance  of  the  petty 
hardships  to  which  even  gentlemen  of  the  Parliamentary  party 
were  liable.     Thomas  Hall,  apparently  steward  to  Sir  Walter 
"Wrottesley,  in  a  letter  to  his  master  from  Wrottesley  Hall,  then 
garrisoned  for  the  Parliament  (March,  1646),  complains  that  "the 
governor  hath  likewise  set  three  men  to  cut  wood  in  the  Upper 
Woodcroft  for  the  garrison's  use,  and  they  crop  and  cut  the  best 
and  leave  the  worst  behind  them,  and  do  not  take  it  before  them  ; 
and  if  we  do  any  of  us  speak,  they  snap  us  up  with  ill  words ; 
that  is  all  the  remedy  that  we  can  have  of  them.    And  with  regard 
to  the  man  that  hath  charge  of  the  ground,  he  hath  left  Barney's 
house  and  is  come  to  my  house,  and  hath  brought  his  wife  and 
five  children.     They  sell  all  and  make  great  waste.     The  gar- 
rison is  all  found  with  charcoal  and  wood,  and,  for  my  thinking, 
I  know  they  will  send  for  no  other  coal." 


412          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [OCT. 

as  to  all  but  the  person  of  the  Marquis.  Weighed 
down  by  the  sorrows  of  eighty- four  years,  he  was 
sent  to  prison,  rigorously  treated,  and  forgotten  by 
all  but  those  who  ravened  for  his  wealth.  His 
name  appears  but  once  more — on  the  19th  of 
December,  when  Parliament  orders  £1000  to  be 
allowed  for. his  funeral  expenses.  Lord  Say  and 
Sele  and  Cromwell  helped  themselves  to  a  con- 
siderable portion  of  the  Somerset  estates ;  and  to 
this  day  that  noble  House  feels  the  consequences 
of  its  devoted  loyalty.1 

At  a  later  period,  when  Charles  II.,  made  a 
romantic  effort  to  recover  the  lost  kingdom,  a  new 
generation  of  Cavaliers  appeared  among  those  who 
were  veterans  in  the  last  war.  My  limits  do  not 
allow  me  to  enter  on  this  interesting  episode  of  our 
history,  but  I  cannot  help  alluding  to  the  fate  of  the 
gallant  Earl  of  Derby,  Lord  Widdrington,  Sir 
Thomas  Tildesby,  and  the  second  Duke  of  Hamil- 
ton. The  three  last  died  by  the  sword,  but  Lord 

1  It  was  stated  to  the  House  of  Commons,  12th  of  November, 
1641,  "that  the  Earl  of  Worcester  had  large  stables  under 
ground  at  Ragland  Castle,  and  a  number  of  light  horse  in  them, 
with  700  men  there  in  pay,  and  ammunition  proportionable." — 
DUGDALE,  p.  77. 

Last  of  all  the  royal  strongholds  in  England  fell  Ragland 
Castle,  transmitting  to  this  day  in  its  time-honoured  war-worn 
battlements,  visible  testimony  of  its  brave  defence.  Colonel 
Morgan,  in  his  letter  to  the  Speaker  of  the  Houses  of  Parlia- 
ment (dated  from  the  Leaguer  before  Ragland,  June  29,  1646), 
gives  account  of  the  resolution  (obstinacy,  he  calls  it),  with  which 
this  castle  was  defended,  and  encloses  Lord  Worcester's  reply  to 
his  first  summons.  "  I  make  choice  (if  it  so  please  God)  rather 
to  die  nobly  than  to  live  with  infamy  ;  which  answer,  if  it  be  not 


1C51.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.          413 

Derby  graced  the  Roundheads'  sanguinary  scaffold. 
Sans  changer  was  the  motto  of  his  noble  House,  and 
well  was  it  fulfilled  in  the  steadfast  loyalty  of  this 
brave  man,  and  his  heroic  spouse.1  The  cold  wel- 
come that  the  former  received  after  his  services  from 
Charles  I. ;  the  colder  acknowledgment  of  the  noble 
heroism  of  the  latter,  had  no  effect  upon  their  con- 
duct. Derby's  loyalty  was  of  that  exalted,  pure, 
and  simple  character  which  was  ready  to  suffer  all 
things,  not  only  for  the  King,  but /row  the  King.8 

Meanwhile,  the  Roundheads  were  by  no  means 
so  happy  as  the  sense  of  unbounded  triumph  should 
have  rendered  them.  They  sank  under  the  in- 
evitable destiny  of  armed  revolutions ;  they  were 
become  slaves  of  those  .among  their  fellow-country- 
men who  had  no  more  sympathy  with  their  patriotic 
visions,  than  had  the  Praetorian  bands  who  appro- 
priated the  Empire  of  Rome  with  their  fellow- 
citizens.  The  fierce  legions  raised,  taught,  and 
pampered  by  the  Parliament,  soon  became  weary 
of  having  their  power  farmed  out  by  their  mas- 
ters :  they  determined  to  use  it  on  their  own 
account:  their  character  as  citizens  soon  merged 
in  that  of  soldiers ;  they  ceased  to  feel  the  control 
of  public  opinion,  and  formed  a  public  opinion 

pleasing  to  you,  I  shall  not  think  you  worthy  to  be  styled  by  me 
Your  loving  Friend  and  Servant,  H.  WORCESTER. 

"From  my  house  at   Ragland,  June  28,  1646.      For   Colonel 

Morgan,  commander-in-chief  of  the   forces  before  Ragland." — 

King's  Coll.,  266,  No.  16. 

1  Worthies  of  Yorkshire  and  Lancashire,  by  Hartley  Coleridge, 

p.  225.  2  Ibid. 


414    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

of  their  own.  They  were  nourished  in  their  pride 
and  their  exclusiveness  by  the  press,  the  pul- 
pit, and  the  agitators :  they  soon  formed  a  terrible 
oligarchy  of  ruthless  men  ;  themselves  forming  their 
own  executive,  and  wielding  the  sword  they  sum- 
moned from  its  sheath.  In  this  spirit  they  were  at 
once  sustained,  and  partially  controlled,  by  the  pecu- 
liar form  of  fanaticism  they  professed :  they  returned 
back  three  thousand  years  into  the  darkness  of  ages, 
to  seek  for  public  precedents  and  private  example  in 
the  history  of  the  Jews ;  but  in  imitating  the  sons  of 
Zeruiah,  and  the  slaughterers  of  Agag,  they  were 
obliged  also  to  assume  their  pretensions  to  a  right- 
eous life. 

Thus  the  military  power  Which  would  have  laid 
England  waste,  had  this  fierce  soldiery  been  also 
dissolute,  was  almost  harmless,  for  nothing  but  a 
vicious  force  can  be  really  destructive  to  a 
country.  The  spiritual  pride  in  which  the  Zerub- 
babel  Serjeants  and  Joshua  corporals  indulged  may 
have  been  as  dangerous  to  themselves  as  the  licen- 
tiousness of  the  Praetorian  bands,  but  it  secured  the 
preservation  of  outward  order  and  decorum  in  the 
State.  The  very  name  of  England  was  now  almost 
lost  in  the  typical  appellation  of  Israel.  The  open- 
hearted,  genial,  and  generous  old  Briton  assumed 
the  principles,  and  the  conduct,  and  the  language  of 
the  ferocious  Pharisee.  Every  battle-field  was  a 
valley  of  Gibeah,  or  a  plain  of  Armageddon  ;  Ire- 
land was  a  mere  "  wash-pot "  of  saintly  England, 


1651.]     PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       415 

the  Edom  over  which  the  chosen  were  to  cast  out 
their  shoe.  The  Royalists  were  sons  of  Belial; 
their  clergy  priests  of  Baal ;  their  churches  were 
temples  of  Rimmon,  in  which  not  even  a  Naaman 
must  dare  to  kneel.  The  Episcopal  order  was  pro- 
scribed ;  the  use  of  the  Liturgy  forbidden  under  the 
severest  penalties.  The  Presbyterian  forms  in  their 
turn  became  almost  as  much  objects  of  contempt : 
extempore  prayer  and  absence  of  all  ceremony  was 
considered  essential  to  the  saints'  reign  upon  earth. 
These  saints,  with  hats  upon  their  heads  and  pipes 
in  their  mouths,  loved  to  lie  at  ease  in  our  old  dese- 
crated churches,  and  listen  to  some  "  babe  of  grace  " 
in  buff  and  bandolier,  blaspheming  from  the  pulpit. 
So  early  as  1645,  for  instance,  I  find  the  following  pas- 
sage in  a  letter  from  the  Puritan  Kem  to  the  Round- 
head Earl  of  Denbigh  :  writing  from  Bristol,  he 
says,  that  the  city  is  greatly  moved  "  at  a  lieutenant 
that  goeth  up  daily  and  preacheth  in  a  scarlet  coat 
with  silver  lace,  and  with  a  sword  by  his  side,  and 
delivers  very  strange  things ;  he  also  holds  the  mor- 
tality of  the  soul."1  For  other  results  of  the 
triumph  of  democracy  over  the  ancient  constitution 
of  England,  I  must  again  quote  Mr.  Macaulay.  He 
draws  the  following  picture  at  a  time  when  he 
devoted  his  great  resources  as  an  advocate  not  as 
now  a  judge  in  the  court  of  history.  Then,  he  says 
were  "Major-generals"  to  be  seen  "fleecing  their 

1  From  the  Earl  of  Denbigh's  MSS.,  19th  October,  1645. 


416    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

districts ;  soldiers  revelling  on  the  spoils  of  a  ruined 
peasantry  ;  upstarts  enriched  by  the  public  plunder ; 
taking  possession  of  the  hospitable  firesides  and 
hereditary  trees  of  the  old  gentry ;  boys  smashing  the 
beautiful  windows  of  cathedrals;  Fifth-monarchy 
men  shouting  for  King  Jesus ;  Quakers  riding 
naked  through  the  market-place  ;  agitators  lecturing 
from  tubs  on  the  fate  of  Agag." 

During  this  rampant  reign  of  cant  and  spiritual 
tyranny,  the  true  old  English  heart  was  still  alive, 
and  yearning  for  better  things  than  either  Round- 
head or  Cavalier  could  furnish.  There  still  remained 
those  whose 

"  Loyalty  was  still  the  same, 
Whether  it  win  or  lose  the  game  : 
True  as  the  dial  to  the  sun, 
Although  it  be  not  shone  upon." l 

1  The  following  ballad,  as  it  was  written  at  the  time,  expresses 
probably  the  feeling  of  many  of  the  Cavaliers,  who  still  clung  to 
England  in  poverty  and  humiliation  : — 

"  I  am  a  poor  man,  God  knows, 

And  all  my  neighbours  can  tell, 
I  want  both  money  and  clothes, 
And  yet  I  live  wondrous  well. 

I  have  a  contented  mind, 

And  a  heart  to  bear  out  all ; 
Though  fortune,  being  unkind, 

Hath  given  me  substance  small. 

Then  hang  up  sorrow  and  care, 

It  never  shall  make  me  rue ; 
What  though  my  back  goes  bare  ? 

I  'm  ragged  and  torn  and  true." 

Roxburgh  Ballads. 


1653.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.      417 


CHAPTER  IV. 


THE  LAST. 


RUPERT     IN     FRANCE  :    TURNS     TO     PHILOSOPHY. THE    RESTORATION. — SEA- 
FIGHTS. DEATH    OF    PRINCE    RUPERT. 


In  other  part  stood  one  who  at  the  forge 
Labouring,  the  massy  clods  of  iron  and  brass 
Had  melted,  from  which  he  formed 
First  his  own  moulds,  then  what  might  else  be  wrought 
Fusible,  or  graven  in  metal. 

Paradise  Lost. 

Heaven  take  my  soul,  and  England  keep  my  bones. 

King  John. 

PRINCE  RUPERT  had  now  abandoned  his  Corsair 
career  for  ever.  Probably  from  the  days  of  the 
Vikingr  to  those  of  his  own  time,  no  chief  had  ever 
exercised  that  desperate  calling  with  so  little  of  re- 
proach. Not  one  charge  of  cruelty  is  brought  against 
him  even  by  the  Roundheads.  He  is  not  therefore 
to  be  estimated  according  to  the  Corsair  standard, 
an  epithet  that  was  freely  applied  to  his  pursuits. 
Great  admirals,  however,  under  Elizabeth  and  even 
James  had  led  the  same  career,  and  had  invested 
their  daring  and  prowess  with  an  air  of  romantic 
and  national  honour.  In  these  days,  when  com- 

VOL.  III.  E   E 


418      MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [MARCH, 

merce  is  almost  held  sacred,  and  any  enterprise  that 
interrupts  its  prosperity  is  justly  considered  as  a  uni- 
versal wrong,  we  are  scarcely  fair  judges  of  those  who 
won  honour  by  such  courses  two  hundred  years  ago. 
After  three  years  of  perilous  adventure  Rupert 
found  himself  once  more  on  shore,  and  without  an 
object.      His   purpose,    like  all    his   other   under- 
takings, had  failed.     The  casualties  of  the  terrible 
sea,  and  the  ungovernable  temper  of  his  crews,  had 
subjected  him  to  bitter  trials.     His   brother,  who 
was  alone  with  him  on  earth,  in  sympathy  and  affec- 
tion, was  lost;  his  best  and  bravest  and  most  de- 
voted followers  were  also  gone ;  he  had  heard  their 
gallant  farewell  cheer  thrilling  through  the   storm 
that  destroyed   them.      All    the   wealth,  too,  for 
which  he  had  hazarded  his  life  and  honour  perished 
with  them,  buried  for  ever  in  the  ocean.     He  had 
returned  to   Europe  far  poorer  in  heart  and  purse 
than  when  he  sailed  from  thence  long  years  before. 
Of  the  little  that  was  left,1  he  had  already  made  a 
generous  proffer  in  his  own  name,  and  that  of  his 
loyal  crew,  to  Charles.     On  his  arrival  at  Nantes> 
worn  down  by  care  and  disappointment,  he  fell  dan- 
gerously ill,  and  soon  afterwards  he  received  the  fol- 
lowing affectionate  letter  from  the  young  King : — 

KING  CHARLES  II.  TO  PRINCE  RUPERT. 

MY  DEAREST  COUSIN, 

I  am  so  surprised  with  joy  in  the  assurance  of  your 
safe  arrival  in  these  parts,  that  I  cannot  tell  you  how 

1  Evelyn  and  a  Parliamentary  paper  say  about  10,000/. 


1053.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     419 

great  it  is,  nor  can  I  consider  any  misfortunes  or  accidents 
which  have  happened,  now  I  know  your  person  is  in 
safety.  If  I  could  receive  the  like  comfort  in  a  reason- 
able hope  of  your  brothers,  I  will  not  tell  you  how 
important  it  would  be  to  my  affairs,  when  my  affection 
makes  me  impatient  to  see  you,  I  know  the  same  desire 
will  incline  you,  after  you  have  done  what  can  be  only 
done  by  your  presence  there,  to  make  what  haste  to  me 
your  health  can  endure,  of  which  I  must  conjure  you  to 
have  such  a  care  as  it  may  be  in  no  danger ;  I  have  sent 
Colonel  Owen,  whom  you  know  to  be  a  very  honest  man, 
to  do  you  such  service  as  you  shall  direct  him ;  Mr.  An- 
thurag  will  write  to  you  more  at  large  of  all  things,  so 
that  I  will  say  no  more  to  you  at  present,  only  to  assure 
you  I  shall  be  very  impatient  till  I  see  you,  that  I  may 
myself  tell  you  with  how  much  kindness  I  am 

My  dearest  Cousin, 
Your  most  affectionate  Cousin, 

CHARLES  R. 

For  my  dear  cousin  Prince  Rupert, 
Paris,  March  22,  1653. 

The  same  messenger  brought  two  other  letters 
from  the  Chancellor  and  from  the  Queen's  favourite. 
The  former  is  only  a  fragment  : — 

sure  as  I  shall  live.     For  God's  sake,  sir,  in  the 

first  place  look  to  your  health,  and  then  to  the  safety  of 
what  you  have  there,  and  then  lose  no  minute  of  coming 
away.  I  do  not  doubt  you  will  find  the  welcome  here 
that  will  please  you,  with  the  King  and  Queen  and  Duke 
of  York,  for  your  other  friends  you  will  find  others  an- 
swerable. Lop.  and  B.  are  as they  can  be  made, 

and  I  really  believe  very  well  they  conceive  it  to  be  for 
them,  as  certainly  it  will  be  if  you  preserve  your  health 
and  secure  your  business  there.  The  King  hath  written 
to  Mr.  Holder  to  come  from  Brest  to  wait  on  you  ;  he  is 
Judge  of  the  Admiralty  for  the  Duke  of  York,  and  is  all 

E    E    2 


420      MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [MARCH, 

we  have  here  of  whom  we  can  make  use  for  adjudication  ; 
he  will  receive  a  command  to  the  same  purpose  from  the 
Duke  of  York.  The  King  and  Queen  [of  France]  have 
written  to  the  governor  where  you  are,  to  be  careful  of 
you.  The  cardinal  hath  promised  the  King  to  work  to 
him  to  the  same  purpose.  I  do  not  find  any  measure  of 
kindness  wanting  in  any  of  the  persons  I  have  mentioned, 
and  if  my  being  here  a  little  may  keep  it  awake,  I  shall 
not  miss  my  aim.  I  shall  write  again  by  Rivers  and  M. 
de  Choqueux  out  of  hand,  which  shall  shorten  the  trouble 
to  your  Highness. 

Think  of  your  health,  and  if  you  dare  venture  upon 
your  old  apothecary,  you  may,  from  whom  you  will 
receive  some  drugs,  well  meant,  if  not  well  prepared. 

Your  Highness  may  be  pleased  to  reserve  the  account 
or  knowledge  of  your  condition  until  you  come.  I  have 
written  the  same,  which  I  hope  is  come  to  you. 

EDW.  HYDE. 

SIR, 

I  am  most  unfeignedly  rejoiced  at  your  Highness's 
safe  arrival,  and  shall  be  extremely  glad  that  your  indis- 
position and  the  condition  of  your  affairs  would  permit 
you  to  hasten  hither  that  I  might  have  the  honour  to 
wait  upon  you.  I  do  hope  it  will  be  so  soon,  that  I  shall 
not  trouble  you  with  much  discourse  of  this  place,  besides 
Mr.  Attorney,1 1  presume,  doth  write  largely  to  you.  I  will 
only  tell  you  as  a  very  good  witness  of  it,  that  the  Queen 
is  very  entirely  your  constant  friend  ;  she  writes  to  you 
by  this  occasion,2  I  will  add  no  more  to  this  at  present, 
but  to  assure  you  I  am,  according  to  all  my  professions, 
with  unfeigned  truth,  Sir,  your  Highness's  most  humble 
and  most  obedient  faithful  Servant, 

HENRY  JERMYN. 

Paris,  March  22,  1653. 

1  Sir  Edward  Herbert. 

2  The  Frenchified  courtier  means  "  opportunity." 


1653.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        421 

The  Prince  recovered  from  his  sickness,  and  was 
cheered  by  the  reception  that  he  found,  not  only 
from  his  own  Royal  kinsmen,  but  from  the  King  of 
France.  Louis  XIV.,  whose  martial  imagination 
was  caught  by  the  Prince's  renown,  sent  him  a 
pressing  invitation  to  Paris,  with  one  of  his  own 
coaches  and  a  large  attendance  to  escort  him 
thither.1  On  the  10th  of  April,  1653,  we  find  the 
English  Parliament  remonstrating  against  the  coun- 
tenance shewn  to  the  Prince  by  France;2  and  on 
the  3rd  of  May  we  find  his  Highness  appointed 
Master  of  the  Horse  to  the  French  King.3  This 
new  appointment  did  not  interrupt  his  proceedings 
at  Nantes ;  he  soon  returned  thither  and  made  a 
good  bargain  "  for  his  sugars  ! "  The  English  Par- 
liament again  remonstrated,  "  but  the  merchants 
fared  none  the  better  for  it,  but  lost  their  monies  in 
bribery,  &c.,  and  in  the  interim  Rupert  selleth  the 
goods."  4 

Prince  Rupert  is  gone  to  Nantes,  and  some  say  his 
cause  of  leaving  the  town  was,  that  they  were  to  make  a 
process  against  him  for  all  the  prizes  he  took  at  sea  from 
all  kind  of  merchants,  without  exception,  which  he  sold 
in  several  places  in  France,  without  any  licence  from  his 
Majesty  of  France.  King  Charles  intended  for  Holland, 
and  from  thence  to  Denmark.  What  shall  be  the  end  of 
his  designs  I  do  not  yet  know.5 

1  Evelyn ;  Clarendon. 

2  Thurloe's  State  Papers,  i.  253. 

3  Evelyn,  vol.  v. 

4  Thurloe's  State  Papers,  i.  257. 

5  A  letter  of  intelligence  from  Paris,  19th  July,  1653,  no  sig- 
nature.— Thurloes  State  Papers. 


422      MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF       [MARCH, 

Here  follows  another  account  of  the  transaction, 
concluding  with  a  description  of  Charles  II's.  frivo- 
lous and  fretful  Court,  that  seems  to  have  been  too 
true. 

The  titular  King  of  England  hath  received  money  for 
his  journey  into  Holland.  .  .  What  should  his  excellency 
my  Lord  General  Cromwell  expect  from  the  cardinal  hut 
a  parcel  of  fair  promises  in  answer  to  his  letter  ?  I  assure 
[you]  the  King  and  Cardinal  are  resolved  not  to  deliver 
Prince  Rupert's  merchandize,  what  language  soever  or 
fair  words  they  give  you.  His  mind  is  at  rest,  there  is 
such  assurances  given  him  hy  the  Queen,  Cardinal,  and 
Council.  I  protest  they  laugh  at  you,  and  think  your 
demands  so  insolent,  as  nothing  [can  he]  more  [so].  In 
the  English  Court,  though  there  are  but  a  few  poor 
ministers  and  lords,  there  is  as  much  confusion  as  ever 
was  at  the  tower  of  Babylon.1 

There  never,  indeed,  was  a  Court  more  calculated 
to  bring  Royalty  into  disrepute ;  vice  and  meanness 
were  there  combined  with  an  abject  poverty  that 
rendered  the  great  majority  of  the  courtiers  as  con- 
temptible to  the  vulgar,  as  their  ignoble  intrigues 
and  dissolute  lives  had  long  made  them  appear  to  the 
wise  and  good.  It  is  not  surprising  that  the  honest 
and  open  nature  of  Prince  Rupert  revolted  against 
such  a  state  of  society,  and  that  he  soon  became  un- 
popular among  the  supercilious  yet  servile  crew  that 
haunted  their  young  exiled  King.  At  this  time 
Sir  Edward  Hyde  became  the  Prince's  bitter  enemy, 
apparently  owing  to  some  quarrel  relating  to  the 

1  Thurloe's  State  Papers,  388.  Paris,  9th  August,  1653.(N.S.) 


1653.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     423 

prizes.1  Lord  Digby  was  still  firm,  for  once,  in  his 
enmity,  and  even  Lord  Jermyn,  who  had  become  a 
follower  of  the  French  and  Romanist  party,  es- 
tranged himself  gradually  from  the  uncompromising 
Protestant  Prince.  Nevertheless,  Rupert  remained 
in  a  state  of  unusual  tranquillity  at  Paris  during  the 
winter  of  1653-4.2  This  passage  in  this  note 
refutes  Lord  Clarendon's  accusations,  even  if  the 
Prince's  letters,  already  quoted,  had  not  done  so. 
If  Rupert  had  been  avaricious,  it  is  not  likely  that 
the  pauperized  King  would  have  used  him  so  affec- 
tionately, or  that  the  Prince  would  have  still  clung 
fondly  to  the  old  cause. 

Some  time  afterwards,  on  the  Scots'  making   a 
proposal    of   insurrection,    Rupert  offered  to  head 

1  In  Clarendon's   State  Papers  (vol.  iii.  p.  177)  we  find  his 
lordship  in  very  ill  humour  :  he  says,  that  "  Sir  Edward  Herbert 
[who  was  Prince  Rupert's  firm  supporter]  is  despised  by  all  men, 
and  looked  up  to  by  Prince  Rupert  as  an  oracle.     The  truth  is, 
the  Prince  is  so  governed  by  the  Lord  Keeper,  that  the  King 
knows  him  not.     You  talk  of  money  the  King  should  have  from 
the  prizes  at  Nantes  ?   alas !  Prince  Rupert  pretends  that  the 
King  owes  him  more  money  than  ever  I  was  worth."     See  also 
p.  231,  in  the  same  volume,  and  p.  245,  where  Lord  Clarendon 
apparently  combats  the  good  opinion  that  old  Nicholas  courage- 
ously maintained  of  the  Prince  :  "What  will  convert  you  in  the 
point  concerning  Prince  Rupert  and  Sir  Edward  Herbert  ?"  he 
querulously  asks  ;  "  perhaps  the  one  being  gone  this  day  for  Ger- 
many and  the  other  being  deprived  of  the  Great  Seal  will  do  it." 
Other  angry  passages  by  Lord  Clarendon  may  be  found  in  Evelyn, 
v.  272.     In  Lord  Clarendon's  autobiography  we  have  no  account 
of  these  transactions  :  there  is  a  long  blank  in  that  work  from 
1652  to  1655. 

2  We  hear  from  Evelyn  (v.  288,  n.),  that  "he  flourishes  with 
his  Blackamoors  and  new  liveries,  and  so  does  his  cousin  Charles  ; 
they  having  shared  the  monies  made  of  the  prizes  between  them, 
and  in  recompense  Rupert  is  made  Master  of  the  Horse." 


424        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JULY, 

their  forces  ;  but  a  private  letter  from  O'Neil, 
asserting  that  the  Prince  was  held  in  dread  in 
Scotland,  prevented  his  offer  from  being  accepted ; l 
so  the  eager-hearted  Prince  was  left  to  amuse 
himself  in  Paris,  with  his  fair  correspondents2  and 
his  Blackamoors.  These  poor  fellows,  like  all  those 
who  were  near  his  person,  seem  to  have  been 
much  attached  to  the  Prince ;  and  in  the  follow- 
ing emergency  they  served  his  Highness  well.  A 
Roundhead  writes  thus  from  Paris,  July  30, 1653  ; — 

"  The  river  Seine  had  like  to  have  made  an  end  of  your 
black  Prince  Rupert ;  for  some  nights  since  he  would 
needs  cool  himself  in  the  river,  where  he  was  in  danger 
of  drowning,  but  for  the  help  of  one  of  his  Blackamoors 
escaped.  His  Highness,  it  seems,  has  learnt  some  magic 
among  the  remote  islands;  since  his  coming  hither,  he 
hath  cured  the  Lord  Jermyn  of  a  fever,  with  a  charm ; 
but  I  am  confident  is  without  the  jurisdiction  of  his  con- 
juring faculty."3 

Rupert's  name  at  this  period  was  identified  with 
a  mysterious  sort  of  renown  very  attractive  to  that 


1  Thurloe's  State  Papers,  vol.  ii.  p.  141. 

2  See  their  letters  in  "  Bromley's  Collection." 

3  Evelyn's  Memoirs,  v.  298,  n.     The  following  curious  letter 
from  Thurloe's  State  Papers  gives  another  version  : — 

COLONEL   EDWARD   WOGAN    TO   MAJOE-GENEEAL    MASSEY  (!). 
SlE, 

The  last  night  there  had  like  to  been  a  most  ....  accident, 
the  King,  Duke,  and  Prince  Rupert  being  a  swimming,  Prince 
Rupert  had  like  to  been  drowned,  had  it  not  been  for  one  Hamil- 
ton, that  saved  him  when  he  was  quite  gone  under  water,  took 
him  up  by  the  hair  of  the  head,  and  swam  ashore  with  him.  I 
am  concerned  that  you  should  want  one  to  present  your  duty  to 


1053.]      PRINCE  RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     425 

age,  whose  mind  still  yearned  after  tlie  departing 
days  of  chivalry.  His  romantic  bravery  on  the 
Continent  when  a  mere  boy,  his  long  imprisonment, 
his  prowess  in  the  civil  wars  of  England,  his  daring 
and  marvellous  adventures  on  the  sea,  his  rare 
experience  in  the  wonders  of  the  Western  world, 
of  whose  unexplored  and  widely-reputed  wealth  all 
tales  were  credible ;  his  noble  personal  appearance 
and  conspicuous  stature :  even  his  "  richly-liveried 
Blackamoors/'  his  birds  of  brilliant  plumage,  and 
monkeys  of  more  than  negro  intellect  and  human 
appearance ;  his  supposed  wealth  in  gems,  and  gold, 
and  ivory,  and  rare  perfumes,  all  this  was  calculated 
to  tell  powerfully  on  the  susceptible  hearts  of  Paris ; 
and  the  number  of  French  love-letters  in  Bromley's 
Collection  addressed  to  the  Prince,  prove  that  he 
was  not  proof  to  all  temptation.  These  adven- 
tures were  naturally  varied  by  others  of  a  dif- 
ferent nature  ;  the  mythology  that  assigned  Mars  as 
the  nearest  connection  of  Venus,  was  well  imagined. 
The  following  affair  is  one  of  the  Palatine's  experi- 
ences in  Paris : — 

Last  Sunday  Prince  Rupert,  with  an  Irishman  called 
Holmes,  a  captain,  were  returning  from  hunting  at  Cam 
de  la  Reyne,  behind  the  Louvre,  where  two  gentlemen 
rode  in  all  haste  coming  into  Paris,  to  whom  Prince  Rupert 

his  Majesty,  and  not  one  that  is  so  really  suspected  as  Bosell 
[Boswell  1]  is. 

Your  most  affectionate,  humble  servant, 

EDWAKD  WOGAN. 
Valeroyal,  the  19th  of  June,  1653. 


426       MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [JUNE, 

gave  way,  and  after  they  passed,  they  turned  back  again, 
and  drew  their  pistols  against  Prince  Rupert,  and  both 
failed  ;  which  the  Prince  seeing,  drew  one  of  his  own, 
killed  one  of  them,  and  mortally  wounded  the  other.  M. 
Comte  de  Mongiron,  their  master,  married  to  Mareschal 
de  Plessy  Praslin's  daughter,  riding  after  them,  and  see- 
ing one  of  his  gentlemen  killed,  began  to  revenge  him. 
Prince  Rupert  must  do  with  him  as  he  had  done  with  his 
man,  till  he  cried  and  told  he  was  such  a  one.  The 
Prince  said  he  could  not  believe  him  for  such,  yet  seeing 
he  said  it,  he  would  not  meddle  with  him,  so  the  matter 
passed,  and  the  gentleman  slain  the  worse  for  him."1 

The  Emperor  of  Germany  and  the  Duke  of 
Modena  had  both  of  them  invited  Rupert  to  assume 
the  command  of  their  forces.  He  afterwards  raised 
some  troops  for  the  latter,  which  he  made  over  to 
his  old  companion  in  arms,  Lord  Gerrard.  It  does 
not  appear  that  he  yet  contemplated  taking  arms 
under  the  Emperor,  but  he  had  claims  on  his  Impe- 
rial Majesty  for  thirty  thousand  rix  dollars  by  the 
articles  of  Munster,  and  he  was  charged  at  the  same 
time  with  a  mission  from  Charles  II.  to  the  Court 
of  Vienna.  Hyde  had  succeeded  in  producing  an 
estrangement  for  some  time  between  the  Royal 
cousins,  but  they  parted  in  perfect  friendship; 
Rupert  having,  apparently,  purchased  the  King's 
good  will  at  some  considerable  cost.2 

In  June  1654,  he  proceeded  to  the  Hague  to  visit 


1  Thurloe's  State  Papers,  p.  185.     Letter  from  Paris,  April  1, 
1654.  (N.  S.) 

2  Cromwell's  spies  saw  everything.   See  Thurloe's  State  Papers, 
vol.  ii.  pp.  276,  325,  327. 


1654.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.      427 

his  mother.1  The  Queen  of  Bohemia  had  remained 
there  ever  since  her  husband's  death :  generously  sup- 
ported by  the  States  of  Holland,  and  most  sordidly 
dealt  with  by  her  son  the  Elector,  Charles  Louis. 
This  caitiff  Prince  had  been  restored  to  his  Palati- 
nate by  the  treaty  of  Westphalia,  in  1648,  and  his 
mother  then  vainly  hoped  to  be  restored  to  her 
dower-house  of  Frankenthal,  which  she  had  herself 
repaired  and  beautified  in  her  bridal  days.  Charles 
Louis  refused  this  barren  justice  to  his  mother,  in  a 
letter  rendered  still  more  offensive  by  his  hypocriti- 
cal professions  of  affection,  and  canting  puritanism. 
He  refused  to  rescue  the  Queen  from  the  attacks  of 


1  405.  Strasburgh,  June  28,  1654  (0.  S.).— "  Sunday  last, 
Prince  Rupert  came  on  here  from  Paris  with  twenty-six  persons, 
among  whom  are  three  Blackamoors  and  an  African  lad  of  five 
years  old,  which  is  part  of  the  prey  he  brought  over  seas  from 
those  parts.  He  is  going  for  Heidelberg,  and  from  thence  to 
Vienna ;  but  whether  or  no  his  cousin,  Charles  Stuart,  whom  he 
left  at  Paris,  will  also  come  into  these  parts  he  could  not  tell 
for  a  certainty." 

Prince  Rupert  was  probably  induced  to  hasten  his  visit  to  the 
Hague  in  consequence  of  the  following  report  there  current. 
There  is  no  suspense  so  anxious,  so  ceaseless,  as  that  which 
watches  for  what  the  mysterious  sea  has  taken  or  hidden  away  in 
its  silent  world. 

Letter  of  intelligence  from  the  Hague,  June  19, 1654  (N.  S.)  : — 
"  Here  is  news  of  Prince  Maurice,  who  was  thought  and  believed 
to  be  drowned  and  perished,  that  he  is  a  slave  at  Africa  ;  for  being 
constrained,  at  that  time  that  he  parted  from  Prince  Rupert,  to  run 
as  far  as  Hispaniola,  in  the  West  Indies,  he  was  coming  back  thence 
towards  Spain  in  a  barque  laden  with  a  great  quantity  of  silver, 
and  was  taken  by  a  pirate  of  Algiers.  The  Queen,  his  mother 
hath  spoken  to  the  ambassador  of  France,  to  the  end  he  may 
write  in  his  behalf  to  the  Great  Turk  ;  for  it  is  pre- supposed  this 
State  dare  not  speak  for  him  for  fear  of  oifending  the  Protector." 
Thurloe,  vol.  ii.  p.  238. 


428       MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF        [JUNE, 

her  creditors,  or  to  relieve  her  in  any  way  from  the 
accumulated  burdens  that  her  narrow  income  and  her 
numerous  family  had  imposed  upon  her.  The  Elec- 
tor had  lately  formed  a  disreputable  connexion  with 
some  lady  who  enslaved  him,  and  his  wife  was  obliged 
to  leave  his  odious  Court,  which  presented  a  loath- 
some contrast  and  combination  of  puritanical 
profession  and  Epicurean  practice. 

Yet  Rupert  suffered  himself  to  indulge  in  the 
hope  that  this  sordid  hypocrite  would  act  liberally 
in  his  case,  and  realize  professions  of  which  alone 
his  Electoral  Highness  was  very  liberal.  It  was 
even  reported  that  he  had  settled  a  large  estate 
upon  his  brother,  but  in  a  few  days,  we  find  the 
Prince  "  leaving  Heidelberg  in  a  rage,  and  repairing 
to  Vienna."1  Here  Cromwell's  accurate  foreign 
intelligence  enables  us  to  trace  him  through  the 
following  extracts  from  Thurloe : — 

"  My  friend  at  Heidelberg  wrote  me  word,  that  Prince 
Rupert  is  gone  thence;  some  guess,  on  resolutions  to 
serve  the  Emperor,  though  others  think  he  will  settle  on 
his  plantation,  his  brother  having  given  him  lands  to  the 
quantity  of  twenty  English  miles  in  compass.  Which- 
soever of  these  projects  succeeds,  it  seems  he  intendeth 
not  his  brother's  service,  of  whom  there  is  nothing  lately, 
he  being  still  at  the  Spa."  2 

"  His  Imperial  Majesty  has  commanded  to  give  an 
assignation  to  Prince  Rupert  Palatine  of  thirty  thousand 
rix  dollars,  of  a  certain  sum  due  to  him  since  the  treaty  at 

1  Thurloe's  State  Papers. 

2  514.     Intelligence  from  Paris,  August  12,  1654.  (N.  S.) 


1655.]        PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     429 

Minister.  The  said  Prince  Rupert,  besides,  solicits 
money  for  R.  C.,  of  which  some  part  is  paid,  and  more 
promised;  the  same  you  had  before."1 

"  Prince  Rupert  is  still  here,  and  is  promised  what  he 
pretended  due  to  him  at  the  peace  of  Munster.  His 
train  now  is  come  to  sixteen  persons.  He  is  much 
honoured  here.  There  was  a  strange  report  here,  that 
R.  C.  [Royal  Charles]  was  to  come  to  this  city ;  which, 
coming  to  the  Emperor's  ears,  he  wrote  to  the  Prince 
Palatine,  to  hinder  that  journey.2 

From  this  time  it  becomes  difficult  to  trace  the 
Prince's  movements.  In  1655,  he  is  again  in  Paris; 
and  has  again  been  divided  from  King  Charles,  as 
Secretary  Thurloe's  correspondent  informs  us. 

"  I  need  not  tell  you  by  whom  Prince  Rupert  was 
turned  from  Court ;  yet,  perhaps,  you  have  not  known 
that  Hyde  then  offered  Charles  Stuart,  that  fifty  thousand 
men  should  be  in  arms  in  England,  before  a  year  went 
about,  if  he  would  quit  the  Queen's  Court  and  the 
Prince's  party.  .  .  .  By  the  last  letters,  it  doth  seem 
as  if  Prince  Rupert  had  an  intention  to  see  Cologne  be- 
fore Modeiia ;  and  if  he  can  break  Hyde's  neck  here,  it 
may  alter  his  design  and  make  him  stay  with  the  King, 
which  he  has  most  mind  to  do."  3 

It  seems  that  in  the  absence  of  all  other  occupa- 
tion, Rupert  had  undertaken  the  command  of  the 
Duke  of  Modena's  forces,  but,  through  the  intrigues 
of  France,  this  scheme  was  defeated :  Lord  Ger- 
rard  was  also  disappointed,  who  expected  to  have 

1  658.     A  letter  dated,  at  the  Red-mill  near  Vienna,  Septem- 
ber 1,  1654.  (0.  S.) 

2  684.     Vienna,  October  13,  1654.  (N.  S.) 

3  A  letter  of  intelligence  from  Mr.  Manning,  June  1,  1655 — 
Thurloe,  iii.  459. 


430       MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF         [SEPT. 

succeeded  him.1  In  the  autumn  of  1655,  Rupert 
was  once  more  invited  to  Vienna,  and  appears  un- 
accountably to  have  marched  with  the  Austrians 
against  the  ancient  allies  of  his  House,  the  Swedes. 
It  appears  unaccountable,  as  he  had  always  refused 
to  take  arms  against  them,  and  still  more  as  he 
writes  the  following  letter  a  few  months  later,  and 
appears  to  rejoice  in  their  success. 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  KING  CHARLES  II. 

SIR, 

I  received  your  Majesty's,  of  the  16th  December,  but 
at  my  arrival  in  this  place,  where,  with  great  grief,  I  un- 
derstand the  continuation  of  the  news  was  whispered  at 
Vienna  before  my  departure,  of  the  Spaniards  tampering 
for  a  peace  with  Cromwell,  yet  I  am  so  confident  that  they 
will  come  off  it,  that  I  wish  K.  England  would  not  be  too 
hasty  in  offering  himself  to  the  King  of  Spain.  If  the 
business  break  between  them  and  England,  they  will  be 
sure  to  take  K.  England  by  the  hand,  if  not  all  will  be 
vain ;  I  humbly  beseech  your  Majesty  to  pardon  this  bold- 
ness, which  proceeds  from  a  very  faithful  heart,  to  save 
your  Majesty.  Sir,  I  shall  not  need  trouble  you  with  the 

1  A  letter  of  intelligence  from  Mr.  Manning,  Cologne,  July  8, 
1655.  Thur.  iii.  591  : — "  Letters  from  Prince  Rupert  advise 
that  Bardy,  the  Duke  of  Modena's  agent,  was  come  to  him  and  had 
removed  all  doubts  which  he  made  of  not  going  that  journey,  so 
that  now  in  honour  he  must  go.  He  offered  the  Lord  Gerrard  to 
be  his  lieutenant-general,  Craven  to  be  general  of  his  ordnance, 
and  Massey  [formerly  Roundhead  governor  of  Gloucester]  his 
lieutenant-general  of  artillery." 

A  letter  of  intelligence  to  Mr.  Petit,  Paris,  July  24,  1655. 
Thur.  iii.  683  : — "  Prince  Rupert  has  sent  to  Italy  the  troop  he 
had  raised  for  the  Duke  of  Modena ;  he  himself  is  going  to  serve 
the  King  of  Sweden.  It  is  said  he  intended  to  be  lieutenant- 
general  to  the  Duke  of  Modena,  but  France  desired  it  might  be 
the  Count  de  Broglio."—  Thurloe's  State  Papers,  iii.  490. 


1656.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.      431 

news  from  the  Swedes,  it  being  generally  known  how  suc- 
cessful their  proceedings  are;  and  Cromwell's  intentions 
in  the  West.  I  am  afraid  the  treasure  of  Castle  St. 
Angelo  must  be  opened  before  the  summer.  Giving  your 
Majesty  most  humble  thanks  for  your  favour, 
I  rest  your  Majesty's  most  faithful 

and  obedient  servant,  RupERT.1 

Heidelberg,  Sept.  6,  1656. 

It  appears  scarcely  probable  that  if  the  war-loving 
Prince  had  once  resumed  a  military  life,  he  would 
so  soon  have  retired  from  it. 

After  a  reconciliation  with  King  Charles,  Rupert 
once  more  visited  Heidelberg,  which  he  again  left 
in  disgust,  and  took  up  his  residence  with  the  Elec- 
tor of  Mentz.  During  the  next  four  years,  his 
name  is  scarcely  heard  of  in  history,  except  in  some 
vague  report  of  invading  England.2  The  Prince 
was  far  otherwise  employed.  In  the  first  leisure  of 
his  manhood,  his  mind  reverted  with  a  sense  of  lux- 
ury to  the  philosophical  pursuits  in  which  even  his 
youth  had  taken  pleasure.  He  now  found  new 
sources  of  unexhausted  interest  in  the  forge,  the 
laboratory,  and  the  painter's  studio. 

It  was  during  this  lull  in  the  stormy  life  of  Ru- 
pert, that  he  discovered  or  improved  upon  his  art  of 
mezzotinto.  So  long  ago  as  1637,  when  immured 
in  the  Castle  of  Lintz,  he  had  exercised  his  active 

1  Thurloe,  ii.  3.  The  only  authority  for  the  Prince  having  served 
Austria  against  the  Swedes  is  contained  in  the  brief  biography  I 
have  before  alluded  to,  published  in  1683,  and  entitled  the  "Life 
of  the  Heroicall  Prince  Rupert,"  &c. 

2  Thurloe's  State  Papers,  ii.  477. 


432      MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

genius  in  some  etchings  that  still  remain,  and  bear 
that  date.  He  now  returned,  in  his  voluntary  re- 
tirement, to  the  objects  that  had  then  charmed  his 
enforced  leisure.  His  varied  biography  presents  no 
more  striking  period  than  this,  when  his  name  was 
hidden  from  the  world  that  had  been  busied  with  it 
for  so  many  years.  The  plumed  helmet,  the  cuirass, 
and  gallant  war-horse  are  laid  aside ;  the  good  sword 
that  so  often  hewed  his  fearless  way  through  fiercest 
danger  hangs  idly  on  the  wall ;  the  stout  ship  that 
so  long  stemmed  the  storm,  and  explored  strange 
seas,  lies  rotting  on  the  banks  of  Loire.  The  beauties 
of  Paris  are  forgotten,  calumny  itself  is  silent.  The 
young  philosopher,  royal,  warlike,  and  renowned, 
has  retired  from  the  world,  and  adopted  the  student's 
bravely  ascetic  life  ;  the  same  energies  that  once  led 
legions  along  the  battle-field,  and  fleets  across  the 
ocean,  are  now  devoted  to  the  discoveries  of  science 
and  the  creations  of  art. 

Among  the  former,  the  Prince  turned  his  first 
attention  to  those  that  related  to  his  own  profession 
— of  arms.  He  laboured  heartily  at  his  own  forge, 
and  applied  himself  to  the  practical  as  well  as  the 
theoretical  details  of  science.  The  writer  of  his 
funeral  ode,  which  is  quoted  from  in  the  first  chap- 
ter of  this  work,  describes  him  as  forging  "  the  thun- 
derbolts of  war,  his  hands  so  well  could  throw." 
The  transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  1  record  his 

1  Original  Register  of  the  Royal  Society,  vol.  ii.  p,  283. 


1058.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       433 

mode  of  fabricating  a  gunpowder  of  ten  times  the 
ordinary  strength  at  that  time  used;1  likewise  a 
mode  of  blowing  up  rocks  in  mines,  or  under  water,2 
"  an  instrument  to  cast  platforms  into  perspecti  ve,3 
an  hydraulic  engine,  a  mode  of  making  hail-shot,  an 
improvement  in  the  naval  quadrant.*  Amongst  his 
mechanical  labours  are  also  to  be  reckoned  his  im- 
provement in  the  locks  of  fire-arms,  and  his  guns  for 
discharging  several  bullets  very  rapidly.  Amongst 
his  chemical  discoveries,  were  the  composition  now 
called  Prince's  metal,  and  a  mode  of  rendering  black 
lead  fusible,  and  re-changing  it  into  its  original 
state.  Perhaps  to  him  is  also  to  be  attributed  the 
toy  that  bears  his  name  as  "  Rupert's  drop ;  that 
curious  bubble  of  glass  which  has  long  amused 
children,  and  puzzled  philosophers."5 


1  The  exact  proportion  of  strength  was  as  21  to  2.     Sprat,  in 
his  History  of  the  Royal  Society  (p.   255),  says   (mistakenly) 
as  20  to  1. 

2  Birch's  History  of  the  Royal  Society,  i.  335. 

3  Ibid.  p.  329. 

4  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  58  ;  Campbell's  Admirals,  ii.  249. 

5  Macaulay's  England,  i.  409.     This  philosophical  puzzle  was 
introduced  by  Rupert  into  England  in  1660,  and  communicated 
by  Charles  II.  to  the  Royal  Society  at  Gresham  College.     It  was 
so  well  known  when  "  Hudibras "  was  written  as  to  be  used  in 
popular  illustration.     In  part  ii.  canto  2,  we  have, — 

"  Honour  is  like  that  glassy  bubble 
That  finds  philosophers  such  trouble, 
Whose  least  part  crack'd,  the  whole  does  fly 
And  wits  are  crack'd  to  find  out  why." 

This  bubble  is  in  form  somewhat  pear-shaped,  or  like  a  leech  ; 
it  is  formed  by  dropping  highly- refined  green  glass,  when  melted, 
into  cold  water.  Its  thick  end  is  so  hard  that  it  can  scarcely  be 

VOL.   III.  F    F 


434    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

Here  too,  he  seems  to  have  reviewed  his  past  life ; 
and  prepared  to  write  his  own  biography,  rather  to 
vindicate  his  character  than  to  gratify  his  pride.  I 
find  amongst  his  papers  an  interesting  document  re- 
lative to  this  matter :  it  appears  to  contain  the  sug- 
gestion of  some  person  to  whom  he  had  applied  for 
advice. 


It  being  made  appear  how  much  the  King's  service  was 
disadvantaged,  and  his  Majesty  withdrawn  from  the  Prince 
by  the  artifice  of  a  Court  faction,  I  would  upon  as  fair 
occasions  produce  the  King's  acknowledgment  and  pro- 
fessions of  infinite  tenderness  for  him  (in  .  .  .  despite  of  all 
his  adversaries)  as  well  after  his  Majesty's  displeasure 
against  him  as  before  ;  and  I  would  cite  the  very  testi- 
monies of  his  Highness's  enemies  in  their  letters  to  him, 
without  taking  any  notice  of  their  [after  conduct]. 

I  would  take  a  special  care  to  certify  all  those  misre- 
ports  that  have  been  either  spoken  or  printed  to  his 
Highness's  prejudice,  on  the  [  .  .  ]  of  the  [  .  .  .  ]  but  with- 
out any  notice  taken  that  ever  any  [  .  .  .  ]  were  reported. 

broken  on  an  anvil,  but  if  the  smallest  particle  of  its  taper  end  is 
broken  off,  the  whole  flies  at  once  into  atoms  and  disappears. 
The  theory  of  this  phenomenon  is,  that  its  particles  when  in 
fusion  are  in  a  state  of  repulsion,  but  on  being  dropped  into  the 
water  its  superficies  is  annealed,  and  the  particles  return  into  the 
power  of  each  other's  attraction ;  the  inner  particles,  still  in  a 
state  of  repulsion,  being  confined  within  their  outward  covering. — 
Philosophical  Transactions,  vol.  xlvi.  p.  175,  &c.  Though  simple 
in  structure,  these  drops  are  difficult  to  make  :  they  are,  however, 
sold  cheaply  at  31,  Fleet  street.  Prince  Rupert  also  discovered  a 
method  of  boring  guns,  which  was  afterward  carried  ipto  execu- 
tion in  Romney  Marsh  by  a  speculator ;  but  some  secret  contri- 
vance of  annealing  the  metal  was  not  understood  except  by 
the  Prince,  and  the  matter  died  with  him.  The  mode  of  tem- 
pering the  Kirby  fish-hooks  was  amongst  his  lesser  discoveries. 


1658.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       435 

In  that  business  of  Newark,  I  would  (with  submission) 
pass  also,  with  admittance  of  [some  fault]  as  his  Highness 
hath  in  some  degree  done  already,  and  in  that  of  Bristol 
(with  favour)  I  conceive  it  will  be  the  frankest  way  to 
write  so  much  of  it  as  was  then  made  public,  and  after  the 
Prince's  just  declaration  and  his  acquittal,  to  insert  the 
King's  kindness  and  esteem  in  his  own  words  with  the 
Prince's  reverence  and  generosity  toward  his  uncle  and  an 
unfortunate  prince,  in  continuing  his  loyalty  and  affection 
to  him  in  all  extremities,  after  this  misunderstanding 

which  may  be  so  counted  as  to  consist  with  great 

both  to  his  late  Majesty  and  to  his  Highness  the 

Prince  Rupert. 

In  the  prosecution  of  this  life  the  defects  of  the  Jour- 
nal must  be  supplied,  and  in  regard  that  letters  from 
others  to  the  Prince  do  generally  treat  of  particulars 
foreign  to  the  Prince's  personal  actions,  recourse  may 
be  had  to  the  Paper  Office  for  the  sight  of  all  these  re- 
lations which  were  dispatched  from  the  Prince  himself  to 
the  King,  or  his  ministers,  upon  every  action,  as  well  at 
sea  as  at  land,  which  will  be  a  great  help  also  to  his 
Highness's  memory. 


The  most   memorable   fruit    of  the   philosophic 
hero's  retirement  was  the  invention  of  mezzotinto.1 


1  Hereafter  I  transcribe  Evelyn's  account  of  Prince  Rupert  as 
an  inventor :  in  the  following  lines  he  speaks  of  him  as  an 
artist : — 

"  We  did  forbear  to  mention  what  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert's 
own  hands  have  contributed  to  the  dignity  of  that  art,  perform- 
ing things  in  graving  comparable  to  the  greatest  masters,  such  a 
spirit  and  address  there  appears  in  all  he  touches,  and  especially 
in  the  mezzotinto,  of  which  we  shall  speak  hereafter  more  at 
large,  having  first  enumerated  those  incomparable  engravings  of 
that  his  new  and  inimitable  style  :  in  both  the  great  and  little 
decollations  of  St.  John  the  Baptist,  the  soldier  holding  a  spear 

F  F  2 


436         MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

Like  all  other  inventors  he  was  quickly  followed  by 
imitators  ;  and  the  natural  tendency  of  critics  to 
question  originality  soon  sought  to  deprive  him  of 
that  honour,  I  confess  that  I  am  little  qualified  to 
argue  the  point  as  to  Prince  Rupert's  claim  to  this 
invention  ;  but  I  am  not  the  less  satisfied  in  my  own 
mind  that  nothing  but  detraction  can  rob  him  of 
that  merit.  Whatever  were  the  numerous  faults  of 
this  calumniated  Prince,  truth  and  honour  were  nobly 
conspicuous  in  his  upright  and  manly  character.  He 
unhesitatingly  claimed  the  invention  as  his  own. 
Next  to  Prince  Rupert's  own  testimony  on  such  a 
matter,  that  of  John  Evelyn  is  the  most  unimpeach- 
able in  respect  to  his  truthfulness  and  general  know- 
ledge of  the  subject.  The  invention  had  been  made 
public  for  at  least  four  years  when  Rupert  shewed 
the  process  to  Evelyn  in  London  in  1662,  and  en- 
larged upon  all  its  details  with  characteristic  frank- 
ness. The  chief  competitor  set  up  against  the 
Prince  is  Louis  Von  Siegen,  a  lieutenant-colonel  in 
the  service  of  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse  Cassel,  from 
whom  Baron  Heineken  asserts  that  Rupert  learned 
the  art :  he  says,  that  the  first  specimen  ever  pro- 
duced was  the  portrait  of  the  Princess  Sophia  Land- 


and  leaning  his  hand  on  a  shield ;  the  Mary  Magdalen  ;  the  old 
man's  head,  that  of  Titian,  and  after  the  same  Titian,  Georgione 
and  others.  P.  333,  chap.  vi.  of  the  '  New  way  of  Engraving,  or 
Mezzotinto,  invented  and  communicated  by  Prince  Rupert.'" — 
Evelyn's  Sculptura,  325.  "March  16,  1661.  This  afternoon 
Prince  Rupert  shewed  me  with  his  own  hands  the  new  way  of 
engraving." — Evelyn's  Diary. 


1658.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       437 

gravine  of  Hesse.1  Mr.  Diamond,  who  has  published 
a  paper  on  this  subject,  (Lond.  1848,)  which  he  read 
before  the  Antiquarian  Society,  quotes  this  work, 
and  adds  an  extract  from  Grainger's  biography 
of  Wren,  in  which  the  invention  is  claimed  for 
Sir  Christopher  !  In  this  extract,  however,  is  a 
dangerous  admission  for  Mr.  Diamond's  theory :  it 
is  there  mentioned  that  Vertue  alludes  to  "  a  large 
head,  something  like  mezzotinto,  of  the  Princess 
Amelia  of  Hesse."  Now  we  cannot  furnish  an 
expression  more  derogatory  to  the  fact  that  it  was 
in  mezzotinto  than  the  comparison  thus  made  by 
a  most  experienced  judge  in  those  matters :  this 
head  is  dated  in  1643.  Prince  Rupert's  invention  is 
said  to  have  been  founded  on  the  discovery  that  a 
soldier,  in  cleaning  his  rusty  musket  found  the  im- 
pression of  a  curious  figure  on  the  rag  which  he 
was  using,  the  rusty  part  having  left  a  dark  impres- 
sion, while  the  smooth  part  left  the  rag  still  white. 
This  soldier  is  said  to  have  been  cleaning  this  musket 
at  Brussels  during  the  wars  in  the  Low  Countries, 
but  nothing  more  is  known,  except  the  reported 
communication  of  the  discovery  to  Le  Vaillant,  who 
afterwards  attended  the  Prince  at  Frankfort.  Ru- 
pert twice  saw  service  in  Flanders — in  1636  and 
1647 ; — and  if  the  musket  cleaning  took  place  at 
the  former  period  there  was  still  ample  priority ;  if 
at  the  latter,  there  can  be  no  reason  why  Rupert 

1  Idee  Generale  d'une  Collection  complete  d'Estampes,  printed 
at  Leipsic  in  1771. 


438    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

should  have  studied  a  rusty  gun-barrel  instead  of  a 
highly  finished  engraving.  There  appears  to  be  no 
reason  for  the  doubt  concerning  this  story,  except 
that  love  of  contradiction  which  seems  to  be  the 
natural  re-action  of  speech  after  an  assertion. 
We  have  an  etching  by  Prince  Rupert  with 
his  own  signature,  of  1637,  at  the  time  when 
he  was  a  prisoner  in  the  Castle  of  Lintz,  which 
probably  bears  as  much  resemblance  to  mezzo- 
tinto  as  the  head  of  the  Princess  Amelia  does. 
The  portrait  which  is  triumphantly  produced  in 
confutation  of  the  Prince's  claims,  is  dated  1657,1 
whilst  its  exhibitor  observes,  "  it  is  only  necessary 
to  add  that  Rupert's  earliest  efforts  in  mezzotinto  is 
of  the  year  1658."  It  is  very  possible  that  the  first 
published  portrait  of  Prince  Rupert  may  bear  a  later 
date  than  that  assigned  by  Siegen  to  his  own  work ; 
and  yet  that  the  former  may  be  genuine,  while  the 
other  may  be  assumed,  in  order  to  vindicate  a  claim 
to  the  invention.  It  is  certain,  from  the  etchings 
now  in  the  British  Museum,  that  Prince  Rupert 
applied  himself  very  zealously  to  the  art  of  en- 
graving in  the  year  1657.2  It  is  impossible  that 

1  The  Earliest  Specimens  of  Mezzotinto  Engraving,  by  Hugh 
W.  Diamond,  Esq.,  F.S.A.    Lond.  1848. 

2  There  are  three  fine  etchings  in  the  British  Museum.     The 
first  appears  to  be  an  original  composition  :  a  whole  length  por- 
trait of  a  mendicant  friar  is  the  principal  figure,   relieved   by 
a   landscape   containing   a   city  and   river,   and   grouped  with 
five  soldiers    and    two    other    figures :    this    bears  the   Prince's 
mark,   '« Rup.   Pr.  F.,"   1637.      The  second   is  a  whole-length 
figure  of  a  beggar,  without  date.     The  third  is  a  landscape,  date 
1657. 


1658.]        PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     439 

he  could  have  been  ignorant  of  Siegen's  invention ; 
but  it  is  still  more  impossible  that  he  should  have 
claimed  it  as  his  own.  Against  the  testimony  of 
the  Prince  engraven,  and  that  of  the  honest  Evelyn, 
written,  at  the  time,  we  have  this  Baron  Heineken's 
"  Id6e  G£n£rale,"  formed  one  hundred  and  twenty 
years  later,  and  Siegen's  assertion  supported  only 
by  his  own  authority. 

I  shall  not  enter  further  into  a  discussion  in  which 
I  am  so  little  qualified  to  act  as  an  advocate.  I 
shall  content  myself  with  referring  to  Lord  Orford's 
opinion,1  and  inserting  the  following  extract  from 
Evelyn's  "  Sculptura." 2  He  proposes  to  gratify  his 
reader  with  "  a  mystery  of  art  altogether  rare,  extra- 
ordinary, universally  approved  of,  admired  by  all 
who  have  considered  the  effect  of  it,  and  which,  as 
yet,  has  by  none  been  ever  published.  Nor  may  I, 
without  extraordinary  ingratitude  conceal  that  illus- 
trious name  which  did  communicate  it  to  me;  nor 
the  obligation  which  the  curious  have  to  that  heroic 
person  who  was  pleased  to  impart  it  to  the  world, 
though  by  so  incompetent  and  unworthy  an  instru- 
ment. It  would  appear  a  paradox  to  discourse  to 
you  of  a  graving  without  a  graver,  burin,  point,  or 
aqua  fortis,  and  yet  is  this  performed  without  the 
assistance  of  either.  That  what  gives  our  most 


1  Anecdotes,  vol.  v.  p.  133. 

2  8vo.  Lond.  1755,  p.  127,  chap.  vi.  "  Of  the  New  way  of  En- 
;raving,  or  MEZ&OTINTO,  INVENTED  and  communicated  to  me  by 
tis  Highness  Prince  Rupert,  Count  Palatine  of  the  Rhine,"  &c. 


440         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE  OF       [MAY, 

perite  and  dextrous  artists  the  greatest  trouble,  and 
is  longest  finishing  (for  such  are  the  patches  and 
deepest  shadows  in  plates)  should  be  here  the  least 
considerable  and  most  expeditious;  that  on  the  con- 
trary the  lights  should  be  in  this  the  most  laborious, 
and  yet  performed  with  the  greatest  facility ;  that 
what  appears  to  be  effected  with  so  little  curiosity, 
should  yet  so  accurately  resemble  what  is  generally 
considered  the  very  greatest ;  that  a  print  should 
emulate  even  the  best  of  drawings  in  chiaro  oscuro 
(as  the  Italians  term  it),  pieces  of  the  mezzotinto, 
so  as  nothing  either  of  Ugo  da  Carpi,  or  any  of  those 
other  masters  who  pursued  his  attempt,  and  whose 
works  we  have  already  celebrated,  have  exceeded, 
or  indeed  approached,  especially  for  that  of  por- 
traits, figures,  tender  landscapes,  history,  &c.,  to 
which  it  seems  most  appropriate  and  applicable." 

Few  of  these  inventions  or  discoveries  transpired 
at  the  time.  They  were  their  own  reward  to  the 
philosophic  prince, — 

"Pale  o'er  his  lamp  and  in  his  cell  retired," 
far  from  the  tumult  and  ambition  of  the  world. 

But  at  length  a  new  epoch  arrived  for  England, 
Prince  Rupert's  cherished  and  adopted  country. 
On  the  29th  of  May,  Charles  the  Second  was 
restored  to  the  throne  of  his  ancestors.  The  profli- 
gate young  king  and  his  hungry  tribe  of  courtiers 
burst  in  upon  England  as  soldiers  on  a  city  taken 
by  assault ;  the  people,  intoxicated  with  the  enthu- 
siasm of  hope,  welcomed  their  sovereign  with  rap- 


1660.]     PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       441 

ture.  They  had  tried,  and  been  trampled  on  by  all 
forms  of  tyranny  that  ever  assumed  the  mask  of 
patriotism,  and  they  were  ready  to  welcome  the 
greatest  oppression  that  mere  kingship  could  achieve. 
But  their  imaginations  figured  no  such  fear:  they 
knew  that  their  young  King  was  brave  and  kindly, 
and  they  gave  him  credit  for  almost  as  many  virtues 
as  he  possessed  vices. 

Long  months  of  festival  succeeded  the  Restora- 
tion. Prince  Rupert  received  an  honourable  invi- 
tation to  his  cousin's  Court,  and  in  the  autumn  of 
the  same  year  he  proceeded  to  the  Hague.  There 
he  found  the  Queen  of  Bohemia  still  languishing 
under  the  burden  of  her  debts :  her  caitiff  son,  the 
Elector,  withheld  from  her  the  smallest  pittance 
of  her  own  dower,  and  had  long  left  her  to  subsist 
on  the  charity  of  the  States.  All  her  daughters 
had  left  her,  either  for  love  or  religion ;  and  Eliza- 
beth of  England,  the  darling  of  her  own  people,  the 
idol  of  European  chivalry,  was  left  alone  to  pine 
in  poverty.  But  one  generous  and  devoted  friend, 
able  and  willing  to  befriend  her  nobly,  remained. 
This  was  the  Earl  of  Craven.  He  had  devoted  his 
youth  to  her  service,  he  had  grown  grey  in  her 
friendship  ;  he  had  probably  warded  off  from  her. 
the  more  painful  attacks  of  poverty,  and  he  now 
proposed  to  procure  her  return  to  her  native 
country.1 


1  This  generous  and  romantic  nobleman  had  entered  the  service 
of  the  States  to  be  near  his  Queen,  and  was  titular  Master  of  the 


442    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

Rupert  found  his  mother  anxious,  yet  unable,  to 
leave  Holland.  She  was  hampered  by  a  heavy 
arrear  of  debt,  which  her  poor  son  was  utterly  in- 
competent to  relieve.  Indeed,  it  appears  incompre- 
hensible how  he  had  hitherto  found  means  to  sup- 
port himself,  even  "without  his  Blackamoors  and 
their  laced  liveries,"  which  had  long  been  laid  aside. 
The  Elector  gave  him  nothing,  Charles  had  nothing 
to  give ;  the  prizes  scarcely  paid  the  wages  of  their 
crews  and  the  debt  previously  contracted  at  Toulon. 
His  prospects  at  present  were  little  better ;  he  was 
promised  a  pension  of  1500/.  a  year,  which  he  after- 
wards received,  but  it  was  long  before  he  obtained 
any  additional  income.  He  remained  for  some 
months  with  his  mother  and  sister,  who  shared  his 
taste  and  genius  for  the  fine  arts,  especially  for 
drawing,  in  which  she  rivalled  her  master,  Gerard 
Honthorst;  this  was  the  Princess  Louisa,  who  had 
been  long  the  faithful  affectionate  companion  of  her 
mother.  Her  eldest  sister,  Elizabeth,  after  a  joyless 
and  anxious  childhood,  was  proposed  to  by  Ladislaus, 
the  young  King  of  Poland :  there  was  but  one  bar 
to  an  union  which  would  have  procured  for  her 
independence,  and  a  large  power  of  doing  good,  in 
which  she  chiefly  delighted ;  she  was  required  to 
change  her  religion  as  a  preliminary,  and  this  she 
refused  to  do.  The  marriage  was  broken  off,  and 


Horse  to  the  Elector  Palatine.  He  had  given  Charles  II.  50,0002. 
in  his  poverty,  and  for  this  his  estates  had  been  confiscated  by 
Cromwell. 


1660.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE  CAVALIERS.      443 

the  Princess  retired  from  the  world  into  the  Lu- 
theran Abbey  of  Hervorden,  of  which  she  finally 
became  the  superior  :  after  a  life  passed  in  the 
exercise  of  every  noble  and  beneficent  faculty,  she 
died  in  1680.  Henrietta  Maria,  the  second  sister, 
had  been  married  to  Prince  Ragotski  in  1651,  and 
died  in  the  same  year.  Sophia,  the  youngest  sister, 
was  beautiful,  joyous,  and  everywhere  a  favourite : 
she  was  married,  in  1658,  to  Ernest  Augustus,  the 
young  Bishop  of  Osnaburg,  who  became  ultimately 
Elector  of  Hanover,  gave  heirs  to  the  throne  of 
England,  and  died  at  a  good  old  age,  in  1717.  The 
Princess  Louisa  had  hitherto  refused  all  temptations 
to  leave  her  mother ;  but  in  an  evil  hour  she  entered 
into  controversy  with  some  Jesuits,  who  soon  won 
upon  her  imaginative  nature,  and  at  length  made 
her  their  own :  one  morning  a .  note  was  found 
on  the  table  of  her  deserted  room,  stating  that 
she  had  fled  to  the  bosom  of  the  true  Church, 
and  had  abandoned  the  world  and  her  mother 
for  ever:  she  soon  afterwards  became  Abbess  of 
Maubuisson,  where  she  died  in  1709.  Rupert  was 
very  lonely  in  the  world  :  estranged  from  his  eldest 
brother,  the  Elector  Palatine,  by  the  sordid  nature 
of  that  unworthy  Prince ;  and  from  his  only  other 
surviving1  brother,  Edward,  by  his  zealous  Romanism 
and  devotion  to  France ;  cut  off  by  his  poverty  from 
all  prospects  of  a  suitable  marriage,  and  wearied 

1  Prince  Maurice  lay  buried  in  the  West  Indian  seas,  and 
Prince  Philip,  after  a  disgraceful  life,  had  been  knocked  on  the 
head  at  some  siege  in  the  Low  Countries. 


444        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [SEPT. 

with  the  pursuit  of  war  as  a  mere  profession,  his 
thoughts  reverted  to  the  now  quiet  fields  and 
stately  homes  of  good  old  England.  There  he  might 
still  find  some  of  his  old  companions  in  arms ;  there 
he  might  prosecute  in  security  his  philosophical 
pursuits;  and,  if  need  were,  once  more  lead  the 
forces  of  his  adopted  country  against  an  enemy. 

Rupert  seems  to  have  remained  for  some  time  at 
the  Hague  with  his  mother,  in  the  hope  that  she 
might  accompany  him  to  England.1     The  Restora- 
tion  Parliament  had  voted  her  10,000£  which  had 
enabled  her  to  discharge  her  debts ;  but  the  restored 
King  was  apprehensive  of  his  benefactress  as  an 
incumbrance,  and  forbade   her  return,  until    Lord 
Craven  made  some  arrangement  to  defray  all  her 
expenses,  and  offered  his  house  to  be  her  home.     It 
appears  that  their  arrangement  was  not  palatable 
either  to  the  Queen  or  to  Prince  Rupert ;  but  it  end- 
ed in  her  acceptance  of  the  generous  offer.     Rupert 
in  the  meanwhile  had  sailed  for  England,  probably 
in  the  hope  of  facilitating  his  mother's  wishes.    The 
Queen  wrote  to  him  from  the  Hague,  saying,  she 
had  already  proceeded  so  far  when  her  progress  was 
arrested  by  the  King  of  England's  ungenerous  mes- 
sage.    Her    letter  concludes  with  these  words,  "I 
have   resolution  to  suffer  all  things  constantly ;  I 
thank   God,  he  has  given  me  courage.     I  love  you 

1  Pepys,  who  had  a  great  dislike  to  the  Prince,  states  in  his 
"  Diary,"  on  the  23rd  of  September,  "  Prince  Rupert  came  to 
Court,  welcome  to  nobody." 


- 


1661.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        445 

ever,  dear  Rupert." 1  At  length,  in  1662,  all  ob- 
stacles having  been  removed  by  Lord  Craven's 
advocacy  and  liberality,  the  forlorn  Queen  of  Bo- 
hemia arrived  in  London  unnoticed  and  almost 
forgotten.  There  she  found  an  asylum  at  Drury 
House,  which,  with  its  spacious  gardens,  then 
enjoyed  a  country  air,  though  it  occupied  the  site 
of  the  present  theatre  and  the  adjoining  streets. 
Here  she  seems  to  have  regained  some  of  her  natu- 
ral spirits,  and  to  have  risen  over  all  her  misfortunes, 
with  brave  cheerfulness.  Reunited  to  her  favourite 
son,  Rupert,  and  breathing  once  more  her  native  air, 
she  closed  her  troubled  life  in  comparative  happi- 
ness. In  the  autumn  of  1662  she  had  removed  to 
Leicester  House,  and  the  next  public  notice  that 
appears  of  her  is  the  paragraph  that  at  some  time 
or  other  applies  to  the  humblest  of  us  all :  "  She 
dieU,"  on  the  13th  of  February,  1662,  in  the  66th 
year  of  her  age.2 

I  have  gone  beyond  the  date  of  the  following 
letters,  in  order  not  to  interrupt  this  episode.  In 
1661,  soon  after  he  had  greeted  and  congratulated 
Charles  on  his  restoration,  Rupert  determined  to 
seek  employment  at  the  Court  of  Vienna :  in  this 
step,  however,  he  seems  to  have  been  actuated  by 
a  desire  to  recover  some  money  assigned  to  him 
by  the  Treaty  of  Munster,  and  to  have  also  borne 
a  secret  mission  from  Charles  to  the  Emperor.  The 

1  Bromley's  Letters,  p.  189. 

2  Miss  Benger's  Life  of  the  Queen  of  Bohemia. 


446         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [APRIL, 

correspondence  forms  an  interesting  episode ;  and 
proves  amongst  other  things,  that  Rupert  had  been 
reconciled  to  the  Chancellor,  Lord  Clarendon. 
"  Our  cousin,"  seems  to  have  been  a  sobriquet  for 
some  fair  friend. 

For  the  whole  of  these  letters  to  Colonel  Legge 
I  am  indebted  to  Lord  Dartmouth's  kindness. 

DEAR  WILL., 

I  have  hardly  recovered  this  sea-voyage,  which  was 
favourable  enough  as  to  my  health,  for  after  the  first  day's 
offer  to  Neptune  I  used  that  ceremony  no  more.  That 
which  most  troubled  us  was,  after  we  came  in  sight  of  our 
port,  a  great  storm  of  rain,  the  wind  easterly,  which 
lasted  the  whole  night.  On  Thursday  morning,  the  tide 
not  serving  for  the  Maese,  we  ran  into  Goree.  I  can  tell 
you  of  no  adventure  only  one,  which  was  to  meet  one 
Master  Buskins,  who  desiring  to  go  over  with  me,  having 
seriously  not  known  him  before,  I  easily  gave  way  to  it. 
By  his  discourse,  I  found  quickly  that  the  Lord  Chan- 
cellor was  not  his  friend,  and  that  his  chiefest  desigif  of 
coming  over,  was  to  have  a  letter  from  my  mother,  and 
one  from  me,  in  his  behalf,  to  his  Majesty.  How  this 
will  take  effect  you  may  easily  imagine.  Sir  Robert 
Welsh  is  here  also,  whose  business,  I  find  already,  was 
to  go  with  me  to  Vienna,  which  I  shall  also  not  allow. 
I  hope  Colonel  Wheeler  hath  been  pleased  to  let  you 
know,  how  that  there  was  left  a  fire-ball  in  the  little  clo- 
set ;  my  people  tell  me  since  that,  they  left  a  little  barrel 
of  powder.  I  was  very  angry  with  them  for  it,  but  I 
hope  that  it  will  not  be  thought  a  plot ;  more  names  at 
present  you  must  not  expect.  This  is  in  haste,  as  you 
may  guess  by  the  writing.  I  durst  not  write  in  the  same 
hand  to  our  master.  So  fare  well,  dear  Will., 

I  am  yours,  RUPERT. 

Hague,  £fth  April,  1661. 


1661.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     447 


PRINCE    RUPERT    TO    WILL.    LEGGE. 


DEAR  WILL., 

By  the  last  post,  I  wrote  to  you  of  my  arrival  in  this 
place.  I  was  detained  by  Mr  Blackwell's  correspondent, 
who,  instead  of  paying  the  monies  upon  sight,  by  unne- 
cessary delays  kept  them,  and,  consequently  we  and  my 
horses  detained  here  till  this  post.  Pray  let  Mr.  Black- 
well  know  this  from  me  ;  and  that  I  could  have  no  ducats 
from  the  merchant,  but  was  fain  to  pay  almost  one  in  a 
hundred  to  have  them  elsewhere.  All  this  is  contrary  to 
his  promise,  and  my  dealing  with  him,  as  Mr.  Kemaden 
can  tell  you,  was  free  enough.  In  my  last,  I  wrote  to 
you  of  one  Major  Buskins  ;  he  is  gone  without  a  letter  ; 
he  may,  perchance,  be  offended  at  it,  but  I  hope,  not 
knowing  the  person,  nor  the  difference  between  him  and 
the  Lord  Chancellor,  my  friends  will  not  blame  me  for  it. 
I  put  off  Sir  Robert  Welsh  also  from  going  with  me  into 
Germany.  The  Emperor's  minister  resident  here  assures 
me  that  most  of  the  Princes  of  Germany  have  consented  to 
send  the  Emperor  aid  against  the  Turks,  but  they  desire 
a  General  of  their  own  may  command  them,  and  have 
liberty  to  come  back  at  his  master's  command.  This  will 
be  as  ill-liked  a  one,  as  the  demand  some  of  the  Rhenish 
Princes  make  to  their  Hagen  Moguls,  for  restitution  of 
Wesell  and  Reinberg.  If  the  Turks  were  quiet,  this 
might  prove  an  ill  beginning  of  a  correspondence ;  these 
have,  I  understand  spoke  high  language  about  their 
herrings,  which  they  say  shall  be  maintained  with  all  the 
power  and  force  they  have.  The  Prince  of  Orange  is  at 
Cleve,  whither  I  intend  with  all  speed. 

The  Lord  Craven  hath  not  done  very  well  in  my  mo- 
ther's business ;    she,  therefore,   is  not   very   willing   he 


448         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [MAY, 

should  have  anything  to  do  with  it,  till  she  herself  be 
acquainted.  I  found  the  poor  woman  very  much  dejected, 
that  I  could  not  tell  her  the  time  she  might  expect  to  be 
sent  for.  Pray  acquaint  the  Chancellor  with  this,  and  the 
King  with  the  news  I  told  you.  I  almost  forgot  to  tell 
you  another  story,  which  be  pleased  to  acquaint  the  Duke 
of  Albemarle  with.  You  have,  doubtless,  seen  a  lame 
Polish  Prince  some  time  at  "Whitehall,  with  passports,  a 
begging.  This  noble  soul  is  taken  and  imprisoned,  at 
Alikmore,  hath  but  twice  been  burnt  in  the  back,  before 
this  misfortune  befell  him.  The  Duke,  I  am  sure,  will 
remember  what  my  judgment  was  of  this  fellow. 

I  am  your  most  faithful  friend,  ever, 

RUPERT. 


PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  WILL.  LEGGE. 

Cleve,  £th  May,  1661. 

DEAR  WILL., 

I  am  come  thus  far,  where  I  meet  with  great  alarms, 
and  preparations  of  war  on  all  sides ;  both  Turks  and 
Swedes  arm.  This  Elector  is  in  readiness,  fearing  the 
Swedes'  treachery.  The  Emperor  is  preparing  also  to 
withstand  the  Turks ;  but,  I  am  confident,  if  peace  can 
be  made  there — as  I  doubt  not  it  may,  since  it  rests  but 
upon  a  tribute,  which  is  desired  from  the  Transylvanians 
— the  troops  will  not  want  employment  elsewhere.  De 
Sanche  commands  now,  in  chief,  a  fellow  that  run  from 
the  Swedes  with  a  sum  of  money.  By  the  next,  I  shall 
be  able  to  write  more  of  these  things  than  now  I  can. 
This  I  must  add,  that  the  Hollanders  boast  much  ;  avow- 
ing openly,  that  if  the  King  doth  trouble  the  herring- 
fishing,  they  will  maintain  it  with  the  sword.  I  told  some 
that  butter  and  cheese  would  do  better.  Pray  let  the 
King  know  all  this,  as  also  the  Chancellor.  I  met  in  with 
one  De  Rues,  an  engineer,  the  ablest  man  in  his  profession 


1061.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      449 

that  ever  I  saw,  of  whom  I  have  already  spoken  to  the 
King.  If  the  fortification  of  Portsmouth  go  on,  I  wish 
his  advice  may  be  taken,  for  none  fortifies  so  well,  and 
cheap,  and  fast  as  he.  He  hath  at  present  in  hand, 
Calker,  a  place  two  miles  off,  of  four  royal  bastions,  out- 
works his  way  and  batteries  placed,  which,  till  you  are 
almost  over  the  moat,  cannot  be  dismounted,  really  the 
finest  that  ever  were  made,  and  all  will  not  cost  eight 
thousand  pounds.  He  makes  any  earth  serve  for  his  base- 
ments, and  uses  no  stones  to  them ;  he  uses  no  rods ; 
he  mingles  his  earth  sometimes  with  sand,  sometimes  with 
either  earth  or  gravel,  as  he  finds  occasion,  and  with  beat- 
ing makes  it  so  hard,  that  the  shaking  of  the  guns  can  no 
way  disorder  his  batteries  ;  in  fine,  he  is  a  man  very 
extraordinary  in  all  mechanics,  and  no  chicaner.  He 
is  now  going  for  Denmark  to  the  King  there,  who  sent 
for  him  ;  in  six  months  he  will  be  back.  If  it  please  our 
King  to  let  him  have  the  plates  of  Portsmouth,  he  will 
make  a  design  which  I  am  confident  will  please  him  best 
of  any.  Prince  Maurice  is  the  surest  person  to  direct  the 
sending  it  to  him,  who  will  also  give  more  particularly 
his  character.  Pray  let  the  King  know  that  Duson  is 
alive,  risen  from  the  dead,  I  think.  My  service  to  all 
our  friends,  especially  those  in  the  bedchamber. 

I  am  your  most  faithful  friend, 

RUPERT. 

As  I  was  writing,  De  Rues  comes  in,  who  bids  me 
assure  the  King  he  will  bring  people,  I  mean  work- 
bases,  who  shall  save  the  King  one-half  of  the  costs ;  he 
has  a  way  of  working  which  none  has  so  good.  Pray  neg- 
lect not  this  man,  and  tell  Sir  R.  Murray  of  him,  with 
my  remembrances ;  also  that  I  met  with  camphor 
wood,  which  smells  of  it ;  also  with  a  distilled  pure  rain 
water,  which  dissolved  gold. 


VOL.  III.  G    G 


450          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF     [JUNE, 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  WILL.  LEGGE. 

Mentz,  Whitsunday,  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

From  Cassell  I  wrote  to  you,  and  sent  you  some  con- 
siderations, a  good  friend  of  mine  desired  me  to  send 
touching  Pomerania ;  I  long  to  hear  that  you  have  re- 
ceived them.  I  met  here  an  envoy  which  intended  for 
England,  sent  by  the  Emperor ;  he  seems  much  troubled 
at  the  news  which  he  met  here  of  the  King's  marriage  with 
the  King  Portugal's  daughter :  I  have  done  what  I  could 
to  make  him  go  on,  but  as  yet  he  is  not  resolved  further 
than  Brussels,  there  he  will  stay  for  orders.  To-morrow 
I  leave  this  place  directly  for  Vienna,  since  I  departed 
Cleve,  I  hear,  for  certain,  that  the  Queen  of  Bohemia  is 
gone  for  England,  but  on  what  terms  I  know  not.  Pray  do 
me  the  favour  to  let  me  understand  the  truth  of  it,  for 
when  I  left  the  Hague  there  was  no  such  thing  in  hand. 
The  Elector  here  is  very  civil  to  me,  I  delivered  the 
King's  letter  to  him,  upon  which  he  assured  me  to  assist- 
ing in  all  things  to  me.  He  also  told  me  of  a  foudre  of 
Rhenish  wine  he  sent  me.  Sir  Kenelm  Digby  hath  the 
disposal  of  it,  to  whom  the  whole  cargaison  is  directed. 
Pray  ask  it  of  him  in  remembrance  of  your  friends,  so 
farewell.  I  am,  &c., 

RUPERT. 


Vienna,  June  22,  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

I  have  but  just  time  to  tell  you,  that  though  I  have 
been  here  eight  days  already  the  Spanish  Ambassador  has 
not  yet  been  to  see  me,  nor  none  of  the  grand  ministers ; 
if  this  be  out  of  pet,  or  God  knows  what,  it  will  quickly 
discover  itself.  A  friend  of  mine,  at  my  coming,  assured 
me  that  there  were  but  two  difficulties  which  hindered 
my  advancement  to  the  generalship  of  the  Horse  :  the  one 


1661.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        451 

was  my  being  no  Roman;  the  other,  that  the  Marquis 
of  Bade  and  General  Zelzing-maister  de  Sanche  had 
taken  ill,  if  I  was  advanced  before  them;  and  as  he 
thought  both  these  small  impediments  might  easily  be 
come  over,  especially  the  first,  on  which  he  was  afraid  most 
did  depend.  I  can  see  so  small  preparations  for  a  war 
against  the  Turks,  otherwise  than  for  a  defencing  one,  in 
which,  roasting  in  the  sun  and  getting  sickness,  will  be 
the  greatest  danger.  I  have  not  got  one  syllable  from 
you,  pray,  fail  not  to  write  as  often  as  you  can,  so  fare- 
well, dear  Will.,  Your  faithful  friend, 

RUPERT. 

I  almost  forgot  to  tell  you  how  that  Comte  Lesley's 
Cousin,  I  forget  his  name,  but  I  remember  that  his  sister 
was  married  to  Sir  Michael,  this  man  did  me  the  favour 
to  send  over  a  book  to  Comte  Lesley,  entitled  "The 
Frondage,"  in  which  is  spoken  most  base  language  of  me 
and  of  my  actions  in  England:  but  I  am  confident  if 
honest  Will  had  read  the  book,  he  had  broken  the  transla- 
tor's head.  Besides  what  he  says  of  me,  he  extols 
Cromwell's  actions,  and  doth  no  right  to  this  or  the  late 
King.  One  Harris  translated  it ;  pray,  inquire  after  the 
book,  and  judge  if  it  were  not  a  Scotch  trick  to  send  it. 
By  the  next,  I  shall  be  able  to  give  the  King  an  ac- 
count what  the  answer  was  to  his  letter,  as  yet  there  is 
none,  the  hunting  retards  much  business.  Pray,  remem- 
ber me  kindly  to  my  Lord  Chancellor,  tell  him  he  must 
expect  a  long  letter  from  me  next  week.  Moutray  is 
the  name,  I  forgot. 


PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  WILL.  LEGGE. 

Vienna,  July  &  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

I  did  not  write  to  you  the  last  week  because  I  in* 
tended  to  see   the  issue  of  some  things  here,  at  last  the 

G  G  2 


452         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF      [JULY, 

Marquis  de  Fuentes,  late  Ambassador  for  Spain,  came  to 
visit  Prince  Rupert.  I  believe  the  new  one  pressed  him 
to  do  it,  well  believing  that  Rupert  else  would  not  have 
given  him  the  like.  The  most  part  of  the  said  Marquis's 
discourse  was  of  this  marriage  of  Portugal,  which  ex- 
tremely troubles  him  ;  he  would  needs  lay  all  the  fault 
upon  Duke  Ormond  and  the  Lord  Chancellor,  who  he 
said  intended  to  bring  the  King  into  a  war  with  Spain. 
He  complained  also  that  the  Baron  Batteville  did  very  ill 
to  send  Lord  Bristol  out  of  England,  when  a  dog  with  a 
letter  tied  to  his  collar,  would  have  served  to  ask  the 
Princess  of  Parma,  for  by  this  means,  said  he,  one  that 
was  assisting  our  interest  was  wanting.  He  inquired  very 
much  how  it  came  that  the  Lord  Chancellor  and  the 
Spanish  Ambassador,  Baron  Batteville,  fell  out ;  but 
Rupert  knew  nothing  of  all  this,  so  could  give  no  answer. 
This  day  Rupert  intends  to  visit  the  Marquis  of  Fuentes. 
If  anything  occur  between  them,  I  shall  strive  to  write  it 
before  the  post  go  ;  in  the  meantime,  be  pleased  to  know 
that  Rupert  is  but  coldly  used  by  the  ministers.  They 
would  have  him  demand  the  generalship  of  Horse  before 
there  is  an  appearance  of  subsistence,  nay,  before  what  is 
owing  in  arrears  by  the  Peace  of  Munster  be  made  sure 
unto  him ;  to  which  Rupert  was  no  ways  inclined,  espe- 
cially since  he  had  the  intimation  given  him  that  his 
religion  was  an  obstacle  to  his  advancement  in  the  wars. 
The  Emperor,  Empress,  and  Archduke,  are  extremely 
kind  to  Rupert,  but  none  of  the  councillors  have  done 
him  the  honour  of  a  visit,  the  reason,  I  believe,  is  the 
marriage  aforesaid.  The  Turks  have  possessed  a  port, 
called  in  Dutch  the  Tuon  Port ;  it  was  most  foolishly 
overseen  by  our  commander,  who  lay  with  five  thousand 
men  not  far  from  it.  Montecuculi  is  posted  with  the  rest 
of  the  army,  consisting  of  about  thirty  thousand,  near  the 
Danube ;  there  is  no  speech  yet  of  a  Reidi's  day,  and 
before  there  is,  you  may  be  confident  that  no  great  busi- 


1061.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      453 

ness  against  the  Turk  can  be  done ;  neither  do  I  find  any 
great  desire  in  this  people  to  have  any  assistance  from 
Protestants,  nor  any  but  from  Roman  Catholics.  Pray 
let  the  Lord  Chancellor  know  all  this,  and  remember  me 
to  him,  Duke  Ormond,  and  the  rest  of  our  friends.  The 
Hungarian  wine  is  likely  to  be  very  good  this  year.  I 
wrote  you  word  of  some  wine  that  was  sent  to  Rupert 
by  the  Elector  of  Mentz  ;  Sir  Kenelm  Digby  hath  it  in 
his  hands.  Rupert  intends  you  should  make  use  of  it,  a 
foudre  is  the  quantity.  For  God's  sake  if  there  be  any 
likelihood  of  any  breach  with  Spain,  let  me  know  by 
times,  it  concerns  us  to  know  it.  We  assure  you  adieu  ; 
my  service  to  our  cousin;  farewell,  dear  Will., 

I  am  yours, 
RUPERT. 

PRINCE    RUPERT    TO   WILL.  LEGGE. 

Vienna,  August  6,  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

For  this  time  the  King  will  have  the  longest  letter ; 
I  am  forced  to  give  in  a  memorial  to  the  Emperor  con- 
cerning the  money  due  to  us  brothers,  by  the  Peace  of 
Munster ;  and  for  my  own  particular,  which  payment 
goeth  on  but  slowly.  It  is  true  that  money  is  a  com- 
modity in  great  request  in  this  Court,  and  scarce  enough  ; 
but  yet  means  may  be  found  to  satisfy  my  particular  if 
they  please.  I  must  confess  the  Emperor  is  kind  enough 
to  me,  but  no  visit  yet  from  the  Grand-Councillors. 
Montecuculi  marches  for  Transylvania  to-morrow.  Stocke 
stays  on  these  frontiers.  Yet  for  all  this  I  do  not  believe 
that  any  war  is  intended.  Conti  Straci,  now  at  Paris, 
has  orders  (as  it  is  said)  to  go  to  our  King.  My  service 
to  our  cousin  ;  and  so  fare  you  well,  dear  Will., 

I  am  yours, 

RUPERT. 

I  could  wish  the  wine  you  presented  to  my  Lord  Chan- 


454         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [SEPT. 

cellor  was  worth  his  acceptance  ;  I  hope  some  Hungarian 
wine  1  am  making  provision  of  will. 


PRINCE    RUPERT    TO   WILL.  LEGGE. 

Vienna,  August  8,  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

I  am  in  no  small  pain  for  our  cousin  since  I  hear 
she  hath  got  the  small-pox ;  pray  God  she  may  fall  not 
into  the  Frenchified  physicians'  hands,  so  let  blood  and  die. 
What  I  write  to  you  concerning  Pomerania,  if  you  re- 
member, was  with  this  caution ;  that  if  you  liked  it,  one 
should  be  sent  to  Rupert  whom  he  might  inform  all ; 
times  are  dangerous,  especially  now ;  letters  are  not  safe 
no  where,  therefore,  pray  take  heed  what  you  write,  espe- 
cially of  that.  We  have  made  here  a  prayer  of  forty 
hours  long  for  Montecuculi's  good  success  in  Transyl- 
vania. This  day  Staremberg  and  he  are  to  join.  Rupert 
has  given  in  his  memorial  to  the  Emperor,  and  hath  spoke 
to  the  Archduke  Prince  Porcia  to  assist  his  interest,  which 
both  have  promised  to  do ;  but  our  President  of  the 
Chamber,  which  is  the  exchequer,  gives  little  hopes  of 
getting  much  more  than  he  has  done  already,  which  is  not 
the  sixth  part  due  of  the  whole  service  by  the  Peace  of 
Munster ;  but  by  a  contract  made  by  the  late  Emperor 
and  Rupert  since,  by  the  end  of  this  week  I  shall  know 
more  of  this  business.  Wonder  not  at  Sir  F.  Dorrington, 
for  he  perhaps  takes  it  ill  I  made  him  not  my  steward, 
judge  you  if  I  had  reason  to  do  it.  I  hope  to  be  with 
you  before  your  next  setting.  Farewell,  dear  Will., 

I  am  yours, 

RUPERT. 

PRINCE    RUPERT    TO    WILL.    LEGGE. 

Vienna,  Sept.  4,  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

I  am  not  able  to  write  to  you  of  any  subject  but  of 


1661.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       455 

one,  which  I  confess  doth  trouble  me  in  the  highest 
degree,  and  doth  concern  our  master  as  well  as  myself. 
The  story  is  this :  the  Elector  Palatine  hath  been  pleased 
to  write  to  a  privy  councillor  of  this  Court.  Farewell, 
dear  Will.,  I  am  yours, 

RUPERT. 


PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  WILL.  LEGGE. 

Vienna,  Sept.  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

In  my  last  I  wrote  word  how  that  many  general 
officers  are  fallen  sick ;  now  I  must  tell  you  that  Count 
Staremberg  is  dead  since.  Sporke  and  the  Marquis  of 
Bude  sick  still ;  and,  as  the  Empress  told  me  herself 
that  Montecuculi  is  sick  also.  Sanche,  that  commands 
those  that  stay  on  these  frontiers,  made  a  cavalcade  into 
the  Turks'  dominions,  took  some  oxen,  a  few  prisoners, 
shewed  his  teeth,  and  came  back.  If  this  draw  not  the 
Turks  into  these  parts,  the  devil  is  in  them.  These  en- 
closed will  give  you  more  information  than  I  can  have 
time  to  write  at  present.  Only  this  take  with  you.  The 
Hungarian  wine  is  marching  off  the  river  towards  Ratis- 
bon,  four  ton,  or  eight  pipes,  which  I  hope  will  serve  our 
Court  this  winter.  The  latter  end  of  this  month  I  begin 
my  journey  towards  you.  Farewell,  dear  Will., 

RUPERT. 


PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  WILL.  LEGGE. 

Vienna,  Sept.  9,  1661. 

DEAR  WILL., 

By  the  last  I  wrote  you  the  kind  usage  of  my  brother, 
the  Elector,  to  me,  as  also  the  good  office  he  did  the 
King  in  this  Court.  I  thank  God  he  hath  not  realised 
his  barbarous  intentions.  I  am  bargaining  for  wine, 


456        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [SEPT. 

which  is  the  chiefest  business  I  have  here.  The  Emperor 
is  gone  to  Ebersdorf,  nine  leagues  off,  where  he  expects 
my  greyhounds,  to  course  a  stag.  The  worst  news  we 
have  from  Montecuculi  is  that  there  is  no  chief  com- 
mander but  himself  in  health.  The  Turks  retire ;  but 
threaten  to  come  next  spring  with  a  puissant  army.  I  am 
afraid  that  before  this  harvest  pass  they  may  make  a  plun- 
dering cavalcade  into  Styria ;  which,  if  they  intend,  it  will 
hardly  be  hindered.  This  is  all  the  news  I  can  tell  you  at 
present.  Farewell,  dear  Will., 

RUPERT. 


PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  WILL.  LEGGE. 

Vienna,  ft  Sept.  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

I  received  yours  dated  the  23rd  but  yesterday.  I 
shall  never  take  ill  when  the  King  or  Lord  Chancellor 
mind  their  great  occasions  more  than  to  write,  so  that  they 
forget  me  not.  I  am  now  departing  from  home,  that  is  to 
say,  making  way  for  it ;  my  goods  go  by  Ratisbon,  so  by 
land  to  Wurzburg,  and  from  thence  by  water  the  rest  of 
the  journey.  This  course  our  Hungary  wine  shall  take 
also,  and  perhaps  gather  a  kind  of  Franconi  Muscadine 
wine,  which  will  be  liked,  I  believe.  Pray  God  the  sick- 
ness of  our  good  Elector  hinder  not  this  design.  There  is 
a  courier  come  from  the  army;  but  what  he  brings  God 
knows.  If  it  had  been  good  news,  we  should  have  had  it 
divulged  before  now.  To-morrow  I  go  to  Court  to  see 
the  Emperor  before  he  goes  to  Neustadt,  which  will  be 
on  Monday,  and  returns  on  the  Saturday  following ;  to- 
wards which  time  I  shall  be  ready  to  begin  to  take  my 
leave.  The  Emperor  was  sick  of  a  fever  :  but  is  recovered. 
I  am  glad  that  Holmes  hath  given  the  King  satisfaction;1 
but  I  would  willingly  have  what  is  resolved  concerning 

1  In  his  voyage  to  the  River  Gambia.     See  Appendix. 


1661.]        PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.     457 

the  whole  business.  Pray  give  him  thanks  for  remember- 
ing his  old  master.  The  orange-flower  butter  will  be 
very  acceptable.  Pray  remember  my  service  to  the 
General,  and  tell  him  that  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  of  his 
recovery ;  it  was  before  I  knew  he  had  been  sick.  If  my 
Lord  Lindsay  be  at  Court,  the  same  to  him,  with  the 
doleful  news  that  poor  Rayall  at  this  time  is  dying,  after 
being  the  cause  of  the  death  of  many  a  stag.  By  Heaven, 
I  had  rather  lose  the  best  horse  in  my  stable !  Pray  desire 
Lord  Chancellor  to  look  well  over  what  I  wrote  concern- 
ing you  know  what.  I  hope  our  cousin  will  have  a  letter 
by  this  time,  and  will  allow  me  for  not  writing  no  more. 
Farewell,  dear  Will.,  Yours, 

RUPERT. 

PRINCE  RUPERT  TO  WILLL.  EGGE. 

Frankfort,  »**£  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

I  am  not  at  all  sorry  for  what  happened  at  the  com- 
bat you  mention  between  the  Don  and  Monsieur.  God 
continue  such  blessings  to  them.  In  my  last  I  told  you  of 
a  sea-design  here  in  Germany ;  the  Elector  of  Breutenberg 
is  the  chief  actor  in  it.  And,  now  I  am  got  hither,  I  may 
let  you  know  under  the  rose,  that  he  also  made  me  write 
the  business  I  sent  you  out  of  Westphalia.  I  am  afraid  I 
shall  not  now  meet  with  him ;  yet  I  shall  make  all  dili- 
gence that  may.  Lord  Chancellor's  letter  I  received,  and 
answered  it :  I  will  not  fail  to  write  to  him  again  from 
Cassel.  Pray  remember  his  Majesty  to  give  order  for  the 
transport  of  his  Hungarian  wines  from  Rotterdam.  In 
twenty  days  I  hope  they  will  be  come  hither :  before 
this  come  to  your  hands  I  hope  the  Duke  of  York  will 
have  given  orders  for  a  frigate  for  me.  So  that  I  hope 
suddenly  to  see  you.  Till  then  farewell,  dear  Will., 

Yours, 

RUPERT. 


458        MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF        [NOV. 

PRINCE    RUPERT    TO    WILL.   LEGGE. 

Cassel,  ft  Nov.  1661. 
DEAR  WILL., 

I  am  making  all  the  haste  I  can  to  you.  This  place 
is  the  only  stop  ;  where  just  at  my  coming  the  Landegra- 
vine  was  brought  to  bed ;  but  I  hope  that  by  to-morrow, 
or  next  day  at  farthest,  I  shall  shake  off  my  shackles  and 
be  gone  in  one  week  to  Rotterdam.  My  baggage  will  be 
there  as  soon  as  myself,  so  that  I  hope  to  find  some  order 
for  the  transportation  of  the  wines,  which  are  both  Hun- 
garian and  Rhenish,  as  also  a  small  frigate  for  myself.  My 
horses  go  by  the  way  of  Dunkirk.  This  enclosed  pray 
deliver,  and  assure  his  Lordship  that  I  answered  his  from 
Vienna.  I  visit  the  Elector  of  Brandenburg,  so  that  I 
can  say  little  more  than  what  you  know  of  that  business ; 
yet  I  find  (by  what  he  sent  me  word  by  my  sister)  that  he 
is  hot  enough  upon  it ;  but  of  all  this  I  shall  tell  you 
more  at  my  arrival.  So  farewell. 

I  am  yours, 

RUPERT.1 


1  The  date  of  the  Prince's  arrival  in  England  is  shewn  by  the 
following  letter  from  Sir  Henry  Bennet,  afterwards  Lord  Arling- 
ton, Secretary  of  State,  to  the  Duke  of  Ormond  in  Ireland,  dated 
from  Whitehall,  November  23,  1662  :  — 

"  His  Majesty,  his  Royal  Highness  Prince  Rupert,  my  Lord 
Ashley,  and  myself  present,  after  some  short  debate  upon  the  letter 
from  the  Council  in  Ireland,  it  was  concluded  utterly  impossible  to 
help  that  kingdom  with  the  sum  of  money  desired  in  order  to 
compound  the  debts  j  and  resolved  this  should  be  immediately 
written  to  your  Grace,  without  taking  any  more  time  to  think 
upon  it  here,  or  amusing  you  with  half-hopes  or  promises  which 
could  never  be  effected  :  in  so  ill  a  state  are  the  public  affairs  here 
for  want  of  public  money,  the  little  revenue  his  Majesty  hath 
kept  out  of  the  sale  of  Dunkirk  being  not  to  be  touched  for  a 
less  occasion  than  an  insurrection  here  at  home,  which  the  foolish 
and  discontented  people  are  apt  every  day  to  threaten  and  appre- 
hend. I  have  no  news  to  add  out  of  your  knowledge,  but  the 
sending  Mr.  Davies  to  the  Tower,  by  his  Majesty's  command,  a 


1661.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      459 

Rupert  had  been  received  on  his  return  to 
England  with  honour  and  many  professions  of 
honour  by  the  King.  Charles,  although  inca- 
pable of  belief  in  any  virtue,  was  probably  glad  to 
have  near  him  one  man  in  whose  honesty  he  was 
compelled  to  feel  some  confidence.  He  had  some 
tastes  in  common,  too,  with  the  Palatine  ;  he  de- 
lighted in  naval  experiments,  in  all  details  of  ship- 
building, and  in  the  lower  branches  of  mechanics. 
He  was  fascinated  too,  with  the  brilliant  wonders 
and  many  mysteries  of  the  laboratory :  the  dreams 
of  alchemy  were  not  yet  altogether  exploded,  and 
Charles  and  the  fanciful  Buckingham  would  watch 
for  hours  the  various  encouragements  to  that  delu- 
sion that  the  chemist's  skill  evolves.  Often  would 
the  indolent  voluptuary  and  his  silken  favourite 
lounge  into  the  workshop  of  the  Prince,  where,  girt 
with  an  apron  "  and  begrimed  with  soot,"  the  hero  of 
a  hundred  fights  was  wielding  his  hammer  as  if  the 
anvil  was  a  Roundhead :  and  there  such  jests  as 
the  giddy  Buckingham  might  venture  on,  chimed 
in  with  the  ring  of  the  rude  metal.  Or,  sometimes, 
they  might  find  the  soldier-philosopher  busied  in  the 
mysteries  of  the  laboratory ;  trying  the  old  experi- 
ments of  the  Hermetic  Philosophy,  and  exploring 
the  magic  secrets  of  Theophrastus  and  Synesius. 
Not  that  Rupert  himself  was  a  believer  in  the  phi- 
close  prisoner ;  which  was  the  work  of  Saturday  last,  of  which  I 
do  not  repeat  the  occasion,  believing  your  Grace  is  not  ignorant 
of  it." — Rennet's  Chronicle,  p.  832. 


460          MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

losopher's  stone ;  but  lie  could  find  interest  in  the 
beautiful  phenomena,  and  truth  in  the  fantastic  de- 
ceptions, that  its  examination  involved.  How  eagerly 
would  the  fantastic  Buckingham  watch  the  union  of 
the  Red  Lion  with  the  White  Virgin ;  abandoning 
all  scepticism  as  he  beheld  lead,  arsenic,  and  copper, 
assuming  almost  every  property  of  gold. 

Philosophy  became  the  fashion,  doubtless  to  Ru- 
pert's great  annoyance ;  dandies  and  he  had  little  in 
common.  He  established  a  seclusion  for  himself  in 
the  high  tower  in  Windsor  Castle,  which  he  soon 
furnished  after  his  own  peculiar  taste.  In  one  set 
of  apartments  forges,  laboratory  instruments,  retorts, 
and  crucibles,  with  all  sorts  of  metals,  fluids,  and 
crude  ores,  lay  strewn  around  in  the  luxurious  con- 
fusion of  a  bachelor's  domain ;  in  other  rooms 
armour  and  arms  of  all  sorts,  from  that  which  had 
blunted  the  Damascus  blade  of  the  Holy  Wars,  to 
those  that  had  lately  clashed  at  Marston  Moor  and 
Naseby.  In  another  was  his  library  stored  with 
strange  books,  a  list  of  which  may  still  be  seen  in 
the  Harleian  Miscellany. 


But  I  am  anticipating  those  future  years  which 
must  now,  after  the  fashion  of  actual  life,  pass  far 
more  rapidly  as  they  advance.  The  events  of  Prince 
Rupert's  public  life,  until  the  year  1666,  are  com. 
paratively  few.  On  the  4th  of  November,  1661, 
he  was  admitted  as  a  Bencher  to  the  Inner  Temple. 


1662.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.        461 

In  the  February  following  he  won  Evelyn's  heart, 
by  explaining  to  him  his  "  Invention  of  Mezzo- 
tinto."1  In  April,  1662,  he  was  sworn  a  Member 
of  the  Privy  Council,  and  in  December,  he  became 
a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society.2  In  the  meanwhile, 
he  accompanied  Charles  to  meet  his  luckless  bride 
at  Portsmouth,  in  May,  1662. 

I  am  here  enabled  to  vary  these  details,  by  a  very 
interesting  and  curious  letter  from  Lord  Cornbury 
to  the  Duchess  of  Beaufort.3 

FROM  LORD  CORNBURY  TO  THE  DUCHESS  OF  BEAUFORT. 

MADAM, 

Though  I  doubt  not  but  your  Ladyship  hears  from 
better  hands  than  mine  how  matters  go  at  Court ;  yet,  in 
obedience  to  your  commands,  I  think  myself  obliged  to 
trouble  you,  though  it  be  with  a  very  ill  and  imperfect 
account.  I  will  not  say  anything  of  the  Queen's  person 
to  you,  my  Lord  having  seen  her,  and  given  you  a  more 
ample  account  than  I  can  by  letter ;  but  I  will  tell  you 
that  which  is  best  of  all,  and  which  I  am  sure  your  Lady- 
ship will  be  very  glad  to  hear.  The  King  likes  her  very 
well ;  is  much  taken  with  her  wit  and  conversation  ;  says 
he  will  out-do  all  that  pretend  to  be  good  husbands,  and 
that  it  is  his  own  fault  if  he  be  not  happy,  for  he  is  as 
happy  in  his  wife  as  any  man  can  be.  He  is  extreme 
fond,  and  spends  all  his  time  with  her,  which  I  think  is  an 
argument  that  he  is  well  pleased.  Certainly  she  is  a 


1  Evelyn's  Sculptura,  p.  325. 

2  Sprat's  History  of  the  Royal  Society,  p.  168. 

3  As  yet  Marchioness  of  Worcester  :  Charles  II.  was  in  no 
hurry  to  keep  his  father's  promises. 


462        MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JUNE, 

woman  of  a  great  deal  of  discretion  and  judgment,  of 
extraordinary  piety,  full  of  sweetness  and  goodness,  and 
must  needs  gain  the  affections  of  all  people  by  her  very 
gracious  and  obliging  carriage ;  and  no  doubt  but  we  shall 
all  be  very  happy  in  her,  if  it  please  God  to  give  her 
health,  which  indeed  she  hath  wanted  of  late.  She  hath 
been  indisposed  almost  ever  since  I  have  been  here,  with  a 
feverish  distemper,  and  hath  been  let  blood  twice;  but, 
God  be  thanked,  she  is  now  very  well  again,  and  will  go 
abroad  to-morrow.  She  had  many  physicians  called,  and 
amongst  the  rest,  Dr.  Fraizer ;  but  nothing  was  done  but 
by  the  prescriptions  of  her  own  Portuguese  doctor.  Many 
impute  this  indisposition  of  the  Queen's  to  the  cough  she 
got  on  shipboard;  but  more  to  her  ill  diet,  which,  I  be- 
lieve, is  the  strangest  you  ever  heard  of,  and  she  cannot 
yet  bring  herself  to  eat  English  meat;  it  is  either  eggs 
and  sugar,  or  eggs  and  lard,  and  now  and  then  a  piece  of  a 
burnt  lean  pullet  (for  the  Portuguese  complain  that  all 
our  meat  is  too  fat),  and  she  eats  so  little  of  all  this,  that 
it  is  almost  impossible  she  can  receive  any  nourishment 
by  it.  But  I  hope  she  will  by  degrees  be  as  well  pleased 
with  our  English  diet  as  she  is  with  our  clothes,  which 
she  says  she  likes  very  well,  though  she  cannot  persuade 
the  Portuguese  ladies  to  follow  her  example,  for  they  still 
wear  their  guardenfantos.  The  Queen  is  much  concerned 
that  the  English  ladies  spend  so  much  time  in  dressing 
themselves.  She  fears  they  bestow  but  little  on  God 
Almighty,  and  in  housewifery.  We  have  yet  a  very 
unsettled  family,  nothing  at  all  in  order  ;  not  one  lady  of 
the  bedchamber  named  besides  my  Lady  Suffolk,  who  is 
in  waiting,  and  they  say  both  the  number  and  persons 
you  formerly  heard  mentioned  will  be  much  altered.  The 
four  dressers  are  fixed ;  who  are,  my  Lady  Wood,  Lady 
Scroope,  Mrs.  Fraizer,  and  Mrs.  La  Garde.  The  maids 
of  honour  are  likewise  in  waiting ;  viz.,  Mrs.  Gary,  Mrs. 
Stuart,  Mrs.  Wells,  Mrs.  Price,  Mrs.  Boynton,  Mrs. 


1062.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.       463 

Warmestry.1  The  maids  of  the  privy  chamber  are  but 
two,  my  Lady  Mary  Savage,  my  Lady  Betty  Livingstone 
(my  Lord  Newborough's  daughter.)  Men  :  there  are  only 
fixed  in  their  offices  my  Lord  Chesterfield,  Mr.  Montague, 
myself,  and  Mr.  Cholmeley  for  a  gentleman-usher.  No 
other  office  is  yet  visibly  disposed  of,  though  I  think 
there  are  forty  pretenders  to  every  one ;  and  they  are  all 
here,  both  men  and  women,  expecting  their  doom,  and  I 
am  sure  they  will  not  be  all  pleased,  There  are  twenty 
little  intrigues  and  factions  stirring ;  but  with  those  I  do 
not  meddle,  and  therefore  will  not  venture  to  give  you  any 
account  of  them.  Only  thus  much  I  will  tell  you,  that 
there  are  great  endeavours  used  to  make  — — ,  you  know 
who,2  a  lady  of  the  bedchamber,  but  it  is  hoped  by  many 
they  will  not  take  effect.  A  little  time  will  shew  us  a 
great  deal :  I  will  say  no  more  of  this,  for  fear  of  burning 
my  fingers.  The  King  says  he  will  settle  the  Queen's 
family  within  very  few  days.  I  hope  it  will  be  done 
within  a  fortnight,  and  then  my  business  will  not  be  so 
much  but  that  I  may  do  what  I  will  till  Michaelmas,  and 
by  the  grace  of  God  I  will  make  what  haste  I  can  into  the 
country.  It  is  much  better  walking  in  the  park  at  Corn- 
bury  than  in  a  gallery  here.  I  have  not  yet  been  here  a 
week,  and  really  I  am  quite  weary  of  the  Court  already.  Do 
you  not  think,  then,  I  am  like  to  make  an  excellent  good 
courtier  ?  I  know  you  will  not  believe  me ;  but,  God 
willing,  I  intend  to  be  very  speedily  at  Cornbury,  and 
hope  to  see  your  Ladyship  there,  in  your  way  up  to  Lon- 
don. I  must  not  leave  off  without  giving  you  most 
humble  thanks  for  your  favours  to  me  at  Badminton,  and 
must  confess  to  have  so  many  obligations  to  you  that  I 
can  'never  acknowledge  them  enough.  It  is  now  high 


1  "  Miss  "  was  in  these  days  a  title  of  reproach.     In  the  "  Me- 
moirs of  De  Grammont"  all  these  mistresses  are  immortalized 
with  diabolical  ingenuity. 

2  We  know  that  it  was  Lady  Castlemaine. 


464         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF       [JUNE, 

time  to  ask  you  ten  thousand  pardons  for  giving  you  this 
long  and  impertinent  trouble,  which  your  own  commands 
hath  brought  upon  you,  for  I  know  you  have  far  more 
exact  accounts  of  everything  here,  even  from  very  report ; 
but  for  variety  sometimes  an  impertinent  letter  is  not 
amiss.  And  I  am  so  glad  of  all  opportunities  to  present 
my  service  to  you,  that  I  forget  myself,  and  think  I  may 
be  as  tedious  in  a  letter  as  in  my  discourses  with  you,  and 
you  have  pardoned  so  many  of  these,  that  I  cannot  but 
hope  you  will  do  the  same  now.  I  beseech  you  present 
my  most  humble  service  to  my  Lord,  and  let  him  know  I 
have  taken  care  of  the  Commissioners'  names  he  gave  me. 
I  did  not  think  it  manners  to  trouble  him  with  a  letter 
after  so  tedious  a  one  to  your  Ladyship.  I  hope  your 
little  son  continues  well,  and  all  the  rest  of  your  family, 
which  that  they  may  do,  and  enjoy  all  the  happiness  this 
world  can  afford,  is  the  constant  prayer  of  him  that  desires 
to  have  the  honour  to  be  owned  as 

Your  Ladyship's  most  affectionate  brother 
and  faithful  servant, 

H.  CORNBURY. 
Hampton  Court,  June  10,  1662. 

P.S. — I  know  your  Ladyship  will  be  very  glad  to  hear 
my  little  one  is  well;  but  he  hath  yet  no  teeth.  If  they 
were  over,  I  should  think  the  worst  were  past.1 


If  my  work  were  less  advanced — perhaps  if  I  had 
better  economized  my  space — I  might  dwell  with  some 
interest  on  the  incidents  and  character  of  the  merry 
Monarch's  fascinating  and  fatal  Court :  fascinating 
to  every  sympathy  with  wit  and  beauty,  and  fatal  to 


1  For  this  letter  and  many  others  I  am  indebted  to  his  Grace 
the  Duke  of  Beaufort. 


1665.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      465 

every  nobler  and  manlier  aspiration.  The  outcast 
and  exiled  King  seemed  to  have  brought  back  +he 
Seven  Spirits  mentioned  in  Holy  Writ — two  more 
besides  the  personages  of  the  Cabal — and  the  last 
state  of  England  was  worse  than  the  first.  Ru- 
pert's character  alone  seemed  changed  for  the  better. 
Chastened  and  calmed  by  the  almost  unparalleled 
vicissitudes  of  his  life,1  he  had  become  grave,  studi- 
ous, and  more  recluse  than  ever,  though  his  letters 
to  Will.  Legge  prove  that  his  was  no  misanthropic 
spirit.  Neither  his  philosophy,  however,  nor  his 
seclusion  rendered  him  proof  against  the  all-con- 
quering temptations  of  Charles's  beauty-haunted 
Court.  There  never  was  a  period  in  honest  England, 
in  which  all  the  virtues,  and  even  the  decencies  of 
life  were  so  disregarded.  As  a  great  observer  of 
human  nature  has  remarked,  "  It  was  one,  and  per- 
haps not  the  least  prejudicial  consequence  of  the 
licence  of  that  ill-governed  time,  that  the  bounds 
betwixt  virtue  and  vice  were  so  far  smoothed  down 
and  levelled,  that  the  frail  wife,  or  the  tender  friend 
who  was  no  wife,  did  not  necessarily  lose  their  place 
in  society,  but  on  the  contrary,  if  they  moved  in  the 
higher  circles,  were  permitted  and  encouraged  to 


1  Pepys,  indeed,  with  the  inveterate  and  inevitable  instinct  of 
a  gossip,  tells  us  from  hearsay,  "  that  the  Prince's  courage  is  not 
what  men  take  it, — a  contempt  of  death ;  for,  says  my  Lord 
Fitzharding,  how  chagrined  the  Prince  was  the  other  day  when 
he  thought  he  should  die  " — Diary ',  Jan.  3,  1664-5.  Yet  some 
months  later  he  confesses  "that  Prince  Rupert  is  the  boldest 
attacker  in  the  world  for  personal  courage." 

VOL.  III.  H   H 


466          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

mingle  with  women  whose  rank  was  certain,  and 
whose  reputation  was  untainted."1 

About  the  year  1665,  Prince  Rupert  seems  to 
have  formed  an  affection  for  Francisca,  daughter  of 
Lord  Bellamont, — the  Sir  Henry  Bard,  with  whose 
marauding  correspondence  and  bravery  we  have 
already  made  acquaintance.  Little  is  known  of  this 
love  story:  its  result  was  the  gallant  Dudley  Bard, 
who  signalised  his  heroism  at  the  siege  of  Buda 
in  1686,  and  was  killed  there  in  a  last  desperate 
attempt  to  scale  the  walls.2 

Prince  Rupert  had  vainly  endeavoured  to  marry 
and  become  respectable  after  his  return  from  the 
West  Indies ;  and  his  proposals  had  been  favourably 
received  by  the  daughter  of  a  Royal  House.  It  was 
necessary,  however,  that  the  Prince  should  have 
some  ostensible  possessions  in  order  to  obtain  his 
promised  bride ;  and  he  applied  to  the  Elector  Pala- 
tine for  the  State  of  Kaisers  Lautern  :  this  seems 


1  Peveril  of  the  Peak,  chap.  xxxi. 

2  Rupert  seems  to  have  conducted  his  son's  education  with 
anxious  care  and  judgment.     At  Eton  the  boy  was  distinguished 
for  gentleness  of  temper,  as  well  as  for  his  father's  courage,  honesty 
of  character,  and  love  of  truth.     He  was  likewise  passionately 
fond  of  military  studies,  and  was  placed  by  his  father  under  the 
care  of  Sir  Jonas  Moore,  a  celebrated  mathematician  and  engineer 
in  the  Tower.     After  Prince  Rupert's  death,*  the  young  Dudley 
succeeded  to  a  fortune  bequeathed  in  Germany  to  his  father  ;  but 
the  sound  of  war   had  for  him  an  hereditary  fascination  :  he 
passed  on  into  Hungary,  and  was  there  killed,  as  I  have  men- 
tioned, at  the  age  of  twenty. 


*  It  is  remarkable  that  this  Dudley  is  not  alluded  to  by  Prince 
Rupert's  executors. 


1665.]        PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     467 

to  have  been  the  only  demand  ever  made  by  Rupert 
from  his  brother,  and  it  was  refused.  The  avari- 
cious and  hypocritical  Charles  Louis  pleaded  poverty 
and  other  insuperable  objections,  in  refusing  to 
make  any  provision  for  Rupert  to  promote  his 
welfare.  The  Prince  consequently  retired  from  all 
pretensions  to  married  life,  and  unhappily  took 
refuge  from  loneliness  in  associations  of  a  different 
nature.  In  Bromley's  Royal  Letters  are  several 
proofs  of  his  ignoble  conquests  over  the  soft  and 
worthless  affections  of  the  ladies  of  his  time.  There 
are,  fortunately  for  Rupert's  credit,  no  letters  from 
him  of  this  nature,  and  I  do  not  pretend  to  criticise 
those  that  are  addressed  to  him  :  there  seems  to  be 
a  singular  monotony  in  such  epistles  in  all  ages. 

From  the  period  of  his  return  from  Vienna  until 
the  outbreak  of  the  Dutch  war,  I  find  few  public 
notices  of  Prince  Rupert's  existence.  I  presume* 
therefore,  that  he  had  returned  to  his  philosophical 
pursuits.  Pepys  mentions  him  occasionally  in  his 
compendious  gossip.  At  one  time  he  speaks  of  him 
as  the  best  tennis-player  in  England ; 1  and  at  an- 
other records  the  following  anecdote.  Batten  had 
revolted  from  the  Parliament,  and  was  received, 
of  course,  by  the  needy  Charles,  when  some  of  the 
Roundhead  vessels  declared  for  him.  At  the  time  a 


1  Pepys's  Diary.  He  also  says  that  Charles  II.  used  to  play  a 
great  deal  with  him,  and  was  in  the  habit  of  weighing  himself 
before  and  after  each  game.  On  one  occasion  he  found  himself 
44  Ibs.  lighter  after  his  exercise  ! 

H    II    2 


468         MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

battle  with  Lord  Warwick  was  expected,  it  appears 
that  Batten  was  very  much  moved,  and  carried  a 
napkin  round  his  chin  to  remove  the  perspiration 
caused  by  his  fear.  Rupert  walked  up  and  down 
the  deck  impatiently,  swearing  to  the  King  that 
Batten  was  making  signals  to  the  enemy  ;  "  but/'  he 
said,  "  if  things  go  ill,  by  G —  the  first  thing  I  will 
do  is  to  shoot  him/'  When  the  Guinea  fleet  was 
fitting  out,  Pepys  met  the  Prince  at  the  Duke  of 
Albemarle's  house  :  speaking  of  the  adventurous 
voyage,  the  Prince  said,  "  I  cannot  answer  but  for 
one  ship  ;  in  that  I  will  do  my  part." 

I  am  not  about  to  follow  Prince  Rupert's  naval 
career  through  all  its  details.  My  allotted  space  is 
contracting  rapidly,  and  I  must  confine  myself  to  a 
mere  mention  of  the  actions  in  which  he  was  engaged 
in  the  capacity  of  military  admiral ;  adding  such 
personal  anecdotes  as  survive  concerning  his  ad- 
ventures in  his  new  career.  He  is  no  longer  the 
impetuous  and  reckless  young  Cavalier,  who  was 
wont  to  carry  even  victory  too  far,  and  who  valued 
the  lives  of  his  followers  as  little  as  his  own.  He 
is  now  become  cautious  and  vigilant;  considerate 
not  only  of  the  lives  of  his  marine  soldiers,  but  of 
their  conduct  and  their  comfort.  He  seems  to  have 
exchanged  character  with  Monk,  who  is  become 
daring  even  to  rashness,  and  cannot  when  in  anger 
be  trusted  near  his  own  powder-magazine.1 

1  The  following  anecdote  is  characteristic  of  both  of  these 
amphibious  commanders  in  their  new  capacities  and  characters  : — 


1665.]     PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        469 

The  navy  of  England  had  been  well  practised 
under  Cromwell  and  the  gallant  Blake.1  The  vessels 

In  the  first  Dutch  war  in  Charles  II. 's  reign,  Prince  Rupert 
and  the  Duke  of  Albemarle  commanded  the  fleet  on  the  coast  of 
Sussex,  but  it  was  in  general  observed  that  the  Duke  left  all 
things  to  the  conduct  and  skill  of  the  Prince,  declaring  modestly, 
upon  all  occasions,  that  he  was  himself  no  seaman. 

One  time,  however,  a  hot  dispute  arose  between  them,  which 
will  serve  to  illustrate  some  part  of  the  Duke's  character.  When 
Prince  Rupert  first  spied  the  Dutch  fleet  making  towards  them, 
the  whole  of  the  squadron  was  so  far  astern  that  the  Prince 
thought  it  absolutely  necessary  to  slacken  sail,  that  they  might 
have  time  to  join.  The  Duke  of  Albemarle  opposed  this  eagerly, 
undertaking  that  the  ships  in  which  they  were,  with  about  twenty 
more,  would  prove  sufficient  to  beat  all  the  enemy's  fleet;  at 
least,  to  keep  them  in  play  till  the  rest  should  come  up.  The 
Prince,  astonished  at  this  unaccountable  intrepidity,  made  the 
officers  on  board  smile  to  see  him  take  on  himself  the  timorous, 
cautious,  and  prudent  part,  which  did  not  use  to  be  his  custom. 
He  declared  he  would  never  consent  to  such  a  rashness,  as  might 
very  probably  occasion  the  loss  of  the  admiral's  fleet,  in  conse- 
quence of  that  loss,  which  obliged  the  good  old  man  to  yield  at 
last,  though  with  great  reluctance.  As  soon,  however,  as  the 
bloody  flag  was  set  up,  before  the  storm  arose  which  parted  the 
fleets  at  this  time,  Mr.  Saville  and  another  gentleman-volunteer, 
being  on  the  quarter-deck,  observed  him  charging  a  very  small 
pocket-pistol  and  putting  it  in  his  pocket,  which  was  so  odd  a 
sort  of  weapon  on  such  an  occasion,  that  they  could  imagine  no 
other  reason  for  it  except  his  having  taken  a  resolution  of  going 
into  the  powder-room  to  blow  up  the  ship,  in  case  at  any  time 
she  should  be  in  danger  of  being  taken  ;  for  his  Grace  had  often 
been  heard  to  say  that  he  would  answer  for  nothing  but  that  they 
should  never  be  carried  into  Holland.  Therefore,  Saville  and  his 
companions,  in  a  laughing  way,  most  mutinously  resolved  to  throw 
him  overboard  in  case  they  should  catch  him  going  down  to  the 
powder-room. — The  Tell-Tale  ;  or,  anecdotes  expressive  of  the  cha- 
racters of  persons  eminent  for  rank,  learning,  wit,  and  humour \ 
2  vols.  Lond.  1756. 

1  Blake  had  served  the  Parliament  well  in  the  capacity  of  a 
cavalry  officer  :  he  defended  Taunton  gallantly  afterwards,  but 
his  true  genius  was  only  shewn  at  sea.  He  was  the  first  naval 
officer  who  taught  that  the  best  place  to  fight  an  enemy  was  as 
near  him  as  the  ship  could  reach  ;  he  was  the  first  who  ventured 
to  fight  against  forts  on  shore  ;  and,  in  short,  he  was  the  first 


470    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

built  by  ship-money  were  turned  with  crushing  effect 
against  the  Royal  cause,  and  Rupert's  naval  enter- 
prise afforded  Cromwell  an  excuse  for  increasing 
his  fleet  to  counteract  it.  On  the  Restoration,  the 
sailors,  ever  loyal  in  their  nature,  were  amongst  the 
first  amongst  his  subjects  to  declare  for  the  King : 
they  escorted  him  in  triumph  back  to  his  dominion ; 
and  the  brave  but  ill-fated  Montague  was  made 
Earl  of  Sandwich  for  that  brief  service.  All  the 
old  Puritan  regime  was  effectually  changed;  even 
the  names  of  the  ships  were  altered  to  suit  the 
new  order  of  things ;  the  Naseby  became  the 
Royal  Charles,  and  a  similar  recantation  was  made 
throughout  the  fleet. 

Charles  II.  took  as  much  interest  in  his  navy 
as  he  was  capable  of  taking  in  any  thing  apart  from 
his  sensual  pleasures,  and  this  circumstance  inspired 
the  sailors  with  a  zeal  which  there  was  little  else  in 
the  nature  of  their  treatment  to  create.  Yachting 
then  became  a  fashion ;  with  characteristic  frivol- 
ity, Charles  even  had  a  vessel  moored  opposite  to 
Whitehall,  in  which  he  might  fancy  himself  at  sea. 
This  childish  hobby  was  appropriately  named  The 
Folly,  and  formed  one  amongst  the  many  lounging 
places  of  the  Court. 

who  banished  the  words  "  fear"  and  "impossibility"  from  a  Bri- 
tish seaman's  vocabulary.  He  died  in  August,  1657,  aged  fifty- 
nine,  and  was  buried  in  great  state  by  Cromwell  in  Henry  VII/s 
Chapel.  At  the  Restoration  his  bones  were  not  contemptuously 
removed  and  thrown  into  a  pit ;  but  his  coffin  was  removed 
from  the  vault  and  buried  in  the  churchyard. — Clarendon ; 
Campbell. 


1665.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      471 

In  the  beginning  of  Charles's  reign,  his  fleet  re- 
mained almost  equally  inactive,  with  the  exception 
of  Lord  Sandwich's,  and  Sir  Robert  Holmes's  expe- 
ditions ;  the  former  to  annoy  the  pirates  of  Barbary, 
and  the  latter  to  attack  the  Dutch  settlements  in 
Africa.  The  latter  expedition,  indeed,  eventuated 
in  an  important  exploit.  Holmes  suddenly  left 
the  Coast  of  Africa,  sailed  across  the  Atlantic,  and 
reduced  the  Dutch  Settlement  of  New  Nether- 
lands to  English  rule  under  the  title  of  New  York. 
In  excuse  for  these  assaults,  during  peace,  upon 
our  ancient  allies,  it  was  professed  that  the  latter 
were  jealous  of  our  commerce,  and  were  preparing 
measures  to  humble  our  naval  power.  There  seems 
to  have  been  little  real  ground  for  this  most  dis- 
reputable commencement  of  hostilities,  and  what- 
ever naval  glory  may  have  redounded  to  our  name 
by  the  following  war,  its  whole  political  conduct 
is  a  stain  upon  our  history.1 

In  1665  the  war  began:  Rupert  was  appointed 
to  a  joint  command  of  the  fleet,  but  at  the  last 
moment  he  was  deprived  of  it  by  the  intrigues  of 
the  Cabal.  Just  as  his  ship  was  weighing  anchor, 
he  was  obliged  to  return  on  shore  "  with  his  goods 
and  all  his  family"  [as  servants  were  then  called]. 
The  first  action  took  place  on  the  3rd  of  June.  The 
Dutch  Admiral  Opdam  had  received  peremptory 

1  Campbell,  in  his  excellent  "  Naval  History,"  endeavours  to 
exculpate  Charles  from  this  war,  but  he  argues  against  his  own 
facts,  and  apparently  even  against  his  own  convictions. 


472          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

orders  to  fight,  and  this  he  was  resolved  to  do, 
although  contrary  to  his  own  judgment,  and  that 
of  his  Council  of  War.  When  the  latter  remonstrat- 
ed, he  replied,  "  I  am  entirely  in  your  sentiments  ; 
but  here  are  my  orders,  to-morrow  my  head  shall  be 
bound  with  laurel,  or  with  cypress."  He  fought  and 
fell.  The  English  fleet  obtained  a  signal  victory, 
but  it  was  not  followed  up,  and  both  the  fleets 
returned  to  their  own  shores  to  prepare  for  future 
action.  Charles  seems  now  to  have  been  instigated 
chiefly  by  freebooting  motives.  The  Dutch  com- 
merce was  then  the  greatest  in  the  world,  and 
it  was  against  the  merchantmen  that  the  next 
expedition  was  undertaken,  and  proved  abortive. 

The  French  now,  secretly,  took  part  with  the 
Dutch,  and  in  April,  1666,  an  English  fleet  was 
despatched  against  each  of  these  continental  powers. 
The  Duke  of  Albemarle  1  commanded  that  destined 
to  fight  the  Dutch  ;  Rupert  the  other,  which  was  to 
meet  the  French;2  we  would  hope  that  the  Prince 
was  unwilling  to  fight  against  the  old  and  faithful 
friends  of  his  persecuted  family.  He  had  in  other 
respects  a  very  undesirable  command.  The  hearts 


1  When  Monk  was  offered  the  joint-command  of  the  fleet,  in 
1666,  with  Rupert,  Clarendon  timidly  broke  the  Prince's  com- 
mand to  him,  and  Monk  did  not  seem  to  like  it.     Afterwards  he 
confessed  that  he  was  afraid  of  his  wife,  and  begged  that  only 
Rupert  should  be  known  as  Admiral  for  a  few  days. — Guizofs 
Life  of  Monk,  edited  by  the  Honourable  Stewart  Wortley,  p.  304. 

2  The  dividing  of  this  fleet  was  one  of  the  principal  charges 
against   Lord    Clarendon. — Journal  of  the  House  of  Commons,, 
p.  10. 


1666.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        473 

of  his  sailors  alone  were  in  the  right  place  ;  every 
thing  relating  to  the  service  was  miserably  mis- 
managed. 

How  those  sailors  and  their  commanders  fought, 
is  only  to  be  estimated  by  comparing  their  means 
of  fighting  with  those  of  their  brave  antago- 
nists. In  Holland,  a  De  Witte  decreed  what  a  De 
Ruyter  was  to  execute ;  the  keen  and  searching 
attention  of  the  Republic  was  bestowed  on  every 
detail  connected  with  its  naval  service ;  and  every 
sailor  fought  under  the  consciousness  that  the  grati- 
tude of  his  country  would  honour,  while  its  care 
protected,  him.  In  the  English  fleet,  the  reverse 
of  all  this  was  felt.  The  honour  of  our  navy 
was  indeed  dear  to  the  English  People,  and  im- 
mense sums  were  voted  for  its  maintenance ;  but 
the  atrocious  dishonesty  and  abject  imbecility  of 
those  who  managed  the  finances,  wasted  away  the 
nation's  liberality. 

The  poor  devoted  sailor,  upon  whom  the  safety 
and  honour  of  his  country  depended,  was  not  only 
half-starved  upon  foul  food,  but  found  the  curse 
of  peculation  in  the  very  powder  of  his  guns,  in 
the  very  rigging  of  his  storm-beaten  ships.  The 
infamous  and  unmanly  vices  of  the  Court  were 
pampered  by  the  money  spared  from  the  sailor's 
mouldy  crust ;  bribery  obtained  contracts  for  the 
supply  of  rotten  cordage,  adulterated  saltpetre,  and 
refuse  provisions.  The  very  hulls  that  were  built 
by  ship-money  under  the  first  Charles,  were  now 


474          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

rotting  through  the  neglect  and  robbery  of  the 
minions  of  his  son. 

Under  these  circumstances,  mutinies  became 
frequent;  they  were  the  rude  remonstrance  of 
the  helpless  friendless  sailors,  against  the  tyranny 
and  wrongs  of  which  they  were  the  victims.  But 
their  gallant  hearts  were  loyal  still.  Their  King 
was  personally  well  known,  and  personally  dear  to 
them ;  to  us,  probably,  there  is  no  more  disrepu- 
table monarch  in  history  than  Charles  the  Second ; 
but  his  presence  seems  to  have  obliterated  every 
sentiment,  save  that  of  affection ;  his  address  fasci- 
nated every  one,  of  every  class,  who  fell  under  its 
spell.1 

Charles  II.  visited  the  fleet  before  its  de- 
parture, soothed  and  flattered  his  ill-used  seamen, 
and  saw  them  sail  away  to  spend  their  lives  for 
his  own  worthless  sake,  and  that  of  his  infatuated 
policy. 

This  was  in  May.  On  the  1st,  2nd,  and  3rd  of 
June,  a  murderous  battle  was  fought  between 
Albemarle  and  the  Dutch.  By  straining  every 
effort,  Rupert  only  arrived  from  his  distant  station 

1  Under  the  reign  of  this  King,  what  the  serious  portion  of 
the  nation  called  judgements,  and  the  profligates  termed  instances 
of  ill-luck,  fell  heavily  on  the  people.  Pestilence,  fire,  and  war, 
in  turn,  visited  the  sinful  City  of  London,  but  they  seem  not  to 
have  touched  its  heart  or  even  its  prosperity.  In  the  year  1664 
the  Plague  broke  out,  and  was  quickly  followed  by  the  Great 
Fire  of  1666,  that  annihilated  and  seems  to  have  burnt  out  the 
Plague  for  ever:  for  the  first  time  for  many  ages,  in  1667, 
London  heard  the  sound  of  hostile  guns  upon  the  Thames. 


1660.]       PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.     475 

in  time  for  the  last  day's  battle,  and  fought, 
as  ever,  gallantly.  There  is  a  noble  poem,  by 
Dry  den,  descriptive  of  the  fight  :• — 

With  equal  power  he  does  two  chiefs  create, 

Two  such  as  each  seemed  worthiest  when  alone ; 

Each  ahle  to  sustain  a  nation's  fate, 

Since  both  had  found  a  greater  in  their  own. 

Both  great  in  courage,  conduct,  and  in  fame, 
Yet  neither  envious  of  the  other's  praise  ; 

Their  duty,  faith,  and  interest  too  the  same, 
Like  mighty  partners,  equally  they  raise. 

The  Prince  long  time  had  courted  fortune's  love, 
But  once  possessed  did  absolutely  reign ; 

Thus  with  the  Amazons,  the  heroes  strove, 

And  conquer'd  first  those  beauties  they  would  gain. 

Together  to  the  watery  camp  they  haste, 

Whom  matrons  passing,  to  their  children  shew, 

Infants  first  vows  for  them  to  heaven  are  cast, 
And  future  people  bless  them  as  they  go. 

With  them  no  riotous  pomp,  nor  Asian  train, 
To  infect  a  navy  with  their  gaudy  fears  ; 

To  make  slow  fights  and  victories  but  vain ; 
But  war  severely  like  itself  appears. 

Our  fleet  divides,  and  straight  the  Dutch  appear, 
In  number  and  a  famed  commander  bold ; 

The  narrow  seas  can  scarce  their  navy  bear, 
Or  crowded  vessels  can  their  soldiers  hold. 

The  Duke,  less  numerous,  but  in  courage  more, 
On  wings  of  all  the  winds  to  combat  flies ; 

His  murdering  guns  a  loud  defiance  roar, 
And  bloody  crosses  on  his  flag-staffs  rise. 


476        MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

Both  furl  their  sails  and  strip  them  for  the  fight ; 

Their  folded  sheets  dismiss  the  useless  air ; 
Th'  Elean  plains  could  boast  no  nobler  sight, 

When  struggling  champions  did  their  bodies  bare. 

Our  dreaded  Admiral  from  far  they  threat, 

Whose  battered  rigging  their  whole  war  receives  ; 

All  brave,  like  some  old  oak  which  tempests  beat, 
He  stands,  and  sees  below  his  scattered  leaves. 

Straight  to  the  Dutch  he  turns  his  dreadful  prow, 
More  fierce  th'  important  quarrel  to  decide  : 

Like  swans,  in  long  array  his  vessels  shew, 
Whose  crests  advancing  do  the  waves  divide. 

They  charge,1  re-charge,  and  all  along  the  sea 
They  drive  and  squander  the  huge  Belgian  fleet ; 

Berkeley  alone,  who  nearest  danger  lay, 
Did  a  like  fate  with  lost  Creiisa  meet. 

The  night  comes  on  ;  we  eager  to  pursue 

The  combat  still,  and  they  ashamed  to  leave  ; 

Till  the  last  streaks  of  dying  day  withdrew, 
And  doubtful  moonlight  did  our  rage  deceive. 

At  morn  the  Dutch  regard  with  sorrowing  eyes, 
Till  from  their  main-tops,  joyful  news  they  hear 

Of  ships,  which  by  them  would  bring  new  supplies, 
And  in  their  colours  Belgian  lions  bear. 


But  now  brave  Rupert  from  afar  appears, 

Whose  waving  streamers  the  glad  general  knows  ; 

With  full-spread  sails  his  eager  navy  steers, 
And  every  ship  in  swift  proportion  grows. 


These  fellows  are  still  soldiers,  though  afloat. 


1666.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      477 

Already  batter'd,  by  his  lee  they  lay  ; 

In  vain  upon  the  passing  winds  they  call ; 
The  passing  winds  through  their  torn  canvas  play, 

And  flagging  sails  on  heartless  sailors  fall. 

When  one  dire  shot,  the  last  they  could  supply, 
Close  by  the  board  the  Prince's  mainmast  bore ; 

All  three  now  helpless  by  each  other  lie, 

And  this  offends  not,  and  those  fear  no  more. 

Old  expert  Allen,  loyal  all  along, 

Fam'd  for  his  action  on  the  Smyrnian  fleet ; 

And  Holmes,  whose  name  shall  live  in  epic  song, 
While  music  numbers,  or  while  verse  has  feet. 

With  him  went  Spragge,  as  bountiful  as  brave, 
Whom  his  high  courage  to  command  had  brought ; 

Harman,  who  did  the.twice-fir'd  Harry  save, 
And  in  his  burning  ship  undaunted  fought. 

Young  Holies,  on  a  Muse  'by  Mars  begot, 

Born,  Caesar-like,  to  write  and  act  great  deeds, 

Impatient  to  revenge  his  fatal  shot, 

His  right  hand  doubly  on  his  left  succeeds. 

Full  in  the  Prince's  passage  hills  of  sand, 
And  dangerous  flats  in  secret  ambush  lay, 

Where  the  false  tides  skim  o'er  the  cover'd  land, 
And  seamen  with  dissembled  depths  betray. 

But  he  unmov'd  contemns  their  idle  threats, 
Secure  of  fame  whene'er  he  please  to  fight ; 

His  cold  experience  tempers  all  his  heat, 

And  inbred  worth  doth  boasting  valour  slight. 

But  when  approach'd,  in  strict  embraces  bound, 

Rupert  and  Albemarle  together  grow, 
He  joys  to  have  his  friend  in  safety  found, 

Which  he  to  none  but  to  that  friend  would  own. 


478          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

Thus  reinforced,  against  the  adverse  fleet, 

Still  doubling  ours,  brave  Rupert  leads  the  way ; 

With  the  first  blushes  of  the  morn  they  meet, 
And  bring  night  back  upon  the  new-born  day. 

His  presence  soon  blows  up  the  kindling  fight, 
And  his  loud  guns  speak  thick  like  angry  men ; 

It  seem'd  as  slaughter  had  been  breath'd  all  night, 
And  Death  new-pointed  his  dull  dart  again. 

Thousands  were  there,  in  darker  fame  that  dwell, 
Whose  deeds  some  nobler  poem  shall  adorn ; 

And  though  to  me  unknown,  they  sure  fought  well 
Whom  Rupert  led,  and  who  were  British  born. 

The  battle  was  indecisive ;  the  Dutch  seem  to 
have  had  rather  the  advantage ;  but  the  follow- 
ing testimony  of  the  Grand -Pensionary  De  Witte 
nobly  speaks  for  itself.  "  If  the  English,"  he  says, 
"  were  beat,  their  defeat  did  them  more  honour 
than  all  their  former  victories ;  our  own  fleet  could 
never  have  been  brought  [again  into  action]  after 
the  first  day's  fight,  if  they  had  been  in  the  other's 
place ;  and  I  believe  none  but  the  English  could. 
All  that  we  discovered  was,  that  Englishmen  might 
be  killed,  and  English  ships  burnt,  but  that  English 
courage  was  invincible."  1 

The  fleets  returned  to  England  to  encounter  the 
reproaches  and  recriminations  which  naturally  follow 
a  great  public  disappointment.  Rupert  and  Albe- 
marle,  of  course,  were  blamed,  and  the  former,  says 

1  Wiquefort,  Hist,  de  Provinces  Unies,  liv.  xiv.  (quoted  in 
Campbell's  Admirals,  ii.  110.) 


1066.]      PRINCE    RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      479 

Pepys,  "was  counted  always  unlucky."  The  lat- 
ter, as  well  as  the  former,  had  fought  almost  with 
desperation,  and  indeed,  in  action,  his  honesty1  was 
beyond  all  suspicion.  The  glorious,  but  ephemeral 
fame  he  purchased  by  the  Restoration,  had  been  tar- 
nished by  his  breach  of  promise  towards  political 
victims  afterwards,  as  well  as  by  the  absence  of  all 
precautions  to  prevent  Charles  II.  from  returning 
with  excessive  prerogative  right.  But  in  all  other 
respects  he  served  England  well. 

Rupert  soon  afterwards  obtained  a  very  une- 
quivocal victory  over  the  Dutch,  which  rendered 
him  very  popular.  In  the  following  year  he  was 
requested  by  the  House  of  Commons  "to  impart 
the  reasons  of  the  late  miscarryings ;' '  in  conse- 
quence of  which  he  wrote,  and  sometime  afterwards 


1  It  is  natural  that  Monk's  honesty  should  be  doubted  by 
those  to  whose  hopes  it  wrought  destruction.  The  only  pre- 
sumption against  him  seems  to  be  that  he  prospered  not  only  in 
his  great  undertaking,  as  concerned  the  public,  but  in  its  results 
as  regarded  himself.  It  is  seldom  that  a  corrupt  or  treacherous 
character  bears  success  with  such  meekness,*  calumnies  with 
such  patience,t  and  danger  with  such  heroism,  as  this  King- 
maker exhibited  at  Court,  in  Council,  and  during  the  Great 
Plague.  In  that  terrible  time,  when  death,  in  its  most  appalling 
form,  stilled  every  sound  in  London,  except  the  unceasing  funeral 
knells,  the  "  roaring  of  those  under  the  pangs  of  death,"  and  the 
blasphemies  of  the  desperate  revellers,  the  Duke  was  unceasingly 
present,  watchful,  generous.  His  royal  protege  was  as  differently 
employed  at  Oxford  as  Nero  was  when  Rome  was  burning. 


*  He  did  Monk  the  justice  to  say  that  "  the  Duke  of  Albe- 
marle  never  presumes  upon  the  services  of  General  Monk."- 
Guizots  Life  of  Monk. 

t  Baxter. 


480         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

published,    the    following     declaration,1    in    which 
he  tells  his  own  story. 


PRINCE   RUPERTS   NARRATIVE. 

I  DO  esteem  it  a  very  great  happiness  that  my  hearty 
services  for  the  King  and  kingdom  in  the  late  war 
are  so  well  accepted  by  the  House  of  Commons : 
and  since  it  is  desired  by  them  that  I  should  impart 
what  miscarriages  I  have  observed  in  the  manage- 
ment of  the  said  war,  and  that  I  should  give  a  par- 
ticular account  concerning  the  division  of  the  fleet 
in  the  year  1666,  I  shall  faithfully  do  it  upon  the 
best  recollection  I  can  make ;  I  being  with  the 
first  summer's  expedition,  when  his  Royal  Highness 
commanded,  and  thereupon  I  shall  only  say,  in 
short,  if  the  Duke's  orders,  as  they  ought,  had  been 


1  The  following  naturally  told  story  infuses  an  air  of  reality 
into  these  transactions  : — 

"  Not  long  after  this,  our  fleet  happening  to  go  near  the  shore 
to  take  in  fresh  water,  Prince  Rupert  dined  with  a  gentleman 
who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  where  they  were,  and  returning 
on  board  in  a  little  boat,  accompanied  only  by  the  Duke  of 
Buckingham,  then  a  youth  and  a  volunteer,  and  Lord  Blaney, 
suddenly  there  arose  a  violent  storm,  which  neither  of  them 
seemed  to  relish.  The  Prince,  in  particular,  began  to  talk  of 
Prince  Maurice's  being  cast  away  in  a  like  accident,  upon  which 
the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  who  was  but  a  sort  of  fresh-water 
sailor  at  that  time,  began  to  reflect  upon  the  fate  of  his  family 
also,  calling  to  mind  that  his  grandfather  and  three  of  his  bro- 
thers had  been  drowned.  The  Lord  Blaney  hearing  all  this, 
made  them  smile  in  the  very  midst  of  their  danger,  by  swearing 
that,  'though  he  liked  their  company  very  well  on  shore,  he 
wished  himself  out  of  it  now,  if  it  were  but  in  an  Indian 
canoe,  as  he  feared  the  d — d  fortune  of  their  families  would  sink 
him.'  "—Tett  Tale. 


1666.]      PRINCE    RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       481 

strictly  observed,  the  victory  which  was  then  ob- 
tained had  been  much  greater,  nay,  in  all  probability 
the  whole  fleet  of  the  enemy  had  been  destroyed. 
What  other  miscarriages  happened  that  summer 
I  cannot  speak  to,  but  upon  hearsay,  being  com- 
manded home  as  soon  as  that  fight  was  over,  arid 
had  not  my  hand  in  any  other  action  of  the  war, 
until  it  pleased  the  King  to  join  me  with  the  Lord- 
General  in  the  command  of  the  fleet.  In  this 
expedition  that  which  first  appeared  of  moment  is 
the  separation  of  the  fleet,  whereof  I  can  say  thus 
much,  that  the  counsel  was  formed  upon  the  intel- 
ligence which  was  brought  of  some  ships  of  the 
French  King's  being  at  Belleisle,  and  that  some 
others  were  expected  there  out  of  Brest,  and  with 
the  Duke  of  Beaufort.  It  was  also  encouraged  by 
other  intelligence  that  the  Dutch  were  not  likely  to 
come  abroad  in  some  weeks,  so  that  it  was  con- 
ceived a  squadron  of  our  ships  might  be  spared  to 
look  after  the  French,  and  return  in  time  enough 
to  the  body  of  the  fleet  before  an  engagement  with 
the  Dutch.  With  these  ships,  and  in  pursuance  to 
the  orders  I  had  then  newly  received  from  the  Duke 
of  York,  I  set  sail  upon  Tuesday,  being  the  29th  of 
May,  leaving  the  main  body  of  the  fleet  with  the 
Duke  of  Albemarle  in  the  Downs,  where  we  con- 
cluded there  could  be  no  probable  danger  from  the 
enemy  in  case  they  should  come  out,  because  the 
same  wind  which  would  bring  them  into  the  Chan- 
nel would  also  serve  to  bring  down  our  fleet  to  a 
VOL.  in.  i  i 


482         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

conjunction  with  the  squadron  under  my  command  ; 
and  I  steered  my  course  westward,  till  by  stress  of 
weather,  which  happened  on  Friday  following,  being 
the  1st  of  June,  I  was  driven  back  again,  and  came 
to  anchor  at  St.  Helen's  Road,  where,  by  a  ketch 
which  I  had  sent  before  to  Portsmouth  for  intelli- 
gence, I  received  the  first  notice  of  the  Dutch 
being  abroad,  and  his  Royal  Highness's  order 
bearing  date  the  30th  of  May,  for  my  return  to  the 
fleet,  which  I  was  directed  to  find  either  in  the 
Downs,  or  else  in  the  Gunfleet.  Whereupon  I 
made  all  the  haste  back  to  the  Downs,  but  the 
Duke  of  Albemarle,  it  seems  by  order  he  had  re- 
ceived after  my  parting  from  him,  was  gone  thence 
for  the  Gunfleet ;  and  in  passing  met  the  Dutch 
upon  the  said  1st  of  June,  and  I,  meeting  no  intel- 
ligence in  the  Downs,  steered  my  course  on  towards 
the  Gunfleet  also ;  and  on  Sunday  the  1st  of 
June  met  the  English  and  Dutch,  who  had  then  been 
some  days  engaged.  The  next  miscarriage  I  shall 
mention  was  the  intolerable  neglect  in  supplying 
provisions  during  the  whole  summer's  expedition, 
notwithstanding  the  extraordinary  and  frequent 
importunity  of  our  letters,  which  were  for  the  most 
part  directed  to  Sir  William  Coventry  as  being  the 
fittest  person  to  represent  our  desire  to  his  Royal 
Highness,  and  to  the  Commissioners  of  the  Navy,  of 
which  number  he  was  also  one.  And  in  this  instance 
the  neglect  was  so  great  that  we  were  enforced  by 
three  repeated  orders  in  that  summer  to  bring  the 


1667.]     PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.        483 

whole  fleet  to  the  short  allowance  from  the  2nd 
of  August  to  the  23rd  of  October,  when  I  brought 
home  the  fleet.  I  know  upon  our  complaints  ac- 
counts were  sent  us  that  all  had  been  supplied  ac- 
cording to  our  orders ;  but  I  remember  also  we  did 
then  complain  that  great  quantities  of  wood-bound 
cask  were  staved,  and  much  of  the  provisions,  upon 
surveys,  proved  defective,  also  that  the  gauge  of 
the  beer-vessels  was  twenty  gallons  in  a  butt  short 
of  what  it  ought  to  be,  and  that  bills  of  credit  came 
with  the  pursers  to  the  fleet  instead  of  provisions  in 
specie.  This  want  of  provisions  did  manifestly  tend 
to  the  extraordinary  prejudice  of  his  Majesty's  ser- 
vice in  that  whole  summer,  but  most  especially  after 
the  victory  obtained  in  July  fight,  when  we  had 
carried  the  fleet  on  the  enemies'  coast,  and  lay 
there  before  the  Uly,  in  the  way  of  all  their  mer- 
chant ships,  we  were  enforced,  merely  for  want  of 
provisions,  to  quit  out  to  Swold  Bay. 

And  now  I  have  made  mention  of  the  second,  I 
must  not  forbear  to  tell  you  my  judgment  that  the 
blue  squadron  was  in  that  action  guilty  of  a  great 
miscarriage,  otherwise,  in  probability,  the  whole 
Zealand  squadron  had  fallen  into  our  hands.  The 
want  of  seamen  was  also  too  great  to  be  forgotten, 
which  I  believe  was  occasioned  partly  by  the  hopes 
they  had  to  go  into  merchant  ships  and  colliers ? 
where  their  pay  was  greater,  and  the  hazard  less, 
and  partly  by  the  ill-management  of  those  who  are 
intrusted  to  impress  them.  In  the  next  place  I 

i  i  2 


484        MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

must  remember  the  horrible  neglects  of  his  Majesty's 
officers,  and  the  workmen  of  his  yards.  For  the  proof 
thereof  there  needs  but  two  instances,  the  one 
that  if  the  fire-ships  which  we  desired  to  have  sup- 
plied to  us  after  the  second  fight,  we  having  spent 
the  greatest  part  of  ours .  in  that  fight,  and  in  the 
action  of  the  CJly.  After  above  five  weeks'  impor- 
tunity we  were  told  we  should  have  five  fire-ships 
out  of  the  Thames  at  Chatham,  where  all  necessaries 
were  at  hand,  when  in  many  days  we  provided  as 
many  fire-ships  ourselves  at  Swold  Bay,  and  those 
which  we  were  promised  out  of  the  Thames  river 
came  not  to  us  till  the  want  of  them  was  over. 

The  next  is  as  considerable;  that  whereas  we 
were  in  great  want  against  the  second  fight,  of 
having  the  Loyal  London,  Warspite,  Cambridge,  and 
Greenwich,  which  were  all  ships  of  so  great  force, 
we  thought  it  not  fit  to  sail  till  they  were  ready, 
after  we  had,  with  all  imaginable  importunity,  in 
vain  desired  the  fitting  and  sending  them,  we  were 
at  last  forced  to  send  up  Sir  Robert  Holmes  with 
some  of  our  number  out  of  the  fleet,  for  the  three 
latter,  and  Sir  Jeremiah  Smith  for  the  Loyal  Lon- 
don, who  in  a  few  days  brought  the  said  ships  to 
the  fleet,  where  we  fitted  them  ourselves;  and 
though  these  are  very  considerable  instances,  yet 
the  late  miscarriage  at  Chatham  dock  more  emi- 
nently prove  it.  From  that  expedition  where  we 
commanded,  I  returned  home  in  the  beginning  of 
October ;  but  before  I  came  in  with  the  fleet,  I  sent 


1667.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       485 

it  as  my  humble  advice  to  the  King,  amongst  other 
things  which  I  thought  for  his  Majesty's  service, 
that  care  should  be  taken  to  prevent  an  attempt 
upon  Harwich,  which  was  to  be  apprehended  some 
time  or  other  from  the  enemy,  after  the  fleet  should 
be  come  in,  and  his  Majesty's  commands  were  ac- 
cordingly afterwards  issued  forth  for  the  fortifying 
both  Harwich  and  Sheerness,  which  should  have  pre- 
vented any  such  design.  But  though  many  months 
passed  before  the  Dutch  made  their  attempt,  yet 
nothing  had  been  done  to  render  Sheerness  defensible 
against  the  enemy,  to  which  neglect  we  may  justly 
ascribe  the  burning  of  the  ships  at  Chatham,  and 
the  dishonour  that  attended  it.  Last  of  all,  I  do 
esteem  it  none  of  the  least  miscarriages  that  have 
been  observable  in  the  last  war,  that  no  fleet  was 
kept  in  a  body  last  summer,  especially  since  the 
enemy  was  well  known  to  be  arming ;  whereas  we 
had  above  18,000  seamen  all  the  while  in  pay  aboard 
dispersed  ships,  which,  if  but  a  part  had  been  but 
kept  together  in  the  Thames,  it  had  been  probably 
the  prevention  of  the  mischief  which  ensued. 

(Signed)         RUPERT. 

In  autumn  the  fleets  were  laid  up  to  refit,  and 
Rupert  returned  into  private  life.  He  studiously 
avoided  all  communication  with  the  Cabal,  and  kept 
himself  free  from  all  party  politics  with  an  unre- 
proachful  success  that  has  seldom  been  imitated. 
When  Charles  so  basely  sold  himself  to  France,  the 


486    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

Prince  retired    altogether   from    his  councils,    and 
became  more  uncourtly  than  ever. 

The  wound  that  he  had  received  in  his  Flanders 
campaign  had  been  aggravated  by  some  trifling 
accident,  and  broke  out  virulently,  putting  him  to 
great  torture.  It  appeared  that  a  particle  of  the 
skull  had  been  driven  in  upon  the  brain,  and  it  was 
only  by  trepanning  that  the  Prince  was  restored  to 
ease.  This  circumstance  produced  the  following 
letter,  which  I  find  in  the  Bromley  Collection. 

TO    PRINCE    RURERT. 

MY  DEAR  COUSIN, 

As  soon  as  Will.  Legge  shewed  me  your  letter  of  the 
accident  in  your  head,  I  immediately  sent  Choqueux  to 
you  in  so  much  haste  as  I  had  not  time  to  write  by  him  ; 
but  now  I  conjure  you,  if  you  have  any  kindness  for  me, 
have  a  care  of  your  health,  and  do  not  neglect  yourself, 
for  which  I  am  not  so  much  concerned.  I  am  very  glad 
to  hear  your  ship  sails  so  well.  I  was  yesterday  to  see  the 
new  ship  Royal  Sovereign  launched,  and  I  think  when 
you  see  her,  which  I  hope  you  will  do  very  quickly,  under 
Sir  J.  Lawson,  you  will  say  she  is  the  finest  ship  that  has 
yet  been  built.  The  Charles,  James,  Henry,  and  some 
others,  are  already  in  the  Hope,  and  men  begin  to  come  in 
reasonably  fast ;  but  to  make  the  more  speed,  yesterday, 
in  council,  I  ordered  there  should  be  an  embargo  of  all 
things  till  the  fleet  were  manned.  There  are  one  thou- 
sand men  ready  to  come  out  of  Scotland  and  the  North, 
which  I  hope  this  north-west  wdnd  will  quickly  bring.  I 
write  to  you  without  ceremony,  and  pray  do  the  like  to 

i  Bromley's  Royal  Letters. 


1668.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE  CAVALIERS.       487 

me,  for  we  are  too  good  friends  to  use  any.  I  must  again 
beg  of  you  to  have  a  care  of  your  health  ;  and  assure  you 
that  I  am  yours,  J.  Y. 

(James,  Duke  of  York.) 
Whitehall,  27th  October. 

In  consequence  of  this  illness,  Prince  Rupert 
was  prevailed  upon  to  join  the  giddy  Court  in  its 
annual  visit  to  Tunbridge  Wells  ;  and  his  sojourn 
there  forms  a  curious  episode  in  his  biography. 

Everyone  is  familiar  with  Mr.  Macaulay's  vivid 
picture  of  Tunbridge  Wells,  as  it  appeared  a  little 
later  than  the  time  we  speak  of ;  but  the  following 
description  from  De  Grammont's  Memoirs,  of  this 
unique  and  still  pleasant  watering  place,  may  pos- 
sess some  novelty,  and  is  essential  to  our  subject. — 
"  Tunbridge  Wells,  (the  place  of  all  Europe  the 
most  rural  and  simple,  and  yet  the  most  entertain- 
ing and  agreeable,)  is  about  the  same  distance  from 
London  that  Fontainebleau  is  from  Paris,  and  is,  at 
the  season,  the  general  rendezvous  of  all  the  gay 
and  handsome  of  both  sexes.  The  company,  though 
numerous,  is  always  select,  as  the  number  of  those 
who  repair  thither  for  diversion  even  exceeds  the 
number  of  those  who  go  thither  for  health.  Every- 
thing there  breathes  mirth  and  pleasure  ;  constraint 
is  banished,  familiarity  is  established  upon  the  first 
acquaintance,  and  joy  and  pleasure  are  the  sole 
sovereigns  of  the  place.  The  company  are  accom- 
modated with  lodgings  in  little  clean  and  convenient 
habitations,  that  lie  straggling  and  separated  from 


488          MEMOIRS  AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

each  other,  a  mile  and  a  half  all  round  the  Wells, 
where  the  company  meet  in  the  morning;  this 
place  consists  of  a  long  alley,  shaded  by  spreading 
trees,  under  which  they  walk  while  they  are  drinking 
the  waters.  On  one  side  of  this  alley  is  a  long  row 
of  shops,  plentifully  stocked  with  all  manner  of  toys, 
lace,  gloves,  stockings,  and  where  there  is  raffling,  as 
at  Paris,  in  the  Foire  de  St.  Germain  ;  on  the  other 
side  of  the  walk  is  the  market ;  and  as  it  is  the  cus- 
tom here  for  every  person  to  buy  their  own  provi- 
sions, care  is  taken  that  nothing  offensive  appears 
on  the  stalls.  Here  are  young,  fair,  fresh-coloured 
country  girls,  with  clean  linen,  small  straw  hats, 
and  neat  shoes  and  stockings,  who  sell  game,  vege- 
tables, flowers,  and  fruit ;  here  you  may  live  as  well 
as  you  wish  ;  here  is  likewise  deep  play,  and  no  want 
of  intrigues.  As  soon  as  the  evening  comes,  every 
one  quits  his  little  palace  to  assemble  on  the  bow- 
ling green,  where,  in  the  open  air,  those  who  choose 
dance  upon  a  turf  more  soft  and  smooth  than  the 
finest  carpet  in  the  world. 

"Never  did  Love  see  his  empire  in  a  more  flour- 
ishing condition  than  on  this  spot :  those  who  were 
smitten  before  they  came  to  it,  felt  a  wonderful 
increase  of  their  flame ;  and  men  who  seemed  the 
least  susceptible  of  love,  laid  aside  their  natural 
ferocity,  and  appeared  in  perfectly  new  characters. 
For  the  truth  of  this  last  observation  we  shall  only 
relate  the  change  which  appeared  in  the  conduct  of 
Prince  Rupert.  He  was  brave  and  courageous  even 


1668.]      PRINCE  RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.          489 

to  rashness ;  but  cross-grained  and  incorrigibly 
obstinate:  his  genius  was  fertile  in  mathematical 
experiments,  and  he  possessed  some  knowledge  of 
chemistry ;  he  was  polite  even  to  excess,  unreason- 
ably ;  but  haughty,  and  even  brutal,  when  he  ought 
to  have  been  gentle  and  courteous :  he  was  tall,  and 
his  manners  were  ungracious;  he  had  a  dry  ill- 
favoured  visage,  and  a  stern  look,  even  when  he 
wished  to  please ;  but  when  he  was  out  of  humour 
his  was  a  *  physiognomie  vraiment  de  reprouve.' 

"  The  Queen  had  sent  for  the  players  either  that 
there  might  be  no  intermission  in  the  diversions  of 
the  place,  or,  perhaps,  to  retort  upon  Miss  Stewart  by 
the  presence  of  Nell  Gwynne,  part  of  the  uneasiness 
that  she  felt  from  hers.  Prince  Rupert  found  charms 
in  the  person  of  another  player,  called  Hughes,1  who 
brought  down,  and  greatly  subdued  his  natural 
fierceness.  From  this  time  adieu  alembics,  cruci- 
bles, furnaces,  and  all  the  black  furniture  of  the 
forges — a  complete  farewell  to  all  mathematical 


1  Mrs.  Hughes  was  one  of  the  actresses  belonging  to  the  King's 
company,  and  one  of  the  earliest  female  performers.  According  to 
Downes,  she  commenced  her  theatrical  career  after  the  opening  of 
Drury  Lane  Theatre,  in  1663.  She  appears  to  have  been  the  first 
female  representative  of  Desdemona.  By  Prince  Rupert  she  had 
a  daughter  named  Ruperta,  married  to  Lieuten ant-General  Howe, 
who  survived  her  husband  many  years,  dying  at  Somerset  House 
about  the  year  1740.  For  Mrs.  Hughes  Prince  Rupert  bought 
the  magnificent  seat  of  Sir  Nicholas  Crispe  near  Hammersmith, 
now  the  residence  of  the  Margrave  of  Brandenburgh,  which  cost 
25,000£.  the  building.  From  the  dramatis personce  to  Tom  Essence, 
licensed  1676,  we  find  Mrs.  Hughes  was  then  on  the  stage,  and 
in  the  Duke's  company. — Note  to  Count  Hamilton's  Memoirs. 


490    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

instruments  and  chemical  speculations  !  Sweet  pow- 
der and  essences  were  now  the  only  ingredients  that 
occupied  any  share  of  his  attention."  [The  Count 
proceeds  to  state  that  Mrs.  Hughes  was  not  lightly 
to  be  won,  and  valued  herself  so  highly  that  the 
Prince's  estimation  of  her,  and  his  sacrifices  to  ob- 
tain her  affections,  were  proportionably  increased.] 
"  The  King  was  greatly  pleased  with  this  event,  for 
which  great  rejoicings  were  made  atTunbridge ;  but 
nobody  was  bold  enough  to  make  it  the  subject  of 
satire,  though  the  same  constraint  was  not  observed 
respecting  the  follies  of  other  personages." 1 

After  this  portrait  of  Prince  Rupert,  caricatured 
with  malicious  wit,  it  is  only  justice  to  add  another 
description  from  one  who  was  better  able  to  appre- 
ciate nobleness  of  nature  than  the  sarcastic  French- 
man. 

Lord  Orford  writes  thus : — 

"  Prince  Rupert  was  fond  of  those  sciences  which 
soften  and  adorn  a  hero's  private  hours ;  and  knew 
how  to  mix  them  with  his  minutes  of  amusements 
without  dedicating  his  life  to  their  pursuit,  like  us 
who,  wanting  capacity  for  momentous  views,  make 
serious  study  of  what  is  only  the  transitory  occupa- 
tion of  a  genius.  Had  the  Court  of  the  first 
Charles  been  peaceful  how  agreeably  had  the  Prince's 
congenial  propensity  flattered  and  confirmed  the 


1  Memoirs  of  the  Count  de  Grammont,  by  Count  A.  Hamilton, 
vol.  iii. 


1668.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      491 

inclination  of  his  uncle.  How  the  Muse  of  arts 
would  have  repaid  the  patronage  of  the  monarch 
when  for  his  first  artist  she  would  have  presented  him 
with  his  nephew !  How  different  a  figure  did  the 
same  Prince  make  in  a  reign  of  dissimilar  com- 
plexion. The  philosophic  warrior  who  would  relax 
himself  into  the  ornament  of  a  refined  Court  was 
thought  a  savage  mechanic,  when  courtiers  were  only 
voluptuous  wits  [Lord  Orford  here  inserts  the  cha- 
racter before  quoted  from  De  Grammont,  and  then 
adds],  "  What  pity  that  we,  who  wish  to  transmit 
this  Prince's  resemblance  to  posterity  on  a  fairer 
canvas,  have  none  of  these  inimitable  colours  to 
efface  the  harsher  likeness.  We  can  but  oppose 
facts  to  wit;  truth  to  satire.  How  unequal  the 
pencils  !  yet  what  these  lines  cannot  do  they  may 
suggest ;  they  may  induce  the  reader  to  reflect,  that, 
if  the  Prince  was  defective  in  the  transient  varnish 
of  a  Court,  he  at  least  was  adorned  by  the  arts 
with  that  polish  which  also  can  make  a  Court 
attract  the  attention  of  subsequent  ages."  l 

After  this  adventure  at  Tunbridge  Wells,  he 
returned  to  his  seclusion  at  Windsor.  There  he 
appears  to  have  remained  tranquilly,  until  he  was 
summoned  once  more  to  bear  arms  for  the  King. 
The  Dutch  war  had  continued  to  rage  with  the  most 
injurious  effect  towards  both  countries,  each  main- 
taining a  costly  fleet,  which  was  employed  rather 

1  Catalogue  of  Engravers. 


492         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

in  injuring  the  other,  than  in  seeking  to  end  the 
war.  In  the  beginning  of  1667,  the  Dutch  de- 
termined to  make  reprisals  on  our  commerce  in  the 
very  face  of  London.  The  imbecile  ministry  of 
Charles  was  easily  blinded  ;  the  Queen  -  Mother, 
Henrietta  Maria,  lent  her  fatal  assistance  to  deceive 
her  son.  On  the  strength  of  her  information  and 
advice,  England  was  left  almost  defenceless ;  the 
people  indeed  were  taxed  as  heavily  as  ever ;  "  the 
national  treasury  was  filled  at  the  cost  of  sighs  and 
tears,  it  was  emptied  to  gain  the  smiles  of  the  riotous 
company  " l  in  the  King's  harems ;  the  navy  remained 
cradled  in  winter  quarters,  and  two  small  squadrons 
alone  were  left  at  sea. 

On  the  7th  of  June  the  Dutch  fleet  sailed  exult- 
ingly  up  the  Thames,  and  attacked  Sheerness. 
Albemarle,  Spragge,  and  other  zealous  officers  had 
made  hasty  preparations  to  protect  the  Medway, 
but  in  vain.  The  Dutch,  led  by  old  Roundhead 
apostates,  sailed  on  in  triumph,  burst  through  all 
obstacles,  took  or  burnt  all  the  English  ships  that 
they  encountered,2  and  swept  the  river  until  they 
reached  Upnor  Castle.  Hither  Prince  Rupert  had 
hastened  on  the  first  intelligence  of  the  invasion, 

1  Lord  John  Russell  (speaking  of  the  French  Revolution). 

2  One  of  these  was  the  Royal  Oak,  commanded  by  Captain 
Douglas  :  when  he  found  that  his  ship  was  hopelessly  on  fire,  he 
sent  away  his  crew  and  lay  down  to  die  upon  his  quarter-deck, 
saying  that  a  Douglas  would  never  live  to  bear  the  reproach  of 
quitting   his   post.     "Whether  it  be  wise,"    says    Sir   William 
Temple  in  recording  this  event,  "  for  men  to  do  such  actions  or/ 
no,  I  am  sure  it  is  wise  in  the  State  to  honour  them." 


1668.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.      493 

with  such  "  land  forces  "  as  could  be  collected.  He 
had  addressed  himself  with  his  usual  energy  to 
fortifying  his  position;  and  he  now  awaited  the 
invaders  with  the  quiet  resolution  into  which  his 
youthful  daring  had  matured.  The  Dutch  fleet 
continued  to  advance,  insultingly  scattering  their 
shot  on  either  side  of  the  narrow  rivers ;  their 
colours  flaunting  over  -the  old  Thames,  and  English 
renegadoes  piloting  their  destructive  course.  They 
opened  the  reach  where  Upnor  Castle  stands ;  the 
fort  seemed  silenced  by  very  fear;  the  tall  spars 
were  still  seen  moving  on  through  the  midst  of 
those  wide  meadowy  quiet  fields.  They  were  within 
point  blank  gun-shot  of  the  fort,  when  the  silence 
was  rudely  broken.  As  if  by  an  explosion,  the  castle 
was  wrapt  in  fire  in  a  moment ;  the  iron  shot  went 
crashing  through  the  Dutchman's  timbers,  and  many 
a  tall  spar  came  toppling  down.  The  sudden  fire 
was  maintained  so  fiercely,  that  there  was  no 
thought  of  resistance  for  a  moment;  as  soon  as 
the  ships  could  be  got  about  they  fled,  and  the 
river  was  once  more  purified,  as  it  has  ever  since 
remained,  from  an  enemy's  insulting  presence. 

No  sooner  had  the  enemy  retired,  than  the  Prince 
returned  to  his  studies  in  Windsor  Castle,  of  which 
he  was  now  appointed  governor.  He  seems  at  this 
period  to  have  lived  the  life  of  a  recluse ;  we  only 
hear  of  him  in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society, 
through  which  his  discoveries  and  inventions  were 
promulgated ;  and  sometimes  in  the  colonial  enter- 


494         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

prizes,  which  then  excited  great  interest  in  Eng- 
land. The  most  interesting  of  these  is  related  in 
the  note  below.1 

It  was  during  these  years,  that  Prince  Rupert 
perfected  those  scientific  and  mechanical  instru- 
ments that  I  have  enumerated  in  an  early  period  of 
his  history.  He  also  became  a  partner  in  several 
speculations,  one  of  which  was  the  exercise  of  a 
patent  for  boring  cannon  by  the  agency  of  a  water- 
mill,  and  annealing  gun-metal  in  a  glass-house. 
These  appear  to  have  succeeded  during  the  Prince's 


1  "  Grosseling,  an  enterprising  individual,  undertook  a  voyage 
and  landed  in  Nelson's  River  (which  falls  into  Hudson's  Bay). 
Having  made  a  survey  of  the  country,  he  drew  up  a  statement, 
which  he  laid  before  the  French  Court,  representing  the  great 
advantages  which  might  be  derived  from  a  settlement  upon  this 
coast.  The  French  cabinet,  prepossessed  by  the  doleful  narrative 
of  James's  sufferings  (one  of  the  early  settlers),  treated  the  project 
as  visionary,  and  turned  a  deaf  ear  to  his  urgent  representations. 
But  Mr.  Montagu,  the  English  minister  at  Paris,  took  a  different 
view  of  the  matter,  and  sent  Grosseling  with  a  letter  to  Prince 
Rupert,  an  enterprising  individual,  always  ready  to  patronise  any 
public-spirited  scheme.  Prince  Rupert,  representing  to  the  King 
the  fair  promise  of  this  undertaking,  obtained  the  grant  of  a  ship, 
with  which  Captain  Zechariah  Gillam,  accompanied  by  Grosse- 
ling, set  sail  in  the  summer  of  1668.  Gillam,  in  September  of 
that  year,  arrived  in  Hudson's  Bay,  and  entering  a  river  to  which 
he  gave  the  name  of  Rupert,  erected  a  small  stone-fort,  which  he 
named  Fort  Charles,  but  which  did  not  ultimately  become  a 
leading  position.  Next  year  the  Prince  obtained  from  Charles  a 
charter  in  favour  of  himself  and  nine  other  persons,  conferring  an 
exclusive  right  to  form  settlements  and  carry  on  trade  in  Hud- 
son's Bay.  This  corporation,  founded  upon  principles  then  pre- 
valent but  which  have  been  renounced  in  most  other  instances, 
remains  in  its  utmost  force,  and  continues  to  shut  this  part  of  the 
dominions  of  Great  Britain  against  the  great  body  of  our  people." 
— Hugh  Murray's  Historical  Account  of  Discoveries  and  Travels 
in  North  America,  vol.  i.  p.  132. 


1672.]      PRINCE  RfcPERT  AND  THE   CAVALIERS.       495 

lifetime,  but  fell  into  disuse  soon  afterwards,  for 
want  of  skilful  superintendance.  Except  in  these 
transactions  we  hear  nothing  of  our  hero,  either 
in  the  political  or  scandalous  chronicles  of  the 
time.  From  politics  he  still  kept  aloof,  disdain- 
ing to  share  the  most  weak  and  wicked  counsels 
of  the  Cabal.  He  hunted  in  the  Royal  forests,  and 
"  was  much  beloved  by  all  the  county  gentlemen  of 
Berks  ; "  he  also  seems  to  have  amused  himself  with 
a  yacht,  the  sale  of  which  is  accounted  for  by  his 
executor,  Lord  Craven,  in  1682.  I  do  not  know 
from  what  sources  his  income  was  derived,  besides 
the  sum  of  thirty  thousand  rix  dollars  which  he 
had  obtained  from  the  Emperor  of  Austria.  A 
relative  in  Germany  left  him  some  property  later  in 
life,  to  which  his  son  Dudley  Bard  succeeded.  His 
English  income  consisted  of  £1500  a  year,  paid  by 
the  Crown  for  all  his  past  and  present  services ;  he 
had  a  house  in  the  Barbican,  and  another  in  Spring 
Gardens,  in  which  he  died,  which  was  only  recently 
pulled  down.  He  had  also  a  house  in  Rhenen  (on  the 
continent)  which  Bulstrode  says  he  was  in  the  habit 
of  lending  to  his  friends.  For  himself,  he  never  left 
England  again,  except  to  fight  her  battles  on  the 
sea. 

With  one  more  fight  his  history  concludes,  and  it 
shall  be  told  in  the  language  and  the  spirit  of  the 
time.  When  the  last  Dutch  war  broke  out  in  1 672, 
the  Duke  of  York  was  incapacitated  from  service  by 
the  Test  Act,  and  the  brave  but  unfortunate  Earl  of 


496    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

Sandwich  had  fallen  a  martyr  to  his  sense  of 
honour,  which  was  wounded  by  a  sneer  from  his 
Royal  Highness.1  None  of  the  other  old  Admirals 
were  forthcoming,  and  Rupert  once  more  left  his 
peaceful  laboratory  for  the  quarterdeck.  "  Though 
too  wise,"  says  the  Naval  Historian,  "  to  be  fond 
of  such  a  service,  he  was  yet  too  honest  and  brave 
a  man  to  neglect  his  duty." 

The  following  narration  of  the  expedition  is  taken 
from  one  of  those  pamphlets  in  the  British  Museum 
that  are  almost  as  rare  as  autographs.  The  style  is 
somewhat  diffusive  and  verbose,  but  the  story  is 
plainly  visible  through  all  its  ornaments. 

An  exact  Relation  of  the  several  Engagements  and 
Actions  of  his  Majesty's  fleet,  under  the  com- 
mand of  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert,  &c.,  1673. 

"  I  perceive  that  through  the  heat  of  men's  mani- 
fold contradictions  both  in  Court  and  City,  the  story 
of  the  whole  matter  is  told  only  as  this  and  the 
other  faction  or  affection  would  have  it,  by  which 
means  the  truth  of  things  hath  been  hidden  from 
his  Majesty,  and  is  like  to  be  from  the  Parliament 
and  people  of  England,  unless  there  stand  forth 
some  faithful  relator. 

"After  a  continuation  of  the  war  this  last  summer 
with  the  United  Provinces  had  been  resolved  on  by 

1  See  Campbell's  Admirals,  ii.  236  ;  see  also  Pepys's  Diary. 


1672.]       PRINCE    RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       497 

his  Majesty,  the  next  thing  to  be  thought  on  was 
the  appointing  a  commander-in-chief  over  the  fleet 
that  should  be  sent  forth  ;  and  concerning  the  per- 
son, though  all  men  judged  the  employment  of 
course  might  continue  in  the  hands  of  his  Royal 
Highness  the  Duke  of  York,  as  Lord  High  Admiral 
of  England,  yet  upon  weighty  reasons  of  State,  it 
was  at  length  thought  best  for  the  good  of  this 
kingdom,  which  is  highly  concerned  in  the  safety 
of  the  heir-apparent  of  the  Crown,  that  at  present 
his  Royal  Highness  should  be  excused  from  running 
any  further  hazard  of  his  person  in  so  dangerous  a 
service ;  he  having  already  too  often  exposed  him- 
self at  sea  with  high  courage  and  resolution.  And 
therefore  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert  being  nomi- 
nated as  the  next  fittest  person  to  undertake  that 
command,  his  Majesty  was  pleased  to  resolve  there- 
upon. And  with  this  his  Majesty's  purpose  there 
immediately  ensued  a  marvellous  concurrence  of 
the  people's  affection  in  city  and  country,  all  over 
the  kingdom,  as  well  in  regard  of  the  Royal  stock 
from  whence  his  Highness  sprang,  as  of  his  high 
courage,  conduct,  and  long  experience  in  affairs 
military  by  sea  and  land,  in  this,  and  many  other 
nations ;  but  yet  more  in  respect  of  his  tried  con- 
stancy to,  and  zeal  for,  the  Reformed  Protestant 
profession  of  religion,  and  all  the  interests  thereof, 
for  the  sake  whereof  he  and  his  Royal  family  had 
long  suffered  the  utmost  extremity.  The  sense 
whereof  was  that  which  chiefly  moved  the  hearts  of 

VOL.  III.  K   K 


498         MEMOIRS   AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

the  people  to  rejoice  in  his  Majesty's  assignation  of 
that  most  illustrious  Prince ;  it  being  at  such  a  time 
when  the  Parliament  had  taken  cognisance  of  the 
confidence  and  insolence  of  the  Popish  party ;  many 
of  which  being  crept  into  places  of  trust  and  com- 
mand, gave  an  universal  jealousy  to  the  kingdom, 
insomuch  that  his  Majesty  and  the  Parliament  saw 
it  necessary,  for  the  breaking  of  their  strength  and 
confidence,  to  put  an  universal  test  upon  all  men 
that  held  any  public  office  or  employ  by  sea  or  land, 
in  order  to  the  removing  of  all  such,  as  not  sub- 
mitting to,  should  be  found  Popishly  affected.  But 
yet,  notwithstanding  this  general  approbation  and 
applause  of  the  commander-in-chief,  there  were  a 
generation  of  men  of  another  mind,  who,  having 
found  all  their  arts  and  endeavours  of  diverting  his 
Majesty  from  this  choice  to  be  in  vain,  tacked  about 
to  the  old  trick  of  State,  of  devising  how  underhand 
to  take  off  the  chariot-wheels  of  the  Prince's  expe- 
dition, and  to  clap  on  dead  weight  to  retard  him ; 
and  so  to  handle  the  matter  among  all  sorts  of  navy 
and  sea-officers,  that  partly  defect  of  due  prepara- 
tion, furniture,  and  supplies  might  disable  him, 
partly  the  ill-timing  of  every  requisite  ;  and,  finally, 
the  starting  of  interests,  discontents,  and  little  feuds 
in  the  fleet,  might  render  the  whole  enterprise  of  no 
more  effect  than  might  just  suit  with  their  own 
ends,  and  if  possible  bring  back  the  Prince  with  no 
more  victory  than  what  might  please  them,  and 
their  accomplices.  In  order  hereunto,  it  is  worth 


1672.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      499 

the  while  to  consider  how  pat  things  were  laid  and 

fell  out ;   for  our  preparations  were  so  delayed  that 

the  Dutch  got  their  fleet  out  before  us ;  and  after 

we  were  in  part  ready,  it  was  towards  the  end  of 

April  before  the  Prince  could  get  his  commission 

and  instruction  to  act  by  them ;  so  that  the  Dutch 

having  a  design  to  sink  sinkers  between  the  middle 

grounds,  to  spoil  the  going  of  our  ships  out  and  into 

the  river,  were  very  near  the  effecting  of  it ;  and 

had  done  it,  but  that  his  Highness  suspecting  it, 

with  much  industry  got  together  as  many  of  the 

fourth  and  fifth  rate  ships  as  he  could,  and  some 

fire-ships,   with   which  he  went  quickly   out,    and 

defeated  the  mischief  they  intended. 

"  Which  gallant  action  of  his  Highness  deserves 
so  much  the  greater  estimation,  seeing  never  any 
Prince  went  forth  upon  a  war  for  the  public  good, 
and  the  honour  of  any  nation,  under  the  greater 
discouragements.  For,  some  persons  of  high  trust 
under  his  Majesty  had  such  an  influence  upon 
affairs,  that  when  they  could  no  longer  hinder  the 
issuing  forth  of  his  Highness's  commission,  they 
took  care  so  to  qualify  and  curtail  it,  that  they  left 
him  not  power  to  make  so  much  a[s]  one  officer  in 
the  whole  fleet,  unless  he  could  upon  request  obtain 
the  favour  so  to  do. 

"  And  when  his  Majesty  in  his  Royal  wisdom 
thought  fit  to  give  him  a  commission  to  raise  a 
maritime  regiment,  which  was  to  have  been  paid 
out  of  the  establishment  of  Ireland  by  my  Lord 

K    K    2 


500          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

Ranelagh,  they  presently  cast  about  how  to  frustrate 
this  order  of  the  King's,  and  thereupon  offered  so 
specious  reasons  for  it  to  his  Royal  Highness  the 
Duke  of  York,  that  he  was  thereby  induced  to 
divert  his  Majesty's  purpose  in  that  matter.  So 
there  was  an  end  of  this  commission. 

"As  for  seamen,  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  though  the 
Prince  made  it  his  business  to  urge  the  getting  of 
them  betimes;  yet,  notwithstanding  all  his  solicita- 
tions, the  order  for  impressing  of  seamen  could  not 
be  got  till  it  was  very  late,  so  that  it  was  the  month 
of  March  before  the  press  began,  though  in  the  pre- 
cedent year  it  began  as  early  as  November.  But 
though  it  was  this  year  so  late  as  March,  yet  even 
then,  matters  were  so  carried,  that  it  was  impossible 
for  his  Highness  to  be  sufficiently  manned,  seeing 
the  press- warrants  were  of  little  effect,  being  checked 
by  protections  which  had  before  been  granted  to 
thousands  of  seamen,  and  fishermen,  and  watermen 
that  would  have  made  good  seamen.  Nevertheless, 
his  Highness  abating  no  whit  of  his  affection  and 
zeal  for  his  Majesty  and  the  nation's  service,  resolved 
to  break  through  all  discouragements ;  and  as  ill- 
accommodated  as  he  was,  seeing  the  Dutch  fleet  were 
got  out,  braving  it  upon  our  coast,  did  with  all  ex- 
pedition hasten  forth  to  sea  :  being  fed  at  least,  and 
set  forward  with  some  empty  promises  that  seamen 
and  necessaries  should  be  sent  after  him,  which 
proved  at  length  to  be  but  a  miserable  slur  put  upon 
so  high  a  commander ;  and  all  other  things  miser- 


1072.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      501 

ably  suited,  when  after  it  drew  on  to  the  point  of 
action,  as  will  appear  in  the  ensuing  part  of  this 
relation." 

"  For  on  the  27th  day  of  May,  which  was  the  day 
before  our  first  engagement  with  the  enemy,  when 
his  Highness  perceived  they  would  not  admit  of  a 
fight  in  fair  sea  room,  but  kept  to  their  advantage, 
riding  within  the  sands  at  Schonevelt,  he,  according 
to  a  resolve  of  a  Council  of  War,  his  Majesty  pre- 
sent, like  a  magnanimous  Prince,  resolved  to  fight 
them  in  that  very  place,  rather  than  permit  them  to 
wear  away  the  summer  with  longer  delays,  which 
they  seemed  mainly  to  intend ;  which  is  the  highest 
proof  of  courage,  the  like  action  having  never  been 
attempted  in  that  station  before.  So  all  the  sands 
having  been  sounded  some  days  before,  and  it  having 
been  concluded  at  a  Council  of  War  held  on  board 
the  Royal  Charles,  to  attack  the  enemy  riding  there 
at  anchor  in  a  line  between  the  Road  and  the  Stony 
Bank,  his  Highness  on  the  28th  day,  about  nine 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  commanded  the  firing  of  a 
gun,  upon  which  we  loosed  our  fore-top-sail  and 
weighed,  and  hoisted  the  Union  Flag  on  the  mizen- 
peak,  which  is  the  signal  to  sail  on  towards  the 
enemy.  This  was  accordingly  obeyed  by  a  squadron 
that  was  ordered  out  of  the  several  divisions  of  the 
fleet,  consisting  in  all  of  thirty-five  frigates,  and 
thirteen  fire-ships,  who  went  with  an  easy  sail,  the 
wind  at  S.S.W.  In  the  meanwhile  the  body  of  the 
French,  all,  except  some  who  straggling  got  into 


502          MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

our  division,  did  indeed  behave  themselves  very 
gallantly,  made  little  or  no  sail,  but  kept  in  the 
rear  of  us,  though  they  saw  the  Hollander  stretch  it 
to  the  northward.  Then  the  Prince  put  forth  the 
red  flag  on  the  fore-top-mast  head,  so  all  our  com- 
manded ships  went  ahead,  and  by  twelve  o'clock 
at  noon  engaged  the  enemy's  van,  commanded  by 
Van  Tromp.  The  Prince  himself  also  engaged  two 
hours  before  the  French,  in  which  time  we  so  pressed 
Tromp,  that  he  was  forced  to  give  way,  and  retire 
as  far  as  the  sands  would  give  him  leave.  Then  the 
Count  d'Estres  and  the  French  squadron  became  at 
length  engaged  with  De  Ruyter,  which  prospered 
not  so  well,  for  they  bore  him  not  down,  but  rather 
left  him.  And  De  Ruyter,  not  to  be  behind  with 
them  in  kindness,  quitted  them,  and  came  to  his 
Highness,  whose  squadron  being  too  near  the  shore, 
was,  for  that  reason,  necessitated  to  stand  the  other 
way  to  such  degree,  that  had  it  not  been  for  fear  of 
the  shoals,  we  had  driven  them  into  their  harbours, 
and  given  his  Majesty  at  that  time  a  better  account 
of  them,  notwithstanding  the  ill  accommodations 
that  we  were  under,  more  particularly  in  the  Royal 
Charles,  his  Highness's  own  ship,  which  proved  so 
crank-sided,  and  fetched  so  much  water  in  at  the 
ports,  that  her  lower  tier  of  guns  could  not  be  made 
use  of,  though  it  was  a  very  easy  gale  that  we  had 
during  this  engagement,  the  issue  whereof  was,  that 
the  enemy  had  many  men  slain,  many  ships  disabled, 
and  some  destroyed,  yea,  and  De  Ruyter  and  Tromp 


1672.]       PRINCE   RUPERT  AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      503 

must  have  been  burnt  by  our  fire-ships,  had  they 
done  their  duty.  We  saw  two  ships  sunk.  The 
French  say  they  saw  one  burnt,  two  disabled,  and 
three  run  ashore.  The  loss  on  our  side  was  very  in- 
considerable, two  of  our  ships  being  only  disabled, 
viz.,  the  Cambridge  and  Resolution ;  very  few  com- 
mon men  were  lost,  and  only  these  officers,  Capt. 
Fowlis,  Capt.  Worden,  and  Capt.  Finch.  Colonel 
Hamilton  .had  his  leg  shot,  of  which,  returning 
home,  he  died  at  London.  All  the  rest  that  en- 
gaged came  off  very  bravely." 


From  this  narration,  which  embodies  the  Prince's 
remonstrance,  in  almost  his  own  words,  it  is  easy 
to  percejve  the  miserable  manner  in  which  the 
business  of  the  State  was  conducted  by  the  aban- 
doned Charles  and  his  contemptible  ministry.  That 
most  unkingly  Monarch  had  sold  himself  and  his 
people's  honour  into  the  hand  of  France ;  and  though 
compelled  to  use  the  services  of  his  gallant  cousin, 
and  his  fleet,  every  base  and  atrocious  artifice  was 
exerted  to  frustrate  their  best  efforts.  Rupert 
and  his  seamen  were  sent  forth,  like  Uriah, 
in  the  hope  that  they  might  perish,  and  leave 
Charles  to  the  unopposed  enjoyment  of  his  French 
alliance.  The  plot  was  defeated  by  the  gallantry 
of  its  destined  victims.  Prince  Rupert's  own  ship 
was  in  so  bad  a  condition,  that  she  was  scarcely 
kept  afloat,  yet  "  he  performed  wonders."  The  gal- 


504    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

lant  Earl  of  Ossory1  and  Sir  Edward  Spragge  dis- 
played extraordinary  conduct  and  courage,  and  Van 
Tromp  was  obliged  to  shift  his  flag  four  times  into 
the  following  strangely-named  ships :  "  from  the 
Golden  Lion  to  the  Prince  on  Horseback,  thence 
to  the  Amsterdam,  and  thence  to  the  Comet." 

The   battle   was  undecided.     A    few  days   later 
another  fight  took  place,  in  which  also  the  victory 
was  doubtful,  and  from  which  the  French  allies  stood 
quite  aloof.     On  the  8th  of  June   the  English  fleet 
returned  to  the  Nore,  and  Prince  Rupert  hastened 
to    London  to  report   his   actions.     His   energetic 
and   indignant  remonstrances   overcame    even    the 
apathy  and  treachery  of  Charles.     He  was  induced 
to    accompany    the    Prince    Admiral    to    the   dis- 
gracefully neglected  fleet ;  he  was  there  obliged  to 
read  with  own  eyes  the  causes  of  the  incapacity  and 
mutinous  nature  of  his  navy ;  he  was  even  shamed 
into   giving  orders  for  supply;    Rupert  saw  these 
orders  executed  on  the  spot ;  in  a  few  days  more  he 
was  again  at  sea,  and  alongside  the  enemy.     Again, 
the  French  fleet  was  in  attendance,  and  again  lay  by 
without  engaging.2     Again   the  Prince    fought  de- 


1  Whose  touching  yet  proud  elegy  his  father,  the  Marquis  of 
Ormond,  pronounced  in  these  words  soon  afterwards  :  "  I  would 
not  change  my  dead  Ossory  for  all  the  living  sons  in  Chris- 
tendom." 

2  It  may  be  easily  understood  how  fatal  the  effect  of  a  large, 
idle,  and  suspicious  fleet  must  have  been,  when  lying  by  to  watch 
the  issue  of  the  fight.     What,  too,  must  have  been  the  feelings 
of  the  combatants   when    the  following   anecdote   got   abroad  : 
"  What  can  the  French  have  been  about  ?"  said  one  Dutchman  to 


1673.]      PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE    CAVALIERS.      505 

sperately,  and  again  without  a  victory,  but  without 
defeat.  This  action  took  place  on  the  llth  of  Au- 
gust, 1673,  and  was  the  last  in  which  Rupert  ever 
served  his  unworthy  King.  Before  taking  leave  of  this 
subject  I  am  tempted  to  introduce  the  anecdote  re- 
lated in  the  note.1  It  throws  some  light  on  the  dif- 
ficulties and  impracticabilities  of  Rupert's  command. 


another.  "  Why,  you  fool,"  replied  the  other,  "  they  have  hired 
the  English  to  fight  for  them,  and  all  their  -business  here  is  to  see 
that  they  earn  their  wages."  So  transparent  were  their  boasted 
politics. — Campbell,  ii.  159. 

1  "  And  here  a  characteristic  incident  took  place.     The  land 
forces   for  this  expedition  had  been  encamped  at  Blackheath 
under  M.  de  Schomberg,  afterwards  renowned  as  an  Anti-Jacobin 
general,  and  already,  it  appears,  suspected  by  the  Stuarts.    When 
the    Marshal   transferred  his   head-quarters   "  from  his  tent  on 
shore  to  his  galley  on  the  sea,"  he  selected  the  Greyhound  frigate 
for  his  accommodation  :  on  the  complaint  of  his  land-officers  that 
they  found  it  difficult  to  distinguish  the  general's  ship  amongst 
such  a  multitude,  M.  de  Schomberg  proposed  to  hoist  his  own 
standard,  no  doubt  a  broad  and  conspicuous  one.     He  inquired 
of  the  young  Duke  of  Buckingham  if  he  saw  any  objection,  and 
the  boyish  captain  referred  him  to  the  commander  of  the  ship. 
To  be  brief :  up  went  the  foreigner's  standard,  to  the  indignation 
and  amazement  of  Prince  Rupert,  who  fired  two  guns  to  attract 
the  Marshal's  attention  to  his  signal  for  lowering  the  obnoxious 
flag,  and  at  the  same  time  sent  an  officer  on  board  the  Greyhound 
with  peremptory  orders  to  remove  it.     M.  de  Schomberg,  jealous 
of  his  authority,  sent  the  captain  to  remonstrate,  and  meantime 
the  standard  continued  to  flaunt  above  the  fleet.     When  Rupert 
saw  this  officer  come  on  board,  leaving  the  flag  still  floating  in 
defiance  of  his  orders,  he  ordered  him  "  to  be  clapped  into  the 
bilboes,"  and  sailing  up  to  the  Greyhound,  threatened  to  sink  her 
on  the  moment  unless  he  were  obeyed.     The  flag  quickly  disap- 
peared, and  the  Prince  and  the  Marshal  sent  mutual  complaints 
of  this  transaction  to  the  King.     With  the  usual  imbecility  of 
his  mean  Council,  no  measures  were  taken  to  soothe  the  exaspe- 
rated feelings  of  either  commander  or  of  either  branch  of  the 
service.     The  Prince's  complaint  was  sulkily  disregarded,  and  De 
Schomberg  was  ordered  to  disembark  his  forces  at  Yarmouth, 
where  they  lay  idle  and  ineffective  all  the  summer." 


506    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

The  devoted  but  unfortunate  Prince  now  retired 
once  more  to  those  studies  and  pursuits  that  had 
so  often  consoled  him  under  such  reverses  and 
disappointments  as  it  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  few 
persons  to  suffer  in  uninterrupted  succession. 

He  had  now  ample  leisure  to  look  back  upon  his 
varied  life,  with  all  its  sad  vicissitudes.  The  most 
daring  man  of  his  age,  he  had  outlived  almost  all  his 
brave  companions  in  arms : l  the  gallant  and  good 
Lord  Craven  alone  survived  him  of  his  earlier 
friends.2  His  sister,  the  Abbess  of  Maubuisson, 
was  still  living,  though  dead  to  him ;  but  the  Prin- 
cess Sophia  was  still  his  friend,  and  to  her  this  last 
letter  was  addressed  : — 

DU  PRINCE  RUPERT  A  LA  DUCHESSE  D'HANOVER,  SA  SGEUR. 

Le  porteur  de  la  presente,  le  Sir  Scelton,  Envoye  Extra- 
ordinaire de  sa  Majeste  notre  Roi  en  vos  quar tiers,  se 
fera  connaitre  mieux  par  son  merite.  II  m'a  assure  qu'il 

1  Of  these  I  shall  only  mention  two  of  the  most  dissimilar  in 
fate  and  character.     Honest  Will.  Legge,  whose  career  would  pre- 
sent one  of  the  most  interesting  biographies  in  our  history,  had 
died,  esteemed  and  honoured,  in  1680.     Goring  had  carried  his 
genius,  his  courage,  and  his  villainy  to  market  on  the  Continent, 
had  served  under  Spain,  and  finally  assumed  the  garb  of  a  Domi- 
nican friar,  and  died  in  a  con  vent- cell. 

2  He  was  executor  to  Prince  Rupert,  and  Combe  Abbey,  rich 
in  all  the  most  interesting  memorials  of  these  times,  still  bears 
witness  of  the  affection  with  which  its  noble  proprietor  was  re- 
garded   by   the  Palatine  family,    whom  he  had   so   generously 
befriended.     I  am  indebted  to  the  present  Earl  of  Craven  for  the 
perusal  of  his  ancestors'  accounts,  as  executor,  from  which  I  have 
made  the  extracts  that  conclude  this  work.     These  accounts  are 
beautifully   written,    and  ara  signed  by   Mrs.  Hughes  and  her 
daughter  Ruperta,   releasing  Lord  Craven   from  all  claims   on 
Prince  Rupert's  estate. 


1681.]    PRINCE   RUPERT  AND  THE  CAVALIERS.        507 

est  fort  porte  pour  les  interests  de  notre  maison,  et  je  ne 
doute  pas  qu'il  ne  suive  ses  instructions,  et  ne  vous  donne 
toute  sorte  de  satisfaction.  Je  vous  assure  que  je  le 
trouve  fort  bonne  te  homme,  et  je  ne  doute  aucunement 
que  vous  n'en  soyez,  satisfaite.  II  vous  pourra  dire  les 
nouvelles  de  ce  lieu,  et  ainsi  je  ne  vous  en  ecrirai  point. 
Je  vous  dirai  seulement  qu'il  y  a  beaucoups  de  gens  qui 
serait  bien  aises  de  1'affaire  de  Monsieur  le  Due  votre  fils 
derechef  sur  pied.1  Peutetre  cet  envoye  vous  en  dira 
quelque  chose  lequel  je  vous  recommende,  et  suis  a  jamais 
a  vous  et  a  vos  services,  chere  sceur.  RUPERT.2 

A  Whitehall,  le  4e  Decembre,  1681. 

1  Savoir  le  mariage  du  Roi  George  avec  la  Princesse  Anne, 
ensuite  Reine. 

2  Gargan,  Receuil  des  Pieces  ;  Collection  of  MSS.  presented  by 
George  IV.  to  the  British  Museum,  940,  272,  A. 

The  subjoined  gleanings  may  also  possess  some  interest : — 

Received  of  Richard  Mounteney,  Esq.,  the  sum  of  threescore 
pounds  for  one  year's  creation-money,  due  to  me  at  Michaelmas 
last  past.  I  say  received  this  16th  of  January,  1676,  <£60. 

..;  RUPERT. 

This  is  a  true  copy  of  the  original,  in  the  last  payment 
made  to  his  Highness  for  his  creation-money.  Certified  this 
17th  December,  1679,  for  my  father. 

Per  R.  MOUNTENEY,  Jun. 

I  have  not  made  any  payment  to  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert 
for  creation-money.  Certified  this  17th  of  December,  1679. 

RICHARD  KENT. 

Received  of  Thomas  Bennett,  Esq.,  the  sum  of  fifteen 
hundred  pounds,  being  in  full  of  my  two  pensions  due  unto 
me  at  Lady-day  last  the  date  hereof.  I  say  received  this 
twenty-fourth  day  of  May,  one  thousand  six  hundred  and  seventy- 
nine,  £1500. 

Per  me,     RUPERT. 
SIR  ROBERT  VYNER, 

I  desire  you  to  deliver  thirty  ounces  of  gilt  plate  for  his 
Highness  Prince  Rupert,  his  new  year's  gift,  as  Vice-Admiral  of 
England  for  this  year,  1676. 

Your  servant, 

THOMAS  TYNDALE. 
Jewel  House,  March  20,  1676. 


508    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

Henceforth,  Prince  Rupert's  name  does  not  ap- 
pear in  any  historical  document.  In  public  he  was 
scarcely  ever  seen,  except  when  in  attendance  at 
the  Board  of  Trade,  of  which  he  was  an  active  and 
zealous  member.  He  was  also  Governor  of  the 
Hudson's  Bay  Company.  He  was  long  celebrated 
as  the  "  seaman's  friend,"  and  as  the  generous 
patron  "  of  all  learned,  ingenious,  and  public 
spirited  persons.1"  He  was  even  accused  of  too 
far  encouraging  projectors  in  what  were  then 
called  visionary  pursuits,  though  now  familiar  and 
prosperous  branches  of  industry. 

"  In  respect  to  his  private  life,  he  was  so  just,  so 
beneficent,  so  courteous,  that  his  memory  remained 
dear  to  all  who  knew  him.  This  I  say,"  continues 
the  narrator  of  his  late  exploits,  "  of  my  own  know- 
ledge, having  often  heard  old  people  in  Berkshire 
speak  in  raptures  of  PRINCE  RUPERT."  J 

In  1681  I  find  the  following  anecdote :  it  is  the 
last  trace  that  I  have  discovered  of  this  straight- 
forward and  honourable  man  in  public  life : — 

"  Mr.  Speke,  the  father  of  that  Speke  who  took  a 
lead  in  promoting  the  Revolution  of  1688,  being  in 
1681  elected  knight  of  the  shire  for  Somersetshire, 
in  opposition  to  the  influence  of  the  Court,  a  libel- 
lous charge  was  made  against  him  by  those  who 
wished  to  gain  favour  there,  by  which  he  was 
accused  of  having  asserted  that  '  he  would  have 

1  Campbell's  Admirals,  ii.  230. 


1681.]      PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.      509 

40,000  men  to  assist  the  Duke  of  Monmouth  against 
the  Duke  of  York  whenever  there  should  be  occa- 
sion.' Upon  which  he  was  by  a  warrant  from  the 
Secretary  of  State  summoned  before  the  Council 
Chamber,  where  he  was  attended  by  several  of  the 
nobility  and  gentry  of  the  West  of  England  to  the 
number  of  forty  and  upwards.  He  then  made  his 
defence,  with  the  spirit  becoming  an  English  gentle- 
man, in  the  presence  of  the  King  and  Prince  Ru- 
pert, putting  the  King  in  mind  of  his  faithful  ser- 
vices to  the  Royal  cause,  and  declaring  that  he  never 
had  or  would  be  concerned  in  any  action  unworthy 
of  his  former  character  and  loyal  behaviour,  yet  he 
never  would  violate  the  obligation  he  conceived 
himself  to  be  under  to  his  country,  and  would,  there- 
fore, firmly  oppose  a  Popish  succession. 

"Prince  Rupert  then  stood  up,  and  desired  the 
favour  of  the  King  that  Mr.  Speke  might  be  or- 
dered to  withdraw;  which  being  done,  his  Highness 
confirmed  all  that  Mr.  Speke  had  said  of  his  faithful 
services  to  the  Crown ;  and  added  one  circumstance 
more,  which  Mr.  Speke  thought  would  not  have 
seemed  handsome  to  mention.  He  told  the  King 
that  when  he  was  at  the  siege  of  Bridgewater,  in  the 
greatest  difficulties  for  want  of  money,  Mr.  Speke 
sent  him  one  thousand  broad  pieces,  of  which  he 
was  so  far  from  soliciting  the  reimbursement  that 
he  had  not  seen  or  heard  from  him  since  that  time. 
He  further  suggested  what  advice  he  thought  proper 
to  give  him  on  that  occasion,  upon  which  that  false 


510         MEMOIRS   AND   CORRESPONDENCE   OF 

accusation  was  dismissed,  and  the  next  morning 
after  the  Prince  sent  one  of  his  gentlemen,  Mr. 
Doucet,  to  invite  Mr.  Speke  to  dine  with  him,  which 
honour  he  accepted,  and  was  received  and  enter- 
tained in  the  most  obliging  manner  by  his  High- 
ness.1 " 

The  brief  remainder  of  Prince  Rupert's  existence 
was  passed  in  tranquillity  and  retirement ;  a  calm 
and  quiet  evening  closing  in  after  his  life's  stormy 
day.  The  philosophical  veteran  is  still  visible  to 
our  imagination,  as  he  dwelt  in  the  Old  Tower  at 
Windsor,  surrounded  with  armour,  and  strange  im- 
plements, and  strange  old  books.  The  walls  were 
hung  over  with  maps  of  countries  that  he  would 
have  visited,  and  plans  of  battles  that  he  might  have 
fought.  As  he  gazed  from  his  citadel  on  the  match- 
less scenery  that  surrounds  it,  he  could  trace  the 
course  of  many  a  midnight  march  and  bold  assault. 
He  had  seen  many  of  his  faithful  troopers  perish  on 
the  very  slopes  beneath  his  eyes  ;2  and  farther  off, 
to  the  very  horizon,  there  was  no  town  that  had  not 
echoed  to  the  tramp  of  his  bold  troopers,  no  church- 


1  Secret  History  of  the  Happy  Revolution,  1688,  by  the  prin- 
cipal transactor  in  it,  Hugh  Speke.    London,  1715. 

"  Hugh  Speke  was  a  young  man  of  good  family,  but  of  a  singu- 
larly base  and  depraved  nature.  His  love  of  mischief  and  of  dark 
and  crooked  ways  amounted  almost  to  madness.  To  cause  confu- 
sion without  being  found  out  was  his  business  and  his  pastime, 
and  he  had  a  rare  skill  in  using  honest  enthusiasts  as  the  instru- 
ments of  his  cold-blooded  malice." — Macaulay's  History  of  Eng- 
land, vol.  i.  p.  105. 

2  Vol.  ii.  pp.  50,  51-81,  &c. 


1681.]     PRINCE   RUPERT   AND  THE   CAVALIERS.        511 

tower  that  had  not  given  warning  of  his  march. 
Those  troopers  had  all  passed  away ;  the  very  name 
of  Cavalier  was  almost  forgotten;  the  cause  for 
which  they  had  fought  and  fallen  was  now  triumph- 
ant, yet  in  dishonour,  and  he,  their  leader,  was 
estranged,  if  not  exiled,  from  the  King  he  had 
served  too  well. 

Doubtless  the  Royal  recluse  had  ample  food  for 
his  meditation.  All  men  of  activity  in  youth  are 
thoughtful  in  their  age ;  retrospect  is  the  ruminat- 
ing of  the  mind,  whereby  memory  is  changed  into 
experience,  and  becomes  profitable  towards  a  future 
life,  either  in  this  world  or  the  next.  In  the  retro- 
spect of  Prince  Rupert's  life,  as  regarded  his  fellow- 
men,  there  was  little  to  visit  him  with  self-reproach; 
if  his  career  had  been  unprosperous,  it  had  been 
unstained  by  one  dishonourable  act:  he 'had  striven 
manfully  to  perform  what  he  esteemed  to  be  his 
duty ;  in  council  and  in  camp  he  had  been  ever 
fearless  and  disinterested ;  he  had  endeavoured  to 
promote  the  prosperity  of  his  adopted  country  with 
grateful  solicitude  ;  and  when  the  country  and  the 
King  had  fallen  under  the  power  of  the  Cabal,  he 
had  retired  from  all  participation  in  the  disgraceful 
proceedings  that  he  was  unable  to  resist. 

"  When  impious  men  bear  sway. 
The  post  of  honour  is  a  private  station." 

And  that  station  he  was  contented  to  occupy  until 
the  hour  of  his  death. 


512    MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF 

Of  the  manner  in  which  his  later  days  were  past, 
we  can  only  judge  from  secondary  evidence.  His 
Executors'  accounts  1  prove  that  he  was  still  fond  of 
hunting ;  that  he  kept  a  small  and  unostentatious 
pack  of  hounds,  and  that  he  possessed  few  other 
luxuries.  He  was,  in  truth,  essentially  English 
in  his  nature,  in  his  principles,  and  even  in  his 
pursuits,  was  mindful  of  old  friends  and  old  ser- 
vants, and  even  of  old  horses.  He  appears  to  have 
seen  little  of  Mrs.  Hughes2  latterly,  and  to  have 
been  still  less  under  her  influence.  He  bequeathed 
her,  indeed,  the  half  of  his  personal  property,  but 
she  was  obliged  to  account  accurately  for  all  that 
she  already  possessed,  and  to  share  the  value  of  it 
with  her  daughter  Ruperta.  This  lady  married 
General  Howe,  and  Prince  Rupert's  blood  is  still 
continued  through  her  line  in  the  family  of  Sir 
Robert  Bromley.3 

On  the  29th  of  November,  1682,  Prince  Rupert 
died,  in  his  house  at  Spring  Gardens,  aged  sixty- 
three  :  his  death  was  caused  by  a  pleurisy  and 
fever.4  He  left  no  more  honest,  brave,  or  true- 
hearted  man  behind  him.5 


1  See  Appendix  JL,  at  the  end  of  the  volume. 

2  She  continued  on  the  stage  long  after  his  death. 

3  Admiral  Sir  Robert  Bromley,  Bart.,  of  Stoke  Park,  where 
there  are   some   fine  portraits,   bequeathed   by   Rupert   to  his 
daughter  :  from  one  of  these  the  engraving  in  the  frontispiece  to 
the  first  volume  is  taken. 

4  Historian's  Guide  (1701),  p.  148. 

5  1682. — Of  the  eminent  persons  that  died  this  year  we  shall 
begin  with  Prince  Rupert.     One,  of  whom  much  has  been  said 


1682.]    PRINCE   RUPERT   AND   THE   CAVALIERS.       513 

in  this  and  the  last  volume,  who,  after  innumerable  toils  and 
variety  of  heroic  actions  both  by  land  and  sea,  spent  several  years 
in  sedate  studies,  and  the  prosecution  of  chemical  and  philoso- 
phical experiments,  with  which  the  King  was  very  much  pleased 
and  delighted.  He  died  on  the  29th  of  November,  in  the  sixty- 
third  year  of  his  age,  generally  lamented ;  having  maintained 
such  good  temper  and  exact  neutrality  in  the  present  unhappy 
divisions,  that  he  was  honoured  and  respected  by  men  of  the  most 
differing  interests. — E 'chard's  History  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  1023. 


VOL.  III.  L    L 


515 


APPENDIX 


A. 

THE  following  important  document  is,  I  believe,  quite 
unknown.  It  purports  to  be  a  speech  intended  for  utter- 
ance in  the  House  of  Lords.  It  appears,  however,  to  have 
been  really  adapted  for  the  King's  private  perusal  only. 
It  contains  a  gentlemanlike  but  resolute  vindication  of 
great  service  rendered  to  the  Crown  of  England,  unre- 
compensed  by  the  late  King,  and  probably  unacknow- 
ledged by  his  Majesty,  to  whom  it  was  addressed.  It  will 
be  remembered  that  the  writer  was  the  Marquis  of  Wor- 
cester, who  published  the  "  Centenary  of  Invention."  I 
am  indebted  for  the  copy  of  it  to  the  kindness  of  the 
Duke  of  Beaufort. 

[The  italics  are  mine. — ED.] 

MAY  IT  PLEASE  YOUR  MOST  EXCELLENT  MAJESTY, 

SIRE, 

To  ease  your  Majesty  of  a  trouble  incident  to  a  pro- 
lixity of  speech  and  a  natural  defect  of  utterance  which  I 
accuse  myself  of,  I  have  presumed  here  to  set  down  sum- 
marily in  writing  what  I  desire,  if  your  Majesty  approve 
thereof,  to  speak  in  the  House  of  Lords,  whereby  your 
Majesty  may  gather  how  far  (some  things  being  rectified) 
I  am  confident  of  myself  to  serve  you,  praying  your 
Majesty's  favourable  construction  of  what  I  shall  en- 
deavour candidly  to  submit  unto  your  Majesty. 

In  the  first  place,  according  to  your  most  gracious  com- 
mands laid  upon  me  at  the  Hague,  when  I  offered  to 

L  L  2 


516  APPENDIX. 

make  my  Lord  Chancellor  privy  to  what  I  should  at  any 
time  presume  to  offer  to  your  Majesty's  transcendent 
judgment,  having  sufficiently  suffered  for  treating  with  the 
late  King,  of  happy  memory,  alone,  to  which  request  of 
mine  you  were  pleased  to  give  this  most  gracious  and 
never-to-be-forgotten  reply,  that,  notwithstanding  you 
would  have  me  first  to  acquaint  yourself  therewith,  and 
then  only  to  such  as  your  Majesty  should  consent  unto, 
and  think  proper  for  it :  in  pursuance  whereof  I  most 
humbly  offer  this  following  discourse,  which  I  shall  with 
a  most  ready  and  implicit  obedience  augment,  diminish, 
or  alter,  as  your  Majesty  shall  think  fittest ;  disputing 
nothing,  much  less  wavering  anything,  that  your  Majesty 
shall  command  either  as  to  substance  or  circumstance. 

MY  LORDS, 

Amongst  Almighty  God's  infinite  mercies  to  me  in 
this  world,  I  account  it  one  of  the  greatest  that  his  Divine 
goodness  vouchsafed  me  parents  as  well  careful  as  able  to 
give  me  virtuous  education,  and  extraordinary  breeding  at 
home  and  abroad,  in  Germany,  France,  and  Italy,  allow- 
ing me  abundantly  in  those  parts,  and  since  most  plenti- 
fully at  my  master  of  happy  memory,  the  late  King's 
Court,  by  which  means,  had  it  not  been  my  own  fault,  I 
ought  to  have  become  better  able  and  more  capable  to 
serve  Almighty  God,  my  King  and  country,  which  ob- 
ligatory ends  of  theirs  have  I  always  had  in  my  eyes,  as 
drawing  and  sucking  them  thence,  it  being  certainly  the 
greatest  and  surest  portions  parents  can  leave  to  their 
children,  since  breeding  and  knowledge  cannot  be  taken 
from  them,  when  as  riches  and  possessions  are  fading  and 
perishable,  witness  my  own  case,  my  Lords.  Yet  by  dear 
bought  experience  and  their  great  expenses,  for  which  I 
honour  the  happy  memory  of  my  most  beloved  parents, 
more  than  for  my  very  life,  drawn  from  them,  they  giving 
me  by  the  one  but  my  being,  and  by  the  other  my  bene 


APPENDIX.  517 

esse.  Whereby  I  find  nothing  more  certain  than  that  the 
way  to  make  oneself  considerably  useful  to  his  Prince  and 
nation,  is  the  surest  means  for  him  to  become  cherished  by 
them,  which  they  then  do  for  their  own  sake,  not  his,  though 
he  had  spent  and  lost  above  700,000/.  or  800,000/.  ster- 
ling ;  and  narrowly  escaped  several  times,  both  by  sea 
and  land,  imminent  dangers,  and  long  and  close  imprison- 
ment and  a  scaffold ;  threatening  death,  as  I  have  done, 
"Experto  crede  Roberto"  my  Lords  ;  yet  happy  is  this  day 
unto  me,  wherein  I  have  the  honour,  sitting  amongst  your 
Lordships,  to  express  from  my  heart  that  I  have  not  the 
least  repining  thought  within  me,  though  I  had  suffered 
ten  times  more  for  so  good  a  cause,  and  so  gracious  and 
obliging  a  master  as  the  late  King,  of  happy  memory,  was 
unto  me.  And  for  so  majestical  and  promising  a  Prince 
as  my  now  sovereign  is,  whom  God  long  preserve  ;  and, 
morally  speaking,  cannot  do  amiss,  whilst  he  hearkens  to 
so  wise  and  great  council,  and  so  tender  of  his  good  and 
welfare  as  your  Lordships,  assisted  by  so  discreet,  expe- 
rienced, and  well  affected  persons  as  sit  now  in  the 
honourable  House  of  Commons,  the  whole  kingdom's  re- 
presentatives. And  may  your  Lordships  be  ever  as  ten- 
der of  your  innate  privileges,  members,  and  birthrights, 
as  they  of  theirs,  and  both  of  you  equally  likewise  tender 
of  his  Majesty's  just  and  undoubted  prerogatives,  upon 
which  two  hinges,  or  rather  bases,  that  is  our  most  gra- 
cious King's  prerogatives  and  the  birthright  of  his  sub- 
jects, this  excellent  government  of  King  and  Parliament 
outvies  and  excels  all  other  in  the  world.  Let  them, 
therefore,  my  Lords,  hold  together  as  the  surest  props  of 
a  settled  kingdom,  his  Majesty's  power  consisting  in  no- 
thing more  than  in  the  greatness  of  your  Lordships,  who 
are,  as  well  by  Divine  Providence  as  human  policy,  al- 
lotted to  be  as  it  were  the  medium  between  the  King  and 
the  people  ;  that  is,  to  enterprize  yourselves  as  mediators 
if  the  King's  supreme  authority  should  become  severe, 


518  APPENDIX. 

which  cannot  be  feared  from  so  gracious  a  Prince,  as  also 
to  be  curbers  of  the  people's  rustic  stubbornness,  if  they 
should  prove  insolent,  which  cannot  likewise  happen  to  a 
nation  that  hath  so  lately  smarted  for  such  inconveniences, 
as,  had  the  Lord's  former  greatness  and  power  been  con- 
tinued in  them,  could  never  have  happened ;  for  as  I 
should  with  the  old  saying,  no  bishops,  no  king,  so  may 
I  boldly  aver  that  no  power  of  temporal  Lords  being  ex- 
tant, there  will  be  neither  bishop  or  king.  But  I  am  too 
tedious,  my  Lords ;  yet  what  I  further  shall  presume  to 
say,  will  need  no  eloquence,  being  upon  a  theme  pleasing, 
as  I  humbly  conceive,  to  the  minds  of  all  your  Lordships, 
there  being  none  of  you  whose  birth  brings  you  unto  this 
place  ;  but  so  much  generosity  possesses  your  hearts,  that 
you  conclude  and  harbour  a  firm  resolution  to  believe  and 
follow  that  noble  and  heroic  maxim,  "  Beatius  est  dare 
quam  accipere,"  since  "  Beneficium  accipere  est  libertatem 
vendere,"  a  thing  beneath  your  Lordships  ;  according,  then, 
to  which  maxim,  as  having  the  honour  to  be  a  member  of 
this  House,  esteeming  in  the  first  place  the  right  of  peer- 
age, even  before  the  titles  of  earl,  marquis,  or  duke  ;  as 
a  peer,  therefore,  I  say  of  this  House,  I  shall,  with  your 
Lordships'  approbation,  humbly  offer  a  present  unto  his 
most  gracious  Majesty,  our  most  gracious  Sovereign,  a 
present,  my  Lords,  which  cannot  be  done  without  you, 
and  fit  to  be  owned  by  a  House  of  Lords,  it  being  no 
less  than  to  raise  an  auxiliary  troop  for  his  Majesty's  Life- 
guard, of  an  hundred  horse,  and  commonly  called  in 
France  an  hundred  meistres  ;  that  is  each  cavalier  to  keep 
a  servant  with  a  led  horse,  as  well  as  his  own,  and  one  of 
them  to  be  worth  1001.  The  whole  troop  shall  amount 
the  first  day  unto  upwards  of  10,000£.,  besides  arms  and 
equipage  accordingly  ;  nay,  my  Lords,  every  one  of  this 
troop  shall  be  of  that  quality  and  power  as  to  be  capable 
to  raise  at  his  Majesty's  command  an  hundred  men  in 
fourteen  days  ;  and  at  the  entering  into  the  troop  shall 


APPENDIX.  519 

furnish  into  his  Majesty's  storehouse  one  hundred  foot- 
arms,  two  parts  in  fire-arms,  and  the  third  pikes,  at  his 
own  proper  cost  and  charges,  and  marked  by  him,  there 
to  be  kept  till  his  Majesty's  occasions  be  to  raise  men 
accordingly;  but  God  long  preserve  his  Majesty  from 
needing  of  them  ;  yet  if  at  any  time,  then  will  his  Ma- 
jesty have  in  readiness  at  a  fortnight's  warning  ten  thou- 
sand men,  without  costing  his  Majesty  or  the  kingdom 
sixpence,  till  they  be  raised  and  armed.  And  that  most 
worthy  nobleman,  the  Earl  of  Northampton,  who,  accord- 
ing to  the  Spanish  saying,  "  so  many  brothers  united  so 
many  castles,"  l  hath  approved  himself  to  be  such  in  gal- 
lantry and  strength  for  his  King  and  kingdom's  defence, 
is  desirous  and  willing  through  his  zeal  to  his  Majesty's 
service,  to  be  but  lieutenant  to  the  said  troop.  But  the 
whole  troop,  consisting  of  such  persons  qualified  as  above- 
mentioned,  volunteers,  and  not  serving  for  pay  or  gain, 
will  deservedly  require  not  to  be  put  upon  common  ser- 
vices, and  not  to  be  commanded  but  by  his  Majesty  or  his 
most  deserving  general  the  Duke  of  Albemarle,  and  they 
themselves  not  to  be  tied  to  daily  duties,  but  to  have 
liberty  to  substitute  some  gentleman  of  quality,  or  an 
experienced  officer,  to  serve  for  him  at  any  time  when  his 
Majesty  requires  not  his  personal  appearance,  and  that  the 
captain  of  the  troop  gives  way  unto  it.  I  presume,  my 
Lords,  to  nominate  my  Lord  of  Northampton  but  as 
second  to  me,  because  his  goodness  and  zeal  to  his  Ma- 
jesty's service  makes  his  lordship  contented  to  give  me 
the  precedence  as  Captain,  though  far  less  worthy,  and 
shall  indeed  be  but  a  servant  to  his  lordship  and  the  rest 
of  the  troop,  in  order  to  his  Majesty's  command,  and  the 
welfare  of  his  tenderly  beloved  people.  The  rest  of  the 
troop  shall  be  nominated  when  your  Lordships  shall  ap- 

1  The  Earl  of  Northampton,  who  fell  at  Hopton  Heath,  left  five  sons 
in  arms  for  the  King.  The  young  Earl  fought  as  gallantly  as  his  father 
for  the  cause. 


520  APPENDIX. 

prove  of  the  motion,  and  his  Majesty  vouchsafe  an  accept- 
ance thereof ;  they  shall  all  of  them  be  approved  persons 
in  zeal,  loyalty,  and  allowed  by  you,  and  do  ambition  the 
honour  of  being  called  a  troop  of  the  House  of  Lords, 
and  being  so  termed,  and  most  of  them  your  members,  I 
dare  without  vanity  affirm  that  no  King  in  Christendom 
but  may  boast  of  such  a  troop  ;  and  it  will  not  only  be  a 
safety  to  his  Majesty's  person,  but  an  honour  to  the 
whole  nation,  and  an  evident  testimony  of  your  Lordship's 
constant  loyalty  and  zeal  to  both  King  and  kingdom,  and 
will  keep  up  the  honour  of  this  House,  and  not  subject 
again  to  be  thrust  out  of  doors  ;  and  I  beseech  your  Lord- 
ships that  I  may  be  rightly  understood,  for  it  is  my  duty 
to  his  Majesty,  and  the  honour  I  bear  to  this  House,  and 
not  the  ambition  of  being  Captain  of  the  said  troop,  that 
makes  me  to  motion  the  raising  thereof;  for  as  I  acknow- 
ledge that  there  are  many  greater  persons  in  the  House, 
as  well  titular  as  real,  in  merit  and  power,  any  of  whom,  if 
they  please  to  undertake  it,  I  shall  with  more  joy  and 
readiness  serve  as  a  trooper  therein,  than  to  have  the  com- 
mand thereof. 

My  second  humble  offer  is  disposable  by  your  Lord- 
ships, is  at  my  own  cost  and  charges,  but  under  your 
Lordships'  name  and  approbation  ;  and  out  of  the  accru- 
ing profits  of  my  Water-commanding  Engine,  to  cause  to 
be  erected  a  competent  ordinary,  affording  as  well  wine 
as  meat,  for  one  meal  a  day,  for  forty  indigent  officers, 
such  as  the  calamity  of  the  late  times  have  brought  to  so 
pressing  necessities,  as  none  of  your  Lordships,  I  am  con- 
fident, but  is  very  sensible  thereof,  especially  of  such 
persons  who — had  not  their  zeal  to  their  King  and  coun- 
try transported  them  —  might  have  lived  plentifully  of 
their  own;  yet  if  your  Lordships'  commiserating  eyes 
look  not  speedily  upon  them,  may  follow  the  destiny  of 
some  others  of  qualitive,  yea  colonels,  and  never  were 
under  my  command ;  yet  I  never  made  distinction  when 


APPENDIX.  521 

his  Majesty's  honour  or  service  was  interested,  or  his  well- 
deserving  subjects  suffered,  and  were  within  my  power  of 
relief,  for  whose  burials  it  hath  been  my  good  fortune  to 
pay ;  they  not  leaving  behind  them  to  the  value  of  an 
angel ;  and  I  humbly  conceive  this  act  of  charity  worthy 
your  Lordships'  owning,  since  your  Lordships'  cheerfully 
passing  the  act  of  my  Water-commanding  Engine  ena- 
bleth  me  thereunto  ;  and  I  most  humbly  offer  this  little 
testimony  of  gratitude,  to  be  under  your  name  thus  em- 
ployed. And  I  intend  there  shall  be  so  good  order  given 
therein,  within  six  months,  as  that  there  shall  be  a  stipend 
given  to  a  person  to  read  unto  them  during  their  meals, 
either  of  military  affairs  or  history,  the  better  to  avoid  fri- 
volous discourse  tending  to  quarrels  and  quaffing. 

Thirdly,  in  favour  and  benefit  of  the  commonalty  as 
well  as  your  Lordships,  and  for  the  general  good  and  ho- 
nour of  this  most  famous  City  of  London,  I  most  hum- 
bly offer,  under  your  Lordship's  name  and  protection,  to 
cause  a  fair  causeway  to  be  made,  upon  which,  without 
disturbance,  two  carts  may  pass  one  by  the  other,  for  two 
miles  together,  at  four  of  the  greatest  avenues  to  the  City, 
as  the  Lord  Mayor  and  Aldermen  shall  best  advise  ;  and 
at  the  end  of  each  of  the  four  causeways,  an  hospital  and 
house  of  correction,  to  be  erected  and  endowed  with  a 
perpetuity  of  five  hundred  pounds  a-year  to  each  house ; 
and  this  pious  work  to  begin  within  two  years,  and  to  be 
finished  within  seven. 

Fourthly — and,  indeed,  I  should  have  begun  with  it, 
according  to  the  true  rule,  "  A  Jove  principium," — I  do 
humbly  offer,  in  honour  of  this  house,  to  cause  one  thou- 
sand pounds  a-year,  for  ten  years,  from  Michaelmas  come 
twelvemonth,  to  be  allotted  towards  the  building  of  Paul's, 
according  as  his  Grace  the  Lord  Archbishop  of  Canter- 
bury, and  the  Bishop  of  London  and  now  Bishop  of 
Winchester,  together  with  the  Dean  and  Chapter  of  St. 
Paul's,  shall  set  forth  and  may  continue : — a  memorable 


522  APPENDIX. 

gift  from  the  House  of  Lords.  And  thus,  I  humbly  con- 
ceive, to  have  offered  an  acknowledgment  of  thankfulness 
both  to  his  Majesty,  and  to  your  Lordships,  Spiritual  and 
Temporal,  and  for  the  honourable  House  of  Commons, 
for  passing  the  act  of  my  Water-commanding  Engine  ; 
and  to  improve  this  my  humble  thankfulness,  shall  be  my 
daily  exercise  and  study,  no  ways  meaning  that  what  here 
I  offer  shall  set  a  period  thereunto,  so  as  your  Lordships 
will  be  pleased  to  set  your  helping  hands  to  remove  some 
misconstructions  and  personal  inconveniences,  which,  if 
not  diverted  from  my  mind,  and  from  a  too  generally  re- 
ceived opinion,  though  upon  false  grounds,  and  not  appear- 
ing otherwise  than  false ;  I  beseech  your  Lordships  to  be 
so  tender  of  a  member  of  yours,  as  to  contribute  to  the 
vindicating  me  therein,  whereof  no  ways  doubting  but 
that  your  Lordships  will  remove  such  an  absolute  remora 
to  all  my  intended  services  ;  and,  therefore,  I  will  pre- 
sume to  lay  my  case  openly  and  cheerfully  before  you, 
not  doubting  but  that,  at  your  Lordships'  intercessions, 
his  most  gracious  Majesty  —  having  given  way  that  I 
should  speak  thus  before  your  Lordships — will  vouchsafe 
a  concurrence,  and  suffer  himself  to  be  disabused,  and 
such  false  and  malicious  opinions  to  be  eradicated  out  of 
his  princely  mind,  as  have  been  endeavoured,  by  either 
envy,  malice,  or  ignorance,  to  be  rooted  therein,  and  so 
certainly  have  obstructed  the  natural  influence  of  grace 
and  favour,  which  could  not  otherwise  but  have  been  the 
effects  of  so  great  a  Sun  as  shines  within  a  throne  of  so 
much  goodness  and  majesty.  Now,  whether  my  merits 
have  been  considerable,  I  beg  leave  here  to  set  down,  not 
as  a  trumpet  to  proclaim  them,  but  narrative  wise,  mo- 
destly, yet  truly,  for  your  Lordships'  better  information, 
amusing  myself  in  some  things  with  the  same  candour 
and  freedom  as  to  vindicate  myself,  in  others  desiring  to 
stand  or  fall  by  your  Lordships'  just  judgment,  and  his 
Majesty's  gracious  proceeding  therein  ;  no  further  rely- 


APPENDIX.  523 

ing  even  upon  his  Majesty's  most  gracious  act  of  general 
pardon,  than  in  compliance  with  others.  His  Majesty's 
subjects  have  taken  it  out,  yet  with  so  great  a  reluctance, 
through  the  clearness  of  my  heart,  not  to  have  deserved 
for  it,  that  the  Lord  upon  the  Woolsack  was  forced  to 
chide  me  to  it,  through  his  tenderness  of  my  good,  and, 
as  I  humbly  conceive,  a  further  apprehension  than  I 
could  have  of  a  necessity  thereof ;  for  which  his  tender 
care  I  acknowledge  thankfulness,  yet,  at  the  same  time, 
I  must  humbly  ask  leave  to  stand  upon  my  justification, 
humbly  praying  to  be  rightly  understood,  for  I  do  it  not 
out  of  pride  or  vain  glory,  but  purely  "Me  defen- 
dendo,"  and  if  any  body,  "  Se  defendendo,"  kills  an- 
other, the  law  quits  him,  much  more  will  your  Lordships 
pronounce  me  not  guilty  of  arrogance,  though  I  should 
arrogate  to  myself  a  praiseworthy  desert,  and  not,  through 
too  much  modesty,  be  mealy-mouthed,  and  not  discover 
what  of  right  appertains  to  the  blessed  memory  of  my 
dead  father,  and  even  my  own  commendations,  crying 
with  Virgil,  "  Sic  vos  non  vobis  nidificatis  aves  ;  sic  vos 
noil  vobis  vellera  fertis  oves ;  sic  vos  non  vobis  fertis 
aratraboves  ;  sic  vos  non  vobis  mellificatis  apes."  Know, 
then,  my  noble  Lords,  that  here  I  speak  not  to  derogate 
from  the  merit  of  the  Roman  Catholics  from  their  duty 
and  love  to  their  Sovereign,  we  having  all  of  us,  with  an 
unanimous  resolution,  nem.  con.,  that  is  to  say,  no  one 
gentleman  of  quality  throughout  the  whole  nation,  but 
has  stuck  to  the  cause,  adventuring  his  life,  and  lost  his 
whole  fortune  therein ;  yet  give  me  leave  to  aver  it, 
boldly,  that  all  the  Catholics  of  England  assisted  not  my 
father,  or  me,  to  the  value  of  five  pounds,  without  real 
security  for  it,  and  such,  indeed,  as  at  this  time  lieth 
heaviest  upon  me ;  and  this  I  aver  as  in  the  presence  of 
Almighty  God  and  your  Lordships.  In  the  second  place, 
my  Lords,  how  came  the  then  Marquis  of  Hertford,  after 
his  defeat  in  the  West  with  recruits  to  his  Majesty,  at 


524  APPENDIX. 

Oxford,  but  my  father's  means  and  mine.  The  forces 
that  I  sent  with  him  had  cost  me  eight  thousand  pounds ; 
and  two  thousand  pounds  my  father  lent  him,  ready  mo- 
ney. How  came  Sir  John  Byron's  regiment  of  horse  to 
be  first  raised,  but  by  five  thousand  pounds  in  gold,  given 
him  by  my  father  ?  How  came  the  Forest  of  Dean  to  be 
reduced;  Goodrich  strong  Castle  to  be  taken;  Mon- 
mouth  itself,  with  its  garrison,  to  be  surprised ;  Chep- 
stow,  Newport,  and  Cardiff  to  be  taken  and  secured  for 
his  Majesty,  but  by  my  forces  and  my  father's  money  ? 
How  came  Ragland  Castle  to  be  first  fortified  and  last  ren- 
dered, but  fifty  thousand  pounds  disbursed  therein  by  my 
father? 

How  came  his  Majesty's  army  to  be  considerable  before 
Edgehill  fight  but  by  the  men  I  brought,  and  how  was 
his  Majesty  recruited  at  Gloucester  side,  even  after  the 
defeat  given  by  Waller  to  my  men.  God  forgive  those  of 
the  King's  party,  who  were  the  occasion  that  fifteen  hun- 
dred gentlemen  was  surprised,  and  I  not  despatched  from 
Oxford  until  the  day  after :  yet,  my  Lords,  at  fourteen 
days'  warning  I  brought  four  thousand  foot  and  eight 
hundred  horse  to  the  siege  of  Gloucester,  paying  them 
6,000/.  down  upon  the  nail  at  Gloucester,  besides  my 
troop  of  Life  Guard,  consisting  of  six  score  noblemen  and 
gentlemen,  whose  estates  amounted  to  above  three  score 
thousand  pounds  a-year,  most  of  whom  I  furnished  with 
horse  and  arms,  which  of  a  sudden  they  could  not  do 
themselves,  for  I  was  then  master  of  thirty-four  horses  in 
my  stable,  for  the  word  of  which  I  have  refused  100/.,  and 
above  forty  others  lonely  worth  50/.  a  horse.  I  kept  a 
table  for  the  said  troop,  not  only  at  Gloucester  side  but 
all  the  way  to  the  west,  without  so  much  as  making  use  of 
free  quarter,  but  all  upon  the  penny,  for  General  Raven 
complained  of  me  to  the  King,  who  graciously  and 
smilingly  reprehending  me  publicly,  I  desired  to  know  my 
accuser,  and  called  my  Lord-General  Raben,  afterwards 


APPENDIX.  525 

made  Earl  of  Bradford  before  his  Majesty,  who,  objecting 
that  it  was  of  ill  example  and  made  them  to  be  thought 
the  more  burdensome,  my  humble  reply  was,  that  I 
yielded  to  his  Excellency  to  be  the  better  soldier,  but 
still  to  be  a  soldier  of  fortune  here  to-day,  and  God  knows 
where  to-morrow,  and  therefore  I  needed  not  care  for  the 
love  of  the  people,  but  though  I  were  killed  myself  I 
should  leave  my  posterity  behind  me,  towards  whom  I 
would  not  leave  a  grudge  in  the  people,  but  whilst  I  could 
serve  his  Majesty  upon  my  own  purse  and  credit  I  would 
readily  do  it,  and  afterwards  leave  it  to  such  as  his  Lord- 
ship. 

I  confess  I  raised  this  troop  without  my  father's 
consent  first  asked ;  his  Majesty's  peremptory  commands 
and  the  shortness  of  time  requiring,  and  I  confess  his 
Lordship  checked  me  for  it,  and  said  I  had  undone  myself 
thereby,  and  I  replied  that  5000 /.  or  6000/.  would  not 
undo  me,  the  horses  being  all  my  own  already,  and  the 
arms,  by  accident,  coming  to  Bristol  afforded  a  sudden 
and  cheaper  means  for  it.  My  father  answered,  that  he 
did  allow  that  6000/.  nor  16 ,0001.  would  not  undo  me, 
but  the  consequence  would  be  that  the  love  and  power 
I  had  in  my  country  would  be  perspicuous,  although  I 
should  have  thanks  from  the  King,  yet  others,  though  his 
Majesty's  well-wishers,  yet,  through  envy,  they  would 
hate  me  for  it,  which  I  confess  I  have  found  too  true,  and 
my  services  have  been  more  retarded  by  those  who  called 
themselves  the  King's  friends  than  obstructed  by  his 
enemies. 

Pardon  me,  my  Lords,  if  I  detain  you  a  little  longer, 
descending  to  some  particulars  as  near  as  I  can  call  to 
mind,  and  beginning  first  to  tell  your  Lordships  that  I 
was  not  privy  nor  present  with  his  Majesty  at  Greenwich, 
when  he  first  took  his  resolution  for  the  North,  and  re- 
moved without  the  Queen  to  Theobald's,  from  which  he 
was  pleased  to  write  me  a  lamentable  letter  by  the  hands 


526  APPENDIX. 

of  Sir  John  Byron,1  averring  that  he  had  but  600/.  and 
300/.  of  which  was  given  to  defray  his  horses,  which  the 
Marquis  of  Hamilton,  then  Master  of  the  Horse,  refused  to 
do,  fearing  to  displease  the  Parliament ;  but  upon  such  a 
lamentable  complaint,  and  pressing  necessities  of  my  dear 
master,  yet  no  ways  advising  him  unto  the  journey. 
I  sent  him  to  Theobald's  .  .  £3000 

To  Huntingdon,  after  his  departing  from  Theo- 
balds      V-  ....  3000 
To  Nottingham  V*i  .  .  .4000 
To  York               ....  8000 
And  took  order  for  a  table,  to  be  kept  for  seve- 
ral experienced  officers,  who  by  this  means  were 


1    SIE   JOHN    BYRON    TO   THE    EARL    OF    WORCESTER. 
M.Y    MOST    HONOURED    LORD, 

Your  Lordship  hath  honoured  me  with  a  title  which  is  above  any 
other  that  can  be  given  me,  and  of  which  I  shall  ever  endeavour 
to  make  myself  worthy  by  all  real  expressions  of  faithful  and  humble 
service.  It  was  my  misfortune  to  be  from  home  when  Sir  John  Somer- 
set came,  and  though  I  acquainted  his  Majesty  therewith,  upon  whom 
I  then  attended,  yet  he  would  not  permit  me  to  go  to  him  for  a  day  or 
two,  having  some  other  service  to  employ  me  in  by  reason  of  his  journey 
to  Leicester,  where  it  was  thought  he  would  have  had  some  opposition  ; 
but  upon  his  Majesty's  approach  his  enemies  fled,  Hazelrigge,  Sir  Arthur, 
the  chief  of  them,  was  said  to  be  lurking  hereabouts,  whereupon  the  King 
commanded  me  and  some  other  gentlemen  to  go  out  and  see  if  we  could 
apprehend  him  ;  but,  though  we  used  the  best  diligence  we  could,  riding 
both  day  and  night,  yet  we  came  short  of  him. 

This  is  the  cause  of  the  delay  in  returning  your  Lordship  an  answer, 
for  which  I  hope  your  Lordship  will  pardon  me  ;  and  now,  since  Sir 
John  Somerset  is  come  hither,  having  left  the  5000/.  your  Lordship  sent 
at  Newstead,  my  house,  his  Majesty  hath  commanded  me  to  make  use 
of  it  for  the  levying  of  five  hundred  horse,  and  withal,  in  his  name,  to 
return  your  Lordship  all  possible  thanks  for  your  seasonable  assistance 
both  now  and  heretofore,  and  that  "  he  hopes  he  shall  not  die  in  your 
debt."  These  are  his  own  words  and  desires  to  be  excused  for  not 
writing  himself,  by  reason  of  the  little  leisure  he  hath;  for  my  own 
particular,  I  humbly  beseech  your  Lordship  to  believe  that,  as  there  lives 
not  anybody  more  deeply  engaged  for  real  and  noble  favours  to  your 
Lordship  than  myself,  so  no  man  can  be  more  sensible  of  them,  or  more 
ready  upon  all  occasions  to  express  myself,  my  Lord, 

Your  Lordship's  most  humble  and  faithful  servant, 

JOHN  BYRON. 

Leicester  Abbey,  this  Sunday, 

being  the  24th  of  July,  1642. 


APPENDIX.  527 

kept  from  taking  arms  for  the  Parliament,  and 
were  ready  for  the  King's  service,  and  the  defray- 
ing of  their  debts  here,  their  journey  into  York, 
and  their  table  there,  which  none  of  them  but  two 
knew  it  came  from  other  hand  than  the  King's 
privy  purse,  stood  me  in  .  i*  d  £1500 

And  these  sums,  with  as  great  privacy  as  may  be 
keeping  good  correspondence  with  the  Parliament 
and  myself,  present  at  London,  to  avoid  suspicion, 
being  then  trusted  by  both  King  and  Parliament  . 
For  victualling  the  Tower  of  London,  by  his 
Majesty's  command  I  sent  to  the  then  Lieutenant, 
Sir  John  Byron,  in  old  plate,  under  pretence  of 
coining  it  :  *..-;  ..*  .  *  .  .  2500 

By  a  feigned  pretence  getting  leave  of  the  Par- 
liament (the  circumstance  being  too  tedious  to 
relate  to  your  Lordships,  but  yet  notable  in  itself), 
I  went  with  their  pass  to  York,  and  carried  to  his 
Majesty  in  ready  money  ,1  »  •  •  15,000 

In  bills  and  assurances     ^,  u  -  4.«  .    80,500 

For  both  which  sums  I  had  his  Majesty's  note, 
yet  extant,  for  ninety-five  thousand  five  hundred 
pounds.  Which  done  in  two  days,  and  his 
Majesty's  further  commands  received,  I  returned 
to  the  Parliament,  with  a  plausible  answer  to  a 
message  sent  from  them  by  me,  and  I  agreed  with 
the  Parliament  to  remove  the  magazine  of  powder 
and  ammunition  from  Monmouth,  which  was  a 
town  of  my  own,  to  Carlyon,  a  town  of  the  Earl  of 
Pembroke,  a  professed  adherent  unto  them,  which 
they  took  kindly  at  my  hands,  though  done  by 
design  by  me,  who  could  not  have  pretension  to 
take  it  from  the  town  of  Monmouth  had  it  been 
still  there. 

For  the  raising  Sir  John  Byron's  regiment  of 
horse,  being  the  first  completed  .  .      5,000 

Things   being  thus   set   in  order   between  his 


528  APPENDIX. 

Majesty  and  me,  I  fairly  took  leave  of  the  Parlia- 
ment to  go  down  to  my  father ;  where  I  no  sooner 
arrived  but  there  came  directed  unto  me  from  his 
Majesty  a  Commission  of  Array;  whereof  I  pre- 
sently, by  a  servant  of  my  own,  sent  word  to  the 
Parliament,  with  a  letter  to  the  House  of  Lords, 
which  I  directed  to  my  Lord  of  Holland,  and  to 
the  House  of  Commons,  to  Mr.  Pym ;  in  both  of 
which  I  offered  to  intercede  to  his  Majesty,  and 
conceived  I  should  prevail  to  suspend  the  Com- 
mission of  Array,  if  they  should  make  an  act  that 
their  militia  should  not  come  into  my  country;  but 
they,  with  civil  compliments  and  thanks,  replied, 
that  his  Majesty's  was  so  illegal,  and  theirs  for 
the  good  of  the  kingdom  so  just  and  necessary, 
that  by  no  means  would  they  waive  the  one  for 
the  other.  At  which  I  declared  myself  irritated 
to  see  that  they  durst  tell  me  that  anything  com- 
manded by  my  master  was  illegal,  and  professed  I 
would  obey  his  Majesty's  commands,  and  let  them 
send  at  their  perils.  So,  immediately,  and  in 
eight  days'  time,  I  raised  six  regiments,  fortified 
Monmouth,  Chepstow,  and  Ragland;  fetching 
away  the  magazine  from  the  Earl  of  Pembroke's 
town,  Carlyon,  and  placed  it  in  Ragland  Castle, 
leaving  a  garrison  in  lieu  thereof.  Garrisoned 
likewise  Cardiff,  Brecknock,  Hereford,  Goodrich 
Castle,  and  the  Forest  of  Deane,  after  I  had  taken 
them  from  the  enemy. 

To  the  then   Lord   Marquis  of  Hereford,   in 
Wales,  as  many  forces  as  cost  me  the  raising  and 
arming    ..... 
Lent  him  to  prosecute  the  expedition  in 
Raising  of  forces  in  Wales,  first  and  last,  to  the 
number  of  12,000  men,  and 
there,  whilst  the  country  was  tottering, 


APPENDIX.  529 

them  weekly  for  fifteen  months, 

Speaking  and  it  shall  be  made  good 

Brought  to  Oxford  and  delivered 

own  hands 

My  journey  to  Ireland  with  levies 

and  incidental  expenses 

there  as  well  at  sea  as  at  land. 

The  furnishing  troops  of  six  score 

arms,  and  most  of  them  with  horses 

some  of  them  of  an  hundred  pounds 

price  and  many  of  50/.  for  though 

the  gentlemen  betwixt  them  made 

above  60,000£.  per  annum,  land  of  inheritance, 
yet  being  unexpectedly  raised  in  eight  days,  and 
could  not  furnish  themselves,  which  I  did  accord- 
ing to  their  quality,  together  with  their  servants 
to  the  number  of  two  hundred,  keeping  a  constant 
table  for  them  the  whole  journey  all  along  from 
Gloucester  into  the  West;  whereat  they  never 
wanted  wine,  that  being  carried  along  with  us, 
but  oftentimes  beer ;  together  with  6,OOOZ.  in 
ready  money,  paid  my  foot-soldiers  at  the  raising 
of  the  siege  of  Gloucester :  which,  all  modestly 
rated,  come  unto  above  .  .  £25,000 

The  keeping  of  the  garrison  of  Ragland,  to- 
wards which,  till  the  very  last  cast,  there  was 
never  a  penny  contribution  raised  or  exacted, 
amounted  to,  at  the  least  .  .  .  40,000 


The  Total,  £318,000 


Besides  the  garrison  of  Monmouth,  both  town 
and  castle,  Chepstow,  Goodrich  with  Hinan,  and 
the  Forest  of  Deane,  recovered  from  the  enemy, 
all  at  my  charge  till  Sir  William  Vavasour  came, 
who  hath  had  of  me  five  hundred  twenty  shilling 

VOL.    III.  M    M 


530  APPENDIX. 

pieces  at  a  time,  to  encourage  him  to  go  on  at 
Gloucester  ;  besides,  likewise,  the  charge  of  re- 
ducing of  Abergavenny,  Carlyon,  and  Newport,  to 
his  Majesty's  obedience. 

Furthermore,  for  seven  years,  both  in  England 
and  Ireland,  I  allowed  twenty  pounds  each  meal, 
to  which  all  officers  and  gentlemen  were  wel- 
come ;  and  I  believe  the  charges  in  these  particu- 
lars not  to  be  inserted  or  charged  on  this  account 
amounts  to  one-half  as  much  as  the  former  sums. 
I  never  received  a  farthing  towards  it  as  General 

or ,  nor  a  penny  out  of  my  estate  in 

twenty  years  .  .  .  these  times  came  unto  upwards 
of  omnibus  mis  et  modis,  which  alone  amounted 
unto  .  .  .600,000 


These  sums  added  together  balance  the  accounts, 
and  make  good  that  I  have  spent,  lent,  ...  for 
my  King  and  Country,  re  vera,  .  £918,000 

My  Lords,  being  conscious  of  this,  and  many  things 
forgotten  by  me  to  set  down,  I  was  become  proof  against 
anything  the  King's  enemies  could  do  against  me,  since 
by  their  principles  I  knew  I  deserved  it ;  but,  since  his 
Majesty's  return  and  happy  restoration  it  hath  almost 
stupified  me  to  have  been  so  laid  by  as  not  to  have  had 
any  promise  made  good  to  me,  for  which  I  had  his 
Majesty's  royal  word,  hand,  or  even  the  Great  Seal  of 
England.  But,  of  the  contrary,  I  humbly  beseech  your 
Lordships'  leave  to  set  down  what,  with  all  submission  to 
his  Majesty's  will  and  pleasure,  flesh  and  blood  cannot  but 
resent,  yet  so  far  only  as  shall  stand  with  the  duty  of  a 
loyal  subject  and  the  unquenchable  zeal  of  my  real  heart 
towards  my  King  and  Country,  and  a  most  humble  sub- 
mission to  your  Lordships'  better  judgment,  casting 
myself  wholly  at  your  disposal  and  favourable  construe- 


APPENDIX.  531 

tion  of  what  I  shall  set  down,  according  to  the  old  saying, 
that  "  losers  may  have  leave  to  speak." 


B. 

SIR, 

I  did  write  to  you  by  several  conveyances  since  we 
came  forth  of  the  Straits ;  but,  having  no  certainty  that 
those  might  come  safe  to  your  hands,  I  have  by  this 
vessel,  which  is  a  Dutchman,  freighted  by  his  Highness, 
and  in  which  Mr.  Carteret  is  employed,  adventured  to 
give  you  a  relation  of  all  passages. 

After  we  came  forth  of  the  Straits,  and  found  that  there 
were  not  ships  in  the  Bay  of  Gales  to  make  us  a  voyage, 
and  that  the  Genoese  and  Spaniard  which  we  had  taken 
was  not  considerable  to  invite  us  to  a  port,  his  Highness 
resolved  for  the  West  Indies ;  and,  because  we  were  not 
well  supplied  with  refreshing  for  such  a  voyage,  he  went, 
by  advice,  to  the  Madeira  Island,  which  was  not  much 
out  of  his  course,  to  supply  those  necessaries  that  were 
wanting,  and  to  take  the  benefit  of  the  time  we  were 
taking  in  of  water  there,  to  sell  all  or  part  of  the  rice  and 
corn  that  was  taken  in  the  Genoese,  being  perishable 
commodities,  especially  the  corn,  and  made  the  ship 
wholly  unserviceable.  But,  the  island,  being  poor,  could 
not  afford  us  merchants  for  all  the  corn,  nor  any  of  the 
other  goods. 

By  the  1st  of  July,  Old  Style,  we  had  got  aboard  all  the 
refreshing  that  place  could  furnish,  and  his  Highness 
stood  on  as  he  first  intended,  taking  the  Canary  Islands  in 
his  way,  to  see  if  we  could  meet  with  any  English  ships, 
by  which  we  might  be  strengthened  for  our  voyage  ;  but 
the  time  of  the  year  was  too  early  for  that  work ;  so,  after 
we  saw  there  was  no  good  to  be  done,  we  passed  those 
islands  without  making  ourselves  known. 

M  M  2 


532  APPENDIX. 

But,  notwithstanding  that  all  things  seemed  with  us  to 
look  prosperously,  and  that  in  all  reason  we  were  likely  to 
have  redeemed'our  losses  in  the  Straits  by  a  happy  voyage, 
yet  his  Highness  was  prevented  by  a  party  that  opposed 
going  to  the  West  Indies,  merely  because  Captain  Fearnes 
proposed  it ;  and  strengthened  their  party  by  alleging  the 
leak  (three  days  before  we  went  from  Madeira)  in  the 
Admiral,  made  the  ship  in  too  bad  a  condition  to  be 
carried  so  long  a  voyage.  This  passionate  carriage  dis- 
ordered all ;  and  put  the  master,  Captain  Fearnes,  to  such 
doubts  as  he  would  not  undertake  that  the  ship  should 
make  her  voyage,  neither  undertake  for  this  place  we  are 
now  at,  because  he  saw  plainly  that  if  any  miscarriage 
should  fall,  he  should  have  been  lost,  to  satisfy  private 
men's  malice. 

And  which  indeed  was  the  reason  that  forced  his  High- 
ness to  call  a  Council  of  War,  of  Captains,  Lieutenants, 
and  Masters,  the  7th  July,  to  advise  him  to  what  place  it 
would  be  most  fit  to  go  to  take  prizes,  and  to  mend  his  ships. 

In  that  Council  the  most  part  opposed  Captain  Fearnes' 
design  to  go  to  the  West  Indies,  declaring  that  in  that 
course  no  provisions  were  to  be  got,  besides  that,  the  Ad- 
miral would  not  be  in  a  condition  to  go  so  far.  And  this 
was  pressed  with  such  violence,  as  without  much  difficulty 
their  opinions  could  not  have  been  altered ;  and  on  the 
other  side  Captain  Fearnes,  in  general  terms,  told  his 
Highness  that  dead  and  living  goats  might  be  had  at  the 
Isles  of  Cape  de  Verde,  and  cassado  bread  and  flesh  in  the 
Indies  ;  but  all  the  rest,  except  Captain  Fearnes  and  Cap- 
tain Goulding,  confidently  affirmed  that  Cape  de  Verde 
could  not  supply  us  with  flesh  considerably,  and  that  we 
must  expect  no  other  than  starving  in  the  West  Indies, 
because,  as  they  said,  there  was  not  any  great  quantity  of 
cassado  to  be  had,  and  our  men  could  never  be  brought 
to  feed  on  it,  which  I  have  seen  the  contrary  of,  by  our 
men  leaving  good  meat  to  eat  it. 


APPENDIX.  533 

And  to  futify  their  other  opinions,  they  urged  very 
much  the  want  of  provisions  in  Capt.  Craven's  ship,  who 
came  into  us  at  our  leaving  Toulon,  and  indeed  that  was 
by  the  greatness  of  the  numbers  of  her  men,  which  did 
somewhat  deceive  our  expectations,  but  was  easy  to  be 
supplied  without  any  great  prejudice  to  the  voyage,  either 
from  our  ships,  or  any  place  we  should  touch  at.  And  to 
make  their  party  more  strong,  underhand  got  Capt.  Mar- 
shall and  others,  by  merriment,  to  join  with  them  too,  but 
Capt.  Craven  was  then  sick,  and  did  not  meddle  therein ; 
nor  was  Capt.  Marshall  in  their  opinion  since  or  before 
the  Council. 

So  that  in  conclusion  they  carried  it,  and  all  except 
Fearnes  and  Goulding  advised  his  Highness  to  the  Western 
Islands  as  a  sure  place,  where  he  might  not  only  sell  most 
part  of  his  goods,  but  be  supplied  immediately  with  all 
manner  of  provisions  forth  of  the  King  of  Portugal's  ma- 
gazine at  easy  rates.  And  that  those  islands  lay  in  the 
East  India  ships'  road  homeward,  where  we  might  in  pro- 
bability have  the  fortune  to  take  one  or  more  of  them, 
which  would  make  us  a  better  voyage  than  to  the  West 
Indies.  Besides  some  of  them  that  pretended  to  know 
the  place  assured  his  Highness  that  he  might  mend  his 
shipwreck  there.  The  next  day  the  Admiral  made  less 
water,  and  the  winds  being  contrary  for  going  as  his 
Highness  resolved,  by  the  Council  of  War's  advice,  to  the 
Western  Islands,  and  the  master  then  seeming  to  be  con- 
fident of  the  ship's  performance,  his  Highness  began  to 
have  second  thoughts  for  the  Indies.  But  having  lost 
Capt.  Marshall's  ship  in  the  night,  by  his  staying  to  set 
up  a  new  top-mast,  we  were  forced  to  beat  it  to  the  Islands 
to  "meet  him.  There  we  spent  more  time  in  procuring 
victuals  than  we  should  have  done  the  other  way  to  make 
their  voyage,  and  could  not  get,  with  all  our  industry,  in 
all  the  time  we  were  thereabouts,  being  from  the  25th 
of  July  to  the  7th  of  December,  so  much  victuals  as  we 


534  APPENDIX. 

had  aboard  when  the  Council  was  called ;  and  truly  their 
design  to  catch  East  Indiamen  there  was  very  far  from 
reason.  I  have  seen  punts  from  London  since  that  year 
the  East  India  fleet  was  arrived  in  the  Thames,  before  we 
recoursed  to  the  Western  Islands.  In  the  next  place  I 
am  sure  there  was  no  place  to  amend  our  ship's  leak  in, 
for  all  those  Islands'  roads  being  very  dangerous,  as  may 
appear  by  the  loss  of  Capt.  Craven's  ship,  of  thirty-eight 
guns,  and  two  Dutchmen ;  and  of  the  loss  of  cattle  and 
anchors  of  our  other  ships,  which  drove  us  into  a  most 
desperate  condition,  because  in  the  least  ill  weather,  which 
is  often  there,  we  were  not  able  to  come  nigh  the  shore  to 
take  in  provisions,  neither  could  any  boats  come  off  to  us, 
as  all  merchants  that  have  used  that  trade  can  testify  that 
sometimes  it  is  three  months  before  they  can  lade  a  ship, 
and  if  once  beaten  from  the  shore,  it  will  be  many  days 
before  they  can  recover  it  again,  as  our  ships,  when  the 
Admiral  was  lost,  were  six  weeks  before  they  could  get 
back  to  the  Terceira  Island.  By  this  relation  you  may 
perceive  how  miserably  we  have  been  misguided  and  ruined^ 
more  by  these  Islands  than  possibly  we  could  have  been 
by  any  strength  that  ever  the  Rebels  could  have  sent 
against  us.  For  we  lost  there  Capt.  Goulding,  who  was 
carried  away  by  his  men,  as  is  supposed,  or  run  away  with 
his  ship ;  Capt.  Craven's  ship  driven  from  her  anchors, 
and  cast  away  in  one  of  their  best  roads,  and  the  Admiral 
foundered  in  a  storm  ;  in  which  ship  his  Highness  had 
perished,  if  God  Almighty  had  not  miraculously  preserved 
his  person,  as  you  may  perceive  by  the  Master's  relation, 
which  I  send  you  here  enclosed,  in  which  he  is  plain ;  and 
by  it  you  may  perceive  the  whole  carnage,  especially  of 
the  Vice-Admiral's  officers,  who  would  not  hoist  out  their 
boat  that  was  better  able  to  live  in  the  sea  than  the  Ad- 
miral's, and  for  which  Capt.  Chester,  who  was  then  Capt. 
of  Vice-Admiral,  cannot  be  excused  ;  for  when  he  saw  the 
ship  perishing  he  made  no  action  at  all  for  their  boat  to 


APPENDIX.  535 

help  to  save  the  men,  but  walked  upon  the  deck,  and  said, 
"  Gentlemen,  it  is  a  great  mischance  ;  who  can  help  it !  " 
And  the  Master  never  brought  the  ship  near  the  perishing 
ship,  notwithstanding  Prince  Maurice's  command  for  it, 
and  earnestness  to  have  it  done,  and  the  signs  he  made  for 
help. 

We   likewise   lost   thereabouts  near  four   hundred   of 
our  best  men,  besides  treasure  and  rich  goods,  and  are 
now  further   from    making   our  voyage   than  when   the 
Council  was  called.     But  the  fault  of  this  miscarriage  I 
conceive  cannot  be  so  justly  laid  on  all  those  that  were  for 
the  Islands  and  knew  them  not,  as  upon  those  who  were 
seamen,  and  knew  the  place.      But  this  design  to   the 
Western  Islands  has  a  long  time  been  drawing  on  by  some 
private  persons,  and  a  very  good  design  'prevented,  which 
I  dare  not  mention,  because  by  the  loss  of  the  Admiral  I 
am  left  destitute  of  all  ciphers  and  other  papers  which  I 
had  collected.    I  had  ahnost  omitted  to  tell  you  his  High- 
ness, before  the  Admiral  was  lost,  perceiving  himself  to 
be  in  a  very  bad  condition  at  these  islands,  and  no  hopes 
to  get  as  much  provisions  as  he  brought  thither,  sent  me 
privately  with  his  warrant  aboard  all  the  ships  on  the  13th 
day  of    September,    to    command   all   the    captains   and 
masters  to  give  their  opinions  singly  in  writing,  to  what 
place  it  was  fit  for  the  fleet  to  make  a  voyage,  by  which 
his  Highness  did  further  see  how  the  former  business  was 
carried  ;  and  that  then  Capt.  Chester,  of  the  Swallow,  and 
his  master,  who  drove  us  on  going  to  the  Western  Islands, 
were  for  going  to  the  mouth  of  the  Channel,   to   take 
prizes,  and  none  others  of  their  opinion,  which  was  a  most 
unreasonable  advice,  considering  the  Admiral's  condition, 
which  they  well  knew  could  not  possibly  endure  such  seas 
as  they  must  have  met  with  there.     The  rest,  though  dif- 
fering in  particulars,  yet  in  general  agreed  that  it  would 
be  best  for  us  to  go  to  the  southward,  and  so  to  the  West 
Indies,  both  to  take  prizes,  and  to  mend  the  ships  that 


536  APPENDIX. 

could  not  endure  the  Northern  seas,  where  none  of  them 
could  have  lived. 

The  want  of  provisions  at  last  was  that  which  most 
afflicted  his  Highness,  and  put  him  to  many  thoughts,  and 
that  which  would  have  enforced  us  to  some  harbour  if  it 
had  pleased  God  that  we  had  kept  up  our  number  of  men 
and  our  ships,  where  we  must  not  have  expected  to  have 
gone  out  again,  unless  we  had  carried  in  great  purchase  ; 
and  to  Portugal  his  Highness  was  resolved  not  to  go, 
because  he  had  good  assurance  of  their  treaty  with  the 
Rebel ;  and  to  have  gone  to  France  you  may  judge  what 
our  condition  would  have  been,  to  bring  strange  mariners 
into  their  own  country,  without  the  means  to  reward  them. 
Besides  the  danger  it  had  been  to  carry  such  ships  in  such 
Northern  seas. 

Those  people  that  were  the  cause  of  carrying  us  to  the 
Islands,  now  excuse  themselves  by  saying  that  if  his 
Highness  had  then  gone  to  the  West  Indies,  he  would 
have  been  met  with  at  Barbadoes  by  the  Rebels'  fleet, 

under who  would  have  been  too  strong 

for  us,  and  have  ruined  us  more  than  the  Islands  did ;  but 
that  carries  no  manner  of  reason  with  it,  because  on  the 
contrary,  it  is  most  probable  that  we  had,  before  our 
arrival,  made  ourselves  stronger  in  ships  than  they,  and 
with  such  men  as  at  Barbadoes,  as  we  might  certainly 
have  got  long  before  they  could  have  arrived  there,  have 
beaten  their  fleet  from  there,  and  done  his  Majesty  most 
eminent  service  by  securing  those  parts.  Therefore,  if 
these  Islands  should  be  lost,  which,  God  forbid,  those 
men  who  kept  us  from  going  thither  must  be  in  fault. 

These  misfortunes  have  again  brought  us  to  three  ships, 
indifferently  well  provided  with  provisions,  but  to  repair 
and  fit  them  we  are  forced  to  this  place,  a  harbour  near 
Cape  Blanc,  in  the  kingdom  of  Argen,  in  the  Barbary 
Coast,  towards  Guinea,  where  are  none  inhabitants  ex- 
cept some  few  Moors  that  come  down  and  trade  with  the 


APPENDIX.  537 

Flushingers  that  sometimes  fish  here,  being  the  place 
affords  great  store  of  fish  ;  especially  mullet.  The  Dutch 
have  a  castle,  sixteen  leagues  off  which  they  took  from 
the  Portuguese,  called  by  the  name  of  Arquen  in  a  small 
island,  where  they  kept  a  small  trade  with  the  Moors  for 
bastard  Besar  stone,  and  a  coarse  sort  of  amber  and 
ambergris.  The  governor  of  that  castle  has  been  very 
civil  to  us,  and  sent  us  as  much  fresh  water  as  he  could 
spare.  The  other  particulars  of  this  place  I  leave  to  Mr. 
Carteret's  relation,  who  is  able  to  give  you  an  account 
thereof,  and  to  inform  you  how  we  lost  by  the  Moors' 
treachery,  three  men  that  did  not  keep  in  our  quarters  as 
his  Highness  commanded. 

Now,  having  cleansed,  fitted,  and  new-rigged  our  three 
ships,  viz.,  the  Swallow,  of  forty-two  guns ;  the  Revenge, 
of  forty  guns ;  and  the  Honest  Seamen,  of  forty  guns  ;  we 
are  this  instant  setting  sail  from  hence.  In  this  intended 
voyage  God  Almighty  guide  us  for  the  best,  and  send  us 
better  fortune  than  we  had  for  the  last,  to  his  Highnesses 
content,  he  being  resolved  not  to  make  any  part  until  he 
shall  get  somewhat  considerable  to  bring  with  him  to  serve 
his  Majesty,  and  to  make  his  fleet  subsist.  Much  more  I 
could  have  added,  concerning  several  persons  that  have  all 
along  hindered  all  advantageous  designs,  but  his  Highness 
commands  to  leave  that  occasion  until  another  .... 
because  of  the  danger  this  is  to  run  before  it  come  to  your 
hands,  but  at  meeting,  or  so  soon  as  his  Highness  can  with 
safety  send,  he  will  give  you  full  satisfaction  in  all  par- 
ticulars. 

I  believe,  before  this  comes  to  your  hands,  Captain 
Chester  will  be  come  into  France.  He  parted  from  us  very 
suddenly  at  St.  Michael's,  pretending  the  cause  to  be  a 
quarrel  that  he  had  with  Captain  Fearnes,  whom  he  could 
not  endure  to  be 

I  believe  you  may  hear  of  some  misinformation  of  a 
business  that  happened  at  Fayal  Island,  in  which  his  High- 


538  APPENDIX. 

ness  was  very  much  injured  by  the  Governor  and  the 
Captain  of  the  Castle  thereof,  as  Mr.  Carteret,  who  was 
present  there,  can  relate,  that  his  Highness  hath  sufficient 

to  their  villany,  and  to  manifest  the  great 

abuses  they  did  his  Highness  and  his  people.  So,  like- 
wise, did  his  Highness  receive  very  bad  usage  at  the 
Terceira  Island,  but  St.  Michael's  and  the  Madeira  Islands 
had  very  civil  entertainment. 

His  Highness  is  pleased  to  command  me  to  acquaint 
you  with  Dr.  Hart's  being  lost  in  the  Admiral,  and  that 
his  Highness  desires  you  to  get  some  able  and  honest  man 
in  his  stead,  as  to  be  ready  so  soon  as  we  shall  arrive  in 
any  convenient  part. 

I  beseech  you  excuse  the  faults  my  haste  hath  caused 
me  to  commit. 

I  remain  your  most  humble  servant, 

PITTS. 


C. 

A  COPY  OF  A  BRIEF  SUMMARY  OF  THE  VOYAGE  UNTO 
GAMBIA,  FROM  JANUARY  THE  27TH  UNTIL  MARCH  21sT, 
1660.  BY  COLONEL  VERMUYDEN. 

[Chief  Engineer  to  Prince  Rupert.] 

January  the  27th,  set  sail  in  the  Amity,  Forth  of  the 
Downs  ;  met  with  the  fleet,  under  conduct  of  Major 
Holmes,  on  the  6th  of  February,  and  were  in  the  latitude 
of  40  degrees;  on  the  llth,  anchored  before  Funchal,  in 
the  Island  of  Madeira.  Having  taken  in  our  wines,  set 
sail  from  thence  the  13th,  and  on  the  19th  came  before 
Santa  Cruz,  in  the  island  of  TenerifFe  ;  here  we  took 
other  wines  in,  and  departed  hence  the  22nd,  and  passed 
by  the  Cape  de  Verde  on  the  1st  of  March,  and  the  2nd 
anchored  before  Trefisco,  and  there  did  give  notice  unto 


APPENDIX.  539 

the  Dutch  commander,  to  desist  trading  within  the  limits 
granted  by  his  Majesty  of  England  unto  the  royal  com- 
pany, &c.  The  West  India  Company  hath  an  island 
three  leagues  westward  hence,  where  they  keep  a  factory, 
and  have  a  great  trade  :  the  island  is  small,  and  reasonable 
grounds,  strengthened  by  two  fortifications ;  the  French 
have  only  a  factory  on  the  main,  at  Trefisco,  who  also 
hath  warning  not  to  trade ;  the  same  day  we  departed 
hence,  and  arrived  in  the  river  of  Gambia  on  the  4th. 
This  river  is  in  breadth  above  three  leagues,  the  tides 
strong ;  we  sailed  as  high  as  Charles  Island,  four  leagues 
from  the  mouth  of  the  river,  where  we  anchored  in  nine 
fathoms  of  water.  Upon  the  south  point  at  the  entrance 
in  of  the  river,  the  Duke  of  Courland  hath  a  fort,  but 
now  the  ruin  is  scarcely  visible.  This  day,  in  general  coun- 
cil upon  debate,  resolved  to  land,  and  secure  our  men  on 
the  same  island,  called  Charles,  until  view  were  made  of 
Elephant  Island,  with  other  the  situations  in  the  river ; 
did  view  Charles  Island,  and  found  it  to  be  in  compass 
about  three  acres,  and  when  the  water  highest,  the  earth 
surmounteth  two  fathoms,  the  bases  whereof  is  wholly  a 
rock  of  bastard  iron  stone,  seated  on  the  north  of  the 
river,  above  an  arrow  flight  from  the  main,  fordable  when 
low  water,  but  then  the  passage  craggy  ;  the  island  af- 
fordeth  lime  and  stone  sufficient  for  a  royal  fort,  but 
cannot  command  the  channel.  With  what  speed  and  in- 
dustry might  be,  got  ready  to  go  up  the  river,  and  on  the 
19th  we  went  up,  having  fitted  three  barges  and  one 
wherry,  the  only  remainder  of  the  four  ;  we  are  in  all 
that  go  up  thirty-six-persons :  but  do  suspect  that  our 
progress  will  be  but  small  as  to  discovery  this  year,  the 
rains  being  so  near,  however  shall  use  all  possible  endea- 
vour :  on  the  21st,  we  viewed  Elephant  Island,  the  which 
is  seated  commodiously  as  to  the  command  of  the  river, 
being  from  the  mouth  thereof  forty -five  leagues  ;  however, 
it  is  not  habitable,  for  that  it  flows  every  tide  a  foot  above 


540  APPENDIX. 

the  island,  it  being  wholly  a  wood  of  mangroves,  so  thick 
that  it  is  not  passable  without  much  difficulty.  According 
to  my  opinion,  the  only  seat  in  this  river  is  Charles  Island, 
being  a  healthy  air,  and  on  the  main,  commodious  ground 
for  plantation,  where,  doubtless,  may  be  had  sugar,  to- 
bacco, wines,  indigo,  oranges,  lemons,  and  variety  of  fruits, 
cotton  wool,  pepper,  &c.  ;  and  also  to  have  James  Island 
better  fortified,  settling  there  a  factory.  This  island  was 
called  heretofore  St.  Andrew,  and  in  the  possession  of  the 
Courlander,  who,  upon  demand,  hath  delivered  it  up  unto 
Captain  Holmes ;  the  reason  of  which  demand  is  under 
our  hands.  I  do  conceive  that  it  was  good  to  send  all 
petty  fellows  and  the  like  to  plant  here,  for  this  country 
once  being  planted  will  turn  to  great  account,  and,  doubt- 
less, the  trade  of  this  river  and  the  coast,  granted  by  the 
patent,  will  employ  above  thirty  good  ships. 

I  do  not  doubt, — God  granting  me  life, — at  my  return 
down  the  river,  but  to  be  able  to  give  you  a  more  perfect 
account,  the  which  shall  not  be  neglected  in  the  least,  by 
Your  most  humble  servant, 

Jo.  VERMUYDEN. 

Elephant  Island,  in  the  river  of  Gambia, 
22nd  March,  1660. 


D. 


EXTRACTED    OUT    OF    A    JOURNAL     KEPT    OF    THE    PRINCE  S 
OWN    SHIP. 

September  30th,  1651.  —  The  Constant  Reformation 
wherein  was  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert,  having  been 
lately  at  the  Western  Islands,  now  at  sea,  in  a  storm 
sprung  a  leak,  and  after  all  endeavours  had  proved  fruit- 
less to  stop  it,  foundered,  to  the  loss  of  near  340  men ; 
his  Highness  would  certainly  have  perished  with  them,  if 


APPENDIX.  541 

some  of  his  officers,  more  careful  of  his  preservation,  had 
not  forced  him  into  a  small  boat,  and  carried  him  on 
board  the  Honest  Seaman  (a  ship  of  his  Highness's  fleet) ; 
the  Isle  Terceira  then  bore  N.  N.  E.  about  seventy  leagues 
distant. 

October  19th. — His  Highness  with  the  Swallow,  which 
had  been  Vice-Admiral,  the  Revenge,  and  the  Honest 
Seaman,  arrived  at  Falay,  where  the  Loyal  Subject,  an- 
other ship  of  his  fleet,  was  cast  away  through  negligence. 

27th. — Set  sail  for  Terceira,  and  anchored  there. 

November  8th. — Sailed  for  Falay  again,  and  in  a  storm 
were  like  to  perish  on  the  south  part  of  St.  George's 
Island. 

9th.  — Anchored  in  Falay,  and  surprised  a  vessel  come 
from  New  England. 

21st. — Set  sail,  and  plied  between  St.  George's  and 
Pico. 

25th.— Anchored  at  St.  Michael's. 

December  17th. — Sailed  by  the  westward  of  the  Canary 
Islands. 

26th. — Anchored  near  Cape  Blanco,  and  four  days  after 
went  into  the  harbour,  where  they  continued  cleaning, 
tallowing,  and  refitting  until  the  25th  of  January. 

January  26th.  — They  had  sailed  by  nine  at  night  from 
Cape  Blanco  W.  S.  W.,  35  leagues,  latitude  19°.  55'. 

30th. — Anchored  in  the  north-eastward  of  the  Island  of 
Sale. 

31st. — Sailed  from  thence,  and 

February  1st,  1651-2. — Anchored  at  Bonavista,  where 
they  took  in  fresh  water,  and  bought  near  one  thousand 
dried  goats. 

14th. — Sailed  for  the  Isle  of  May,  and  the  18th  an- 
chored before  St.  Jago. 

21st. — His  Highness  with  his  fleet  set  sail  from  St.  Jago 
intending  for  Gambo. 

27th. — Anchored  before  that  river,  where  both  the  Ad- 


542  APPENDIX. 

miral  and  Vice- Admiral  run  aground,  but  got  off  without 
much  damage. 

29th. — They  surprised  a  small  English  vessel  which 
attended  on  a  greater  ;  Mr.  Holmes  was  sent  aboard  com- 
mander. 

30th. — They  took  a  Spanish  vessel,  whereof  Captain 
Craven  was  sent  commander. 

March  2nd. — They  took  a  good  English  ship  called  the 
Friendship,  whereof  Blake  was  master. 

13th. — She  was  named  the  Defiance,  and  made  Vice- 
Admiral. 

18th. — They  departed  from  thence,  sailing  all  along 
Cape  Mastre,  and  anchored  before  a  town  called  Reback  ; 
some  of  Prince  Maurice's  men  having  seized  in  a  canoe 
two  negroes.  The  natives  detained  Mr.  Holmes  and  Mr. 
Hell  (then  ashore)  until  the  others  were  released. 

29th. — Sailed  from  thence  by  Cape  de  Verd  and  Bona- 
vista,  towards  the  Isle  of  May,  and  out  of  that  [April  5] 
road  chased  an  English  Plymouth  ship  of  250  tons,  and 
18  guns,  and  took  her. 

April  5th  and  7th. — Came  with  her  to  an  anchor,  and 
took  in  fresh  water  and  provisions. 

14th. — Two  vessels  of  250  tons  each,  newly  come  from 
Plymouth,  put  into  the  place  where  the  Prince's  fleet  was 
and  so  were  both  surprised  and  seized. 

16th.— The  Admiral  and  one  other  set  sail  for  the  Isle 
of  Salle  to  take  an  English  ship  which  rode  there,  but 
she  proving  too  nimble,  they  returned  back  to  Jago. 

May  9th. — Set  sail  with  all  his  fleet  from  thence  for 
Barbadoes. 

29th. — Passed  by  the  Isle  of  St.  Vincent,  eight  leagues 
distant ;  then  plied  for  the  Island  of  Santa  Lusia,  and 
anchored  there  within  two  days. 

June  2nd. — Set  sail  for  Martinico,  and  anchored  there 
next  day. 

4th. — From  thence  to  Guadaloupe. 


APPENDIX.  543 

June  5,  1652.— His  Highness  sailed  from  Guadaloupe 
to  Montserrat,  and  took  two  English  prizes,  one  whereof, 
belonging  to  an  inhabitant  of  the  island,  he  restored. 

7th. — His  Highness  sent  a  letter  to  the  governor,  and, 
as  soon  as  he  had  answered  it,  set  sail  for  Nevis,  and  there 
with  his  own  ship  took  two  prizes  near  the  fort  by  shot, 
from  whence  his  Highness's  secretary  was  slain  while  his 
Highness  was  fast  aboard  one  of  the  ships,  which  he  took, 
of  200  tons,  two  guns  laden  with  sugar,  four  or  five  others 
made  their  escape.  From  thence  his  Highness  sailed  to 
St.  Christopher's. 

June  8th. — His  Highness  luffed  into  Digby's  Bay,  and 
there  fought  with  two  forts  and  several  ships,  which  his 
Highness  could  not  come  at. 

Anchored  in  Sand  Point  Road,  belonging  to  the  French, 
and  after  in  Bastar  Road  not  far  from  thence,  where  was 
riding  twenty-four  French  and  Dutch  vessels,  and  there 
continued  twelve  days. 

The  English  rebels  of  that  island  made  proclamation, 
threatening  the  Dutch  with  confiscation  of  their  goods  if 
they  should  assist  their  Highnesses's  fleet  with  any  pro- 
visions ;  and  they  accused  one Dangerfield  that  he 

had  been  with  the  Prince,   and  entered  himself  in  the 
King's  service,  and  caused  him  to  be  hanged. 

June  20th. — His  Highness  sailed  from  St.  Christopher's. 

24'th. — Put  into  a  creek  in  an  island  called  the  Leeward 
Virgin,  to  stop  a  leak  in  his  own  ship,  and  to  careen  and 
clean  the  rest. 

There  they  went  ashore,  and  set  up  tents,  and  made 
cannon  baskets  for  defence,  and  mounted  eight  guns 
ashore,  and 

July  2nd. — Afterwards  took  all  the  guns  and  luggage 
out  of  the  Prince's  own  ship,  and  sheathed  her,  and  con- 
tinued there  seven  or  eight  weeks,  fitting  of  her  and  the 
rest  of  the  ships.  They  set  fire  to  two  prizes,  having  first 
taken  away  such  materials  as  could  be  useful  for  the  rest. 


544  APPENDIX. 

August  29th. — His  Highness  set  sail  from  the  Leeward 
Virgin,  with  four  ships,  and  steered  N.JNT.  E. 

September  1st. — "Were  got  five  leagues  from  the  said 
place,  in  latitude  21°  40'. 

2nd  and  3rd. — Plied  to  and  again  with  variable  winds. 

4th. — The  Leeward  Virgin  bore  seven  leagues  distant, 
latitude  22°  25'. 

5th  and  6th. — Sailed  divers  courses,  with  fair  weather, 
but  a  great  northern  sea. 

13th. — His  Highness,  with  his  four  ships,  was  in  lati- 
tude 19°  43',  when  the  storm  began,  which  continued  four 
days  ;  on  the  second  whereof  Prince  Maurice,  with  ^  three 
of  the  four  ships,  were  missing,  and  Prince  Rupert,  in  his 
own  ship,  with  a  great  deal  of  danger,  got  to  an  anchor  at 
St.  Ann's  Island,  at  the  Windward  Virgin,  a  place  then 
uninhabited. 

18th. — Provisions  being  scarce,  each  man's  daily  allow- 
ance of  bread  was  but  three  ounces. 

25th. — His  Highness  having  taken  in  good  store  of 
freshwater,  and  caused  the  damage  sustained  by  the 
storm  to  be  repaired  [October  5]  ;  sailed  thence,  and 
arrived  at  Montserrat,  where  he  took  a  prize  of  ten 
guns,  continued  sailing  to  and  again  about  those  islands 
until  the  10th,  when  he  anchored  at  Guadaloupe,  and  there 
was  informed  that  war  was  proclaimed  between  the  States 
of  Holland  and  the  rebels  of  England. 

October  22nd. — His  Highness  set  sail  from  thence  upon 
the  appearance  of  eight  or  ten  ships,  suspected  to  be  of 
the  enemy's  men  of  war. 

26th. — Came  there  again  to  anchor. 

27th. — Set  sail  at  midnight,  and 

30th, — Entered  a  harbour  in  Antigua  called  Five  Island 
Harbour,  where  were  riding  three  English  merchant  ships. 
Mr.  Holmes  was  set  ashore,  with  fifty  men,  to  take  a  great 
gun  planted  at  certain  cannon  baskets,  wherewith  they 
somewhat  annoyed  the  ship ;  so,  while  he  took  that  gun 


APPENDIX.  545 

his  Highness  took  the  ships  without  resistance.  One  of 
them  being  a  fly-boat  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  ton,  had 
in  her  eighteen  guns.  His  Highness  continued  there 
three  days ;  in  which  time  the  rebels  ashore  endeavoured 
to  raise  a  breastwork  against  the  ships ;  but,  upon  firing 
two  guns,  were  frighted  from  it.  Several  parties  of  horse 
and  foot  appeared,  but  attempted  nothing. 

November  2nd. — His  Highness  sailed  from  thence  with 
four  ships. 

7th. — Anchored  in  a  bay  in  the  north-west  part  of 
Guadaloupe. 

November  llth. — Set  sail  again,  and  took  a  prize  of 
London,  200  tons,  bound  for  Barbadoes,  laden  chiefly 
upon  provisions. 

15th. — With  that  prize  and  the  rest,  came  to  the  road 
of  Guadaloupe. 

16th. — News  was  brought  the  Prince  by  a  French  ves- 
sel, that  his  brother  was  safe  at  the  island  Tartogue. 

20th. — His  Highness  set  sail  for  Dominico. 

22nd. — Anchored  in  the  N.  W.  bay  of  that  island. 

26th. — Set  sail  from  thence. 

29th.— Touched  at  Nevis. 

30th. — Anchored  at  Stalhowe,  a  French  plantation. 

December  4th. — Sailed  from  thence  and  steered  for  the 
Virgins,  and  next  day  anchored  in  the  same  harbour  and 
place,  which  not  long  before  had  proved  so  convenient  for 
fitting  his  Highness's  ships. 

8th. — A  great  comet  was  discovered  in  the  south-east, 
30  degrees  above  the  horizon  the  first  night,  the  same  for 
four  nights,  elevated  about  8  degrees  higher  each  night. 
It  disappeared  not  till  Christmas-Day. 

12th. — Set  sail  from  the  Leeward  Virgin,  having  taken 
in  fresh  water  and  fitted. 

January  16th. — His  Highness  arrived  safe  at  Fayal  and 
there  came  to  an  anchor,  in  expectation  of  friendly  en- 
tertainment, but  the  Governor  fired  at  him,  and  would 

VOL.  III.  N  N 


546  APPENDIX. 

not  let  him  continue  there  ;  so  he  sailed  from  thence  to 
St.  Michael's,  another  of  the  Western  islands,  belonging 
to  the  King  of  Portugal ;  the  Governor  whereof  enter- 
tained the  Prince  with  bullets  for  salutation,  as  he  at 
Fayal  had  done  before.  So  he  set  sail  from  thence  for 
France,  after  he  had  some  days  been  plying  among  the 
islands.  His  Highness  had  not  been  very  well  since  he 
came  from  the  islands  of  the  West  Indies,  and  now  fresh 
provisions  being  a  rarity,  a  present  of  two  hens  and  a  few 
eggs  were  very  acceptable,  which  the  master  of  one  of  the 
prizes  brought  him. 

March  3rd.— After  many  storms  and  tempests,  his 
Highness,  with  his  little  fleet  of  five  ships,  arrived  in 
sight  of  Belleisle,  and  next  day  came  to  an  anchor  at  St. 
Nasarous,  near  the  Castle,  from  which,  as  also  from  a 
fleet  of  Dutch  ships,  his  Highness  received  and  returned 
salutes. 

29th. — His  Highness  departed  from  aboard  the  ship, 
and  took  his  journey  for  Paris. 

This  Journal  was  delivered  to  Mr.  Holmes, 
and  by  him  sent  to  Paris  to  the  Prince. 


E. 

List   of    Prince    Rupert's    Mezzotinto    Engravings   and 
Etchings  now  in  being. 

Rupert,  Prince  Palatine,  born  1619. 

1.  The  Executioner  of  St.  John,  with  the  decollated 
head  in  his  right  hand,  and  a  drawn  sword  in  his  left,  on 
which  are  the  letters  R.  P.,  surmounted  by  a  crown,  date 
1658.  At  the  back  of  the  figure  the  cross  and  scroll. 
(Height  25$  inches,  width  174.) 


APPENDIX.  547 

%*  All  other  impressions  known  have  the  following 
inscription  on  an  entablature  at  the  foot  of  the  picture  : — 

"  Sp.=In.  RVP.  P.  FECIT.       FRANCOFVRTI.  AN'o.   1658. 
M.  =.  A.  P.  R." 

excepting  one  impression,  which  is  in  the  Bibliotheque  du 
Roi  at  Paris,  having  only  Sp.  =  In.  (Spagnoletti  invenit) 
on  the  entablature,  and  R.  p.  ^f  1658  on  the  sword- 
blade. 

2.  Portrait  of  a  Magdalen,  with  clasped  hands,  looking 
upwards,  long  dark  hair,  inscribed  : 

"  Rupertus  D.  G.  C.  P.  D.  B.     Princeps  Imperii 
Animi  gratia  lusit." 

In  the  corner,  "  M.  Merian  pinxit."  Height  8|  inches, 
width  6J. 

3.  Portrait,  supposed  to  be  the  Prince,  leaning  on  the 
left  arm ;  the  head  resting  on  the  right  hand.     Cap  and 
feathers.     Height  8  inches,  width  6§. 

*#*  There  are  copies  of  this  print.  I  have  one  by  W. 
Vaillant  done  in  the  lifetime  of  Rupert,  and  inscribed : 
"  Prins  Robbert,  vinder  van  de  Swart  Prent  Konst," 
shewing  the  Prince  claimed  the  invention  as  soon  as  he 
came  over  into  England  a  second  time,  as  Vaillant  was  an 
artist  he  brought  with  him. 

4.  A  three-quarters  length   portrait,   generally   called 
"  The  Standard  Bearer,"  in  a  slashed  cap  and  feathers; 
the  right  hand  grasping  a  standard ;  the  left  resting  on  a 
shield,  on  the  edge  of  which  is  inscribed :  "  [1]658.  Rup*. 
P:  Fee."     Height  11  inches,  width  8£. 

5.  The  same  portrait  to  the  shoulders,  but  somewhat 
larger,  and  looking  more  to  the  left.      Height  7-|  inches, 
width  6i. 

6.  The  bust  of  an  old  man  with  bald  head  and  flowing 
beard.     "  R.  P."  in  the  left-hand  top  corner.      5  inches 
square. 

N    N    2 


548  APPENDIX. 

7.  The  head  of  the  Executioner  of  St.  John  (as  No.  1), 


in  the  right-hand  top  corner,  Ijfv.     Height   5J   inches, 
width  6£.  KE/ 

*#*  This  is  the  head  done  for  Mr.  Evelyn's  Sculp tura, 
8vo.  1662;  in  which  Evelyn  gives  a  chapter,  "  Of  the  new 
way  of  engraving,  or  Mezzotinto,  invented  and  communi- 
cated by  his  Highness  Prince  Rupert,  Count  Palatine  of 
the  Rhine,  &c." — This  head  has  been  copied. 

8.  The  same  head  looking  to  the  right  (dubious). 

9.  A  portrait  of  Oliver    Cromwell,   an    oval,    at   the 
corners,  "  O.  C.   P.  R.  fc." 

10.  Another  portrait  of  Oliver  Cromwell,  8vo.,  appears 
unfinished ;  a  portrait  turned  to  the  right.     %*  Bought 
at  Sir  Mark  Sykes's  sale,  with  No.  9,  by  Mrs.  Suther- 
land.    Now  in  the  Bodleian  Library. 

11.  A  Monk  in  his  Cell,  with  table  and  book,  under  a 
window  admitting  the  light ;  it  is  behind  the  monk.     On 
the  right  of  him  is  a  chair,  inscribed  at  the  top  "  RVP. 
Pr.  fee."      Length  5J  inches,  width    4J.      %*    In  the 
collection  of  the  Archduke  Charles. 

12.  A  Woman's  Head,  looking  down,  in  an  oval.    Wai- 
pole's  History  of  Engravers,  p.  75. 

ETCHINGS    BY    PRINCE    RUPERT. 

Though  not  precisely  connected  with  the  subject  of 
Mezzotinto  engraving,  yet,  as  the  Etchings  of  Prince 
Rupert  are  excessively  rare,  and  have  been  seen  but  by 
few  persons,  I  have  subjoined  the  following  list,  making,  I 
believe,  a  complete  catalogue  of  his  works.  Strutt,  in  his 
Biographical  Dictionary  of  Engravers,  vol.  ii.  p.  284,  ob- 
serves, "  Florent  le  Comte,"  speaking  of  Prince  Rupert, 
"  says  he  etched  two  small  landscapes."  These  I  know 
nothing  of ;  it  might  be  a  mistake  of  Le  Comte's.  The 
prints  from  which  the  following  description  is  taken  were 


APPENDIX.  549 

in  my  possession,  with  the  Mezzotinto  prints,  but  are 
now  in  the  British  Museum. 

1 .  An  old  Mendicant  Friar,  whole-length ;  his  arms  are 
folded  in  front,  a  rosary  hangs  down,  and  a  staff  may  be 
perceived  at  the  bottom  of  his  long  dress  ;  his  feet  are  very 
imperfectly  denned.     On  the  right  are  five  soldiers,  seat- 
ed, with  two  figures  standing  near  them.     In  the  distance 
a  city  is  seen,  with  a  river  in  front  of  it ;  on  the  left  are 
other  figures,  which  are  imperfect,  owing  to  the  failure  of 
the  aquafortis ;  beneath  them  the  letters  R.P.,  and  in  a 
portion  of  architecture,  near  the  margin,  also  on  the  left, 
Rup.  Pr.  F.  1637.     This  was  etched  by  the  Prince  in  his 
seventeenth  year,  and  is  in  the  manner  of  Callot.     Height 
8f ,  width  5£. 

2.  A  Beggar,  a  whole-length   figure    singing,    turned 
towards  the  left ;  his  dress  is  much  patched,  and  he  has 
no  shoes ;  in  the  back-ground,  on  the  right,  is  a  long  boat, 
which  has  an  awning  at  the  end,  and  on  the  rocky  shore 
behind  are  buildings  with  an  open  archway.  Three  figures 
are  at  the  door  of  an  inn  on  the  left,  and  in  the  distance 
is  a  bridge  of  four  arches.     Etched  also  in  the  style  of 
Callot,  and  has  no  mark.     Height  10J,  width  6£. 

3.  A  Landscape,  with  a  man  driving  a  loaded  waggon, 
in  which  he  is  seated;    it  is  drawn  towards   the  back- 
ground by  two  horses ;  on  the  left  is  a  large  tree,  some 
buildings,  and  a  bower,  are  seen  in  the  distance  on  the 

right.     On  which  side,  at  the  bottom,  is  the  mark  ^jjjr 
and  the  date  1657.     Height  3f ,  width  4}.1  Rp 


F. 

The  following  letter  was  written  after  Prince  Rupert's 
death  ;  but  it  is  so  interesting  in  its  relation  to  the  politics 

1  This  list  was  made  out  by  Mr.  H.  W.  Diamond  for  the  Antiquarian 
Society. 


550  APPENDIX. 

of  James  II.,  that  the  historical  reader  will  feel  indebted 
to  the  source  from  whence  it  came  : — 


FROM  JAMES  II,  TO  THE  DUKE  OF  BEAUFORT. 

I  forgot  when  you  went  out  of  town  to  give  you 
directions  to  speak  with  such  Parliament  men  as  you  shall 
see  in  the  country,  about  what  I  intend  to  endeavour  to 
have  done  when  they  shall  meet  next;  which  is,  to  have 
the  two  Tests  and  Penal  Laws  repealed,  that  my  Catholic 
subjects  may  be  in  the  same  condition  the  rest  of  my 
subjects  are.  Therefore  pray  take  pains  with  such  as 
make  difficulty  to  promise  to  comply  with  my  so  reason- 
able terms,  and  get  as  many  of  them  as  you  can  to  pro- 
mise you  positively  that  they  will  do  it,  so  that  against 
you  come  back  hither  you  may  be  able  to  give  me  a  true 
account ;  and  send  to  such  as  are  anything  near  you  to 
come  to  you,  that  you  may  speak  with  them  about  it. 
As  for  the  Herefordshire  men  that  are  here  in  town,  I 
have  spoken  with  all  of  them,  and  they  have  fully  satisfied 
me.  I  hear  Sir  John  Morgan  is  in  the  country.  Be  sure 
to  send  for  him,  and  speak  with  him ;  for,  if  he  will  not 
comply,  of  which  I  do  not  doubt,  he  shall  be  no  longer  in 
my  pay.  Speak  also  to  as  many  as  you  can  of  the  Welsh 
Members,  and  take  great  care  to  get  none  but  such  as  you 
can  be  sure  of  to  be  chosen  in  the  vacancies  which  are 
where  you  have  to  do.  I  have  a  very  good  prospect  of 
being  able  to  carry  it  in  both  Houses ;  but  no  pains  must 
be  spared  to  gain  people,  which  is  all  I  have  now  to  say. 

J.  R.1 

Whitehall,  February  12,  168$. 

For  his  Majesty's  service. 

For  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Beaufort, 

at  Badminton  in  Gloucestershire. 


From  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Beaufort's  MSS. 


APPENDIX.  551 


G. 

When  Cromwell  landed  in  Ireland,  "  nine  parts  in  ten 
of  that  island  held  for  the  King,"  as  Ludlow,  Cromwell's 
enemy  and  the  King's,  admits.  Since  the  days  of  Straf- 
ford's  stern  but  impartial  rule,  Ireland  had  made  a  vast 
stride  in  prosperity,  notwithstanding  the  rebellion  of  1641. 
That  great  and  able  statesman  had  done  for  that  country 
what  the  early  Plantagenets  did  for  England,  by  sweeping 
away  all  tyranny  except  his  own,  he  had  given  room  to 
the  people  to  grow  up  and  acquire  strength.  The  King's 
compelled  consideration  towards  the  Irish,  and  Ormond's 
wise,  gentle,  and  conciliatory  government,  had  elevated 
their  national  character,  and  inspired  a  sense  of  im- 
portance unknown  to  them  till  then.  They  at  least  ap- 
peared to  have  profited  by  the  King's  adversity ;  but,  like 
the  Scots,  their  first  rebellion  and  too  late  royalty,  only 
purchased  a  temporary  and  deceitful  triumph.  Cromwell's 
murderous  hand  soon  smote  them  to  the  earth.  He 
slaughtered  with  a  ruthlessness,  only  to  be  paralleled  by 
his  prototypes,  the  chiefs  of  Israel,  and  with  much  the 
same  object  and  intention  j1  but  he  made  Ireland  pay  a 
still  more  bitter  penalty  for  opposition  to  his  rule ;  he 
flung  her  back  a  century  in  civilization,  and  perhaps  for 
ever,  in  that  hopeful  spirit  so  essential  to  the  prosperity 
of  a  nation.  Even  Lady  Fanshaw  marked  the  change 


1  "  Ireland  was  the  great  capital  out  of  which  all  debts  were  paid, 
all  services  rewarded,  and  all  acts  of  bounty  performed  ;"  says  Claren- 
don, speaking  of  the  Parliamentary  conquest  of  that  unhappy  country. 
Harris  gravely  endeavours  to  confute  the  assertion  that  Ireland  was  to  be 
unceremoniously  appropriated,  and  her  people  extirpated,  by  quoting 
from  the  preamble  to  the  "  Act  for  settling  Ireland,"  these  words  :  "  that 
the  people  of  Ireland  may  know  it  is  not  the  intention  of  the  Parliament 
to  extirpate  that  whole  nation :"  even  this  liberal  declaration,  however, 
was  only  pronounced  by  the  majority  of  a  single  vote.  Cromwell's  alter- 
native to  the  rebels  of  death  or  banishment  to  the  western  wilds  was 
pithily  expressed  by  "  Hell  or  Connaught,"  the  only  terms  oftered  to  the 
vanquished. 


552  APPENDIX. 

with  horror ;  "  We  left  that  brave  kingdom,"  she  says, 
"in  1651,  fallen  in  six  or  eight  months  into  a  most  mise- 
rable sad  condition,  as  it  hath  been  many  times  in  most 
king's  reigns;  God  knows  why!  for  I  presume  not  to  say; 
but  the  natives  seem  to  me  a  very  loving  people  to  each 
other,  and  constantly  false  to  all  strangers,  the  Spaniards 
only  excepted.1  The  career  of  Cromwell  from  the  storming 
of  Drogheda,2  was  one  continuous  stride  of  victory. 


H. 

[The  following  letter  has  been  omitted  by  some  acci- 
dent from  the  text.] 

DEAR  SIR  JOHN, 

I  am  very  much  beholding  to  you  for  the  care  you 
have  taken  to  send  the  letter  to  his  Majesty,  and  settling 
an  intelligence  to  France.  I  will  not  fail  to  send  a  frigate 
to  you  as  soon  as  the  weather  removes  our  friends  from 
this  coast.  Though  the  blow  my  Lord-lieutenant  has  re- 
ceived is  considerable,  yet  Cromwell's  landing  at  Dublin 
with  part  of  his  army,  which  is  certainly  reported,  does 
not  frighten  us,  neither  do  I  think  it  should  hinder  any 
sign  his  Majesty  had  before  for  this  place,  though  I  dare 
not  counsel  him  to  continue  the  same,  the  event  being 
hazardous  to  his  own  person ;  yet  I  could  wish  he  would 
rather  hazard  himself  this  way  than  by  looking  on ;  our 
army  will  in  a  few  days  consist  of  ten  thousand  effective 
foot,  and  four  thousand  horse  ;  O'Neil,  I  doubt  not, 
would  come  in ;  our  fleet  is  ready  and  in  order ;  I  need 
not  give  you  more  reasons,  I  hope  the  best.  As  for  your 

1  "  The  country  exceeds/'  her  ladyship  continues,  "  in  timber  and  sea- 
ports, and  great  plenty  of  fish,  flesh,  and  fowl." 

2  At  Drogheda,  or  Tredagh,  as  it  was  then  called,  our  old  correspondent 
Sir  Arthur  Aston  was  put  to  the  sword  amongst  otheis. 


APPENDIX.  553 

own  business,  I  have  put  Antony  Browne  upon  it,  who 

assured  me  that  within he  will  send  a  vessel  to 

you  with  clothes  and  such  necessaries  as  you  want.  I  have 
undertaken  that  if  you  are  not  in  a  condition  to  pay  for 
it,  that  out  of  the  next  prizes  we  take  he  shall  be  paid ; 
but  take  you  no  notice  to  him  or  to  any  other,  that  you 
know  this,  but  order  your  business  as  you  shall  see  occa- 
sion. You  may  assure  yourself  that  I  shall  omit  nothing 
which  shall  tend  to  your  service  there  or  elsewhere,  as  far 
as  the  power  extends  of  your  most  loving  friend, 

RUPERT.1 

27  Aug.  1649. 


I. 

[The  following  fragmentary  correspondence  is  too  curi- 
ous to  be  omitted,  though  it  does  not  relate  to  the  subject 
of  these  memoirs.  It  was  found  among  Prince  Rupert's 
papers.] 

Dublin,  Feb.  22,  1672. 
SIR, 

The  first  proposal  was  grounded  upon  men's  having 
more  acres  than  their  respective  grants  did  mention,  the 
Down  Survey  being  Judge. 

What  you  now  propound  must  depend  upon  what  Pfo- 
testants,  Church,  and  Innocents  have  as  their  right  in 
anno  1641,  which  really  was  not  so.  For  this  you  think 
fit  to  offer  12,OOOZ.  per  annum.  To  which  I  answer,  it 
shall  be  done  when  the  same  is  possessed,  as  in  the  other 
case ;  only  it  must  be  considered  how  the  lawsuits  shall 
be  managed,  by  whom  judged,  for  —  &c. 

But  this  difficulty  is  no  more  than  would  have  pestered 
the  effects  of  your  inspection  ;  for  whatever  you  had  re- 
ported must  have  passed  all  the  quillets  of  the  law,  juries, 
sheriffs,  demurrers,  writs  of  error,  &c. 

1  From  Lord  John  Fitzroy's 


554  APPENDIX. 

So  as  to  undertake  more  by  Michaelmas  day  than  what 
depends  upon  admeasurement,  will  but  argue  an  ignorance 
and  temerity.  Ergo.  But  in  brief,  whatever  others  can 
offer,  I  think  we  shall  perform  more  than  they,  and  that 's 
enough. 

Dublin,  Feb.  7,  1672. 

Let  a  draught  be  made  on  your  side  of  the  agreement, 
and  send  it  me  over  when  it  hath  been  perused  by  the 
other  party.  You  must  remember  that.  Ten  potent  men 
threaten  fire  and  sword  against  it,  and  Antichrist  reigns 
furiously  in  that  pit  and  cage  of  unclean  birds,  wherefore, 
Dr.  Aken,  the  author  of  the  State  of  Ireland  says,  the 
English  lost  about  600,000£.,  which,  had  it  been  truly 
computed,  was  five  hundred  times  as  much.  That  five 
hundred  should  have  been  but  five,  for  five  times  600,000/. 
is  three  millions,  which  is  as  much  as  the  personal  estate 
of  all  Ireland  is  now  worth.  Smaller  matters,  "  quae  faci- 
unt  pro  nobis,"  may  be  winked  at.  I  am  really  yours. 

Dublin,  Feb.  7,  1672. 

The  clause  concerning  former  miscarriages  in  Con- 
naught,  is  in  page  28  of  the  Act  of  Settlement. 

That  of  Sir  William  Petty's  Admeasurement  in  page  73 
of  the  Explanatory. 

By  Cromwell  were  reserved,  undisposed  to  soldiers  or 
adventurers,  towards  bearing  the  charge  of  their  govern- 
ment, the  counties  of  Dublin,  Carlow,  Kildare,  and  Cork, 
wherein  was  the  Barony  of  Muskerry,  one  hundred  and 
fifty  thousand  acres.  And  in  the  county  of  Kerry  it  was 
death  for  an  Irishman  to  be  taken. 

In  the  Lords  Commissioners'  Report  to  his  Majesty, 
dated  13th  June,  1671,  in  the  4th  page,  the  Surveyor- 
General  alleges  that  about  three  millions  of  English  acres 
would  suffice  soldiers,  adventurers,  creditors  for  arms, 


APPENDIX.  555 

&c.,  and  five  millions  might  have  remained  at  his  Ma- 
jesty's disposal. 

In  the  2nd  page  his  certificate  computes  the  forfeited 
lands  there  to  be  eight  millions  of  English  acres ;  whereas 
all  dispositions  of  lands  there  were  by  Irish  acres,  planta- 
tion-measure, whereof  five  are  about  eight  English. 

Only  the  quit-rents  are  set  according  to  English  mea- 
sure. 

The  soldiers  and  adventurers  have  about  two  millions 
Irish  measure  ;  and  near  three  millions  more  of  the  same 
measure  have  been  disposed  to  Innocents  and  others  by 
the  settlement. 

Upon  his  Majesty's  restoration,  it  was  the  more  easy  to 
be  their  own  carvers  in  these  reserved  counties ;  they,  as 
having  been  public,  were  the  less  looked  after.  Some  out 
of  Connaught  got  the  then  state-tenants  to  attorn  to  them, 
on  good  terms,  for  more  land  than  they  ever  claimed  be- 
fore the  late  wars,  and  yet  held  what  they  were  trans- 
planted to  in  Connaught. 


K. 

THE  PROCEEDING  TO  THE  FUNERAL  OF  HIS  HIGHNESS 
PRINCE  RUPERT,  THE  6TH  OF  DECEMBER,  1684,  FROM 
THE  PAINTED  CHAMBER  TO  THE  SOUTH  DOOR  OF  THE 
ABBEY  OF  WESTMINSTER.1 

First,  two  companies  of  foot,  to  make  a  .guard  leading 
from  the  stairs  to  the  Abbey. 
Marshal's  Men. 

Servants  to  Gentlemen,  Esquires,  bare-headed. 
The  Prince's  Watermen,  two  and  two. 

1  MS.  Harl.  6815,  fol.  208. 


556  APPENDIX. 

Footmen,  two  and  two.  Grooms,  and  other  ordinary 
servants,  two  and  two,  and  grooms  of  his  chamber. 

Gentlemen  servants  to  Knights  and  others  of  the  Privy 
Council. 

Gentlemen  servants  of  the  Nobility. 

Gentlemen  servants  to  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  York. 

Gentlemen  servants  to  the  Queen. 

Gentlemen  servants  to  the  King,  in  their  order. 

Pages  to  the  Prince. 

The  Prince's  Gentlemen. 

Gentleman  of  the  Horse. 

Chaplains  to  the  Prince. 

Secretaries  to  the  Prince. 

Officers  of  Arms,  and  three  so  far  bareheaded. 

Baron's  younger  sons. 

Viscounts'  younger  sons. 

Privy  Councillors. 

Barons'  eldest  sons. 

Earls'  younger  sons. 

Viscounts'  eldest  sons. 

Irish,  Scotch,  and  English  Barons. 

Bishops. 

Marquises'  younger  sons. 

Earls'  eldest  sons. 

Irish,  Scotch,  and  English  Viscounts. 

Dukes*  younger  sons. 

Marquises'  eldest  sons. 

Earls,  Irish,  Scotch,  and  English. 

Earls  that  are  great  Officers. 

Dukes'  eldest  sons. 

Marquises. 

Dukes,  Irish,  Scotch,  and  English. 

Dukes  that  have  great  Offices. 

Two  Officers  of  Arms. 

The  four  great  Officers. 

Here,  the  Dean  of  the  Chapel,  Prebends,  and  Choir. 


APPENDIX.  557 

Two   Officers  :     The  Coronet  and  Cushion,     Mr.  Colt, 
one  on  each  side.        carried  by  Mr.  Norroy. 

Supporters,  two.          The  Body.  Supporters,  two.1 

A  canopy  carried  by  eight  of  the  Prince's  Gentlemen. 

The  Guard  to  carry  the  Body. 
Gentleman  Usher.  Garter.  Gentleman  Usher. 

Supported  The  Chief  Mourner.  Supported. 

D.  Grafton,         Earl  of  Craven  in  cloak,      E.  Feversham, 

in  cloak,  no  his  train  borne  by  in  cloak,  no 

train.  train. 

Assistants  to  Chief  Mourner. 
Earl  Denbigh.  Earl  Westmoreland. 

Viscount  Mordant.         Viscount  Newport. 
Lord  North.  Lord  Cornwallis. 

The  Yeomen  of  the  Guard  to  close  the  proceeding. 
Mr.  Colt,  Gentleman  of  the  Horse. 
Mr.  Gadford,  Chaplain. 

Gents. 

Mr.  Dewcet.  Mr.  Simon. 

Mr.  Cowth.  Mr.  Kirk. 

Mr.  Pike.  Mr.  Hawley. 

Mr.  Hughes. 

Pages. 
Mr.  Jean.  Mr.  Rayney. 

Grooms  of  the  Chamber. 
Mr.  Martin.  Mr.  Berry. 

Mr.  Tayler,  Huntsman. 
Mr.  Cornelius,  Butler. 
Mr.  Goyer,  Tennis  Player. 
Johannes  the  Turner. 


1  Sir  Francis  Lawley,  Sir  William  Walter,  Sir  Thomas  Ogle,  Sin 
William  Tirringham,  ordered  so  by  his  Majesty,  for  want  of  Earls' 
younger  sons  and  Barons'  eldest  sons. 


558  APPENDIX. 

Ermindinger,  Gunsmith. 
Michael,  the  Saddle  Knight. 
Boiler,  the  Coachman. 

Grooms. 

Pearce.  Franck. 

John.  John  de  Main. 

Postillions. 
John.  Robin. 

Helpers. 
Richard.  Thomas. 

Footmen. 

Johannes.  Richard  Davis. 

Herbert  Coel.  Thomas  Head. 

William  Ford.  Robert  Silvester. 

Thirteen  Watermen. 


L. 

Extracts  from  a  MS.  in  the  possession  of  the  Earl  of 
Craven,  at  Combe  Abbey.  It  is  endorsed  "A  book  of 
Accounts  of  what  is  received  and  paid  by  the  Right 
Honourable  the  Earl  of  Craven,  as  executor  of  his  High- 
ness Prince  Rupert,  deceased."  This  curious  paper  is 
beautifully  written  and  admirable  arranged.  At  the  end 
of  the  account  is  a  release  to  Lord  Craven,  signed  by  Mrs. 
Hughes  and  Ruperta,  the  Prince's  daughter,  and  her 
mother. 

RECEIVED,  Dec.  7th,  1682. 

Found  in  the  Prince's  iron  chest,  1694  guineas. 

£.  s.  d. 

Found  there  also  in  silver  .  1000  0  0 

For  plate  sold          .  .  .  2070  0  0 

Of  Mr.  Wills  for  a  pack  of  Hounds  .   120  0  0 

Of  Mr.  Colt  for  four  coach  mares  .     26  0  0 


APPENDIX.  559 

£.      s.      d. 

For  an  old  blind  mare        .  .  .100 

Of  Sir  John  Earnly  for  a  hunting  mare      .     40     0     0 

Of  a  coachmaker  for  an  old  chariot  .       400 

Sir   James  Hayes   for    100/.  stock  in  the 

Hudson's  Bay  Company  sold  to  him       .  350     0     0 

Of  Colonel  Oglethorpe  for  nine  guns          .     21   10     0 

From  the  Earl  of  Craven  for  the  cover  of 

a  book  of  gold  enamelled         «£t  /]          .     50     0     0 

Of  Sir  Charles  BickerstaiF  for  a  yacht,  be- 
sides 14£  allowed  for  materials  wanting  46  0  0 

Of  Mr.  Charles  Griffith  for  the  Prince's 

Library.          r"T;'      ?  '.:         '.  'j   '          .   100     00 

Of  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  for  a 
diamond  George,  and  an  onyx  George, 
and  a  garter  set  with  rubies  *'i  /'  .313  0  0 

Of  Mrs.  Ellen  Gwynne  for  the  great  pearl 

necklace          ....     4520     0     0 

For  the    King  and   Queen  of  Bohemia's 

heads  cut  in  stones          .  .  60     0     0 

PAID,  Dec.  16th,  1682.  Mrs.  Browne  the 
graver's  wife,  the  Prince  having  pro- 
mised it  himself  .  .  .  10  0  0 

To  Mr.  Colt,  the  Gentleman  of  the  Horse 
in  full  of  all  board  wages  and  bills  re- 
lating to  the  stables  .  .  .  578  14  9 

Mr.  Sedgewick  perry  wig-maker     .  .     38     0     0 

Mr.  Richard  Russell  for  a  hearse  to  carry 

the  body  .  .  .  0  10     0 

Mr.  Piker  for  mourning  for  himself  and 

two  more  .  .  .  .     19     0    0 

Mr.  Ceilings  for  translating  the  Bishop  of 
Lincoln's  works  into  Latin,  by  Prince 
Rupert's  order  .  .  .  .  21  10  0 

Mr.  Exton,  the  Proctor,  for  proving  the 

Prince's  will  500 


560  APPENDIX. 

£.      s.    d. 

Mr.  Chase  the  Apothecary's  bill    .  .250 

Thomas  Bennet,  the  secretary,  in  full  of 

all  demands  .  .  .  .  800  0  0 

Mr.  Beavour,  the  jeweller,  for  commission 
for  selling  the  great  necklace  and  setting 
some  of  the  stones  for  sale  .  .  60  0  0 

Spent  in  dinner  upon  the  jury  which  tried 
the  cause  with  Captain  Charles  Lloyd, 
they  being  most  Justices  of  the  Peace, 
and  persons  of  quality  .  .  .  12  0  0 

There  are  sundry  payments  on  account  to  Mrs.  Hughes 
and  Ruperta,  on  the  whole  amounting  to  about  6000/. 
each.  The  payments  to  members  of  the  Prince's  house- 
hold include  those  to  a  turner,  tennis-player,  barber, 
milliner,  and  gunsmith. 


561 


EDITIONS  OF  THE  PRINCIPAL  WORKS  QUOTED. 


Albemarle  on  War 

Archbishop  Williams  (Life  of) 

Archbishop  Laud  (Diary  and  Life  of) 

Baillie's  Letters  .          '  V 

Baker's  Chronicle 

Baxter's  Life,  &c.          .  .  v 

Berkeley,  Sir  John's,  Narrative 

Berry's,  Miss,  Comparative  View 

Bromley's  Royal  Letters     .  t'[''-i 

Bulstrode's  Memoirs      .  *.  ; 

Bussy,  Rabutin,  Memoires  de      "  . 

Campbell's  Admirals     . 

Carlyle's  Cromwell 

Clarendon's  History  of  the  Rebellion     . 

Life    . 

Clarendon  and  Whitelocke  compared    . 
Coleridge's,  H.,  Worthies,  &c. 
Court  and  Times  of  Charles  I.  . 
Cromwell,  Vita  di  (Leti)    . 
Cromwelliana  .... 
D'Aubigny's  Protector        .         1/L..j  ' 
Defoe's  Works 

De  Grammont,  Memoirs  of     (Hamilton) 
D'Israeli's  Charles  I.    . 
Dugdale's  Troubles 

Warwickshire 

Evelyn's  Medals    . 

Sculp  tura 

Echard      . 

Fairfax  Correspondence 
Fanshawe's,  Lady,  Memoirs 
Forster's  Statesmen  of  the  Commonwealth 
Fox,  C.  J.,  History  of  James  II.    . 
Guizot's  Revolution  d'Angleterre 
Hallam's  Constitutional  History 
Hampden,  Lord  Nugent's  Life  of   . 
Harris's  Charles  I. 
Heath's  Chronicle 
VOL.  III. 


London,  1677. 

Cambridge,  1700. 

Oxford,  1839. 

Edinburgh,  1841. 

London,  1674. 

London,  1846. 

London,  1673. 

London,  1834. 

London,  1779. 

London,  1721. 

Bruxelles,  1823. 

London,  1778. 

London,  1846. 

Oxford,  1842. 

Oxford,  1827. 

London,  1720. 

London,  1826. 

London,  1848. 

Amsterdam,  1692. 

Westminster,  1810. 

Edinburgh,  1849. 
London,       1840-1. 

London,  1809. 

London,  1828. 

London,  1651. 


London, 
London, 

London, 

London, 

London, 

London, 

Bruxelles, 

London, 

London, 

London, 

London, 

O  O 


1754f 
1829. 

1848. 
1702. 
1790. 
1848. 
1843. 
1842. 
1844. 
1766. 
1676. 


562 


WORKS  QUOTED. 


History  of  Prince  Rupert          .  .  London, 

Hollings's  History  of  Leicester       .  .      Leicester, 

Howell's  Familiar  Letters         .  .  London, 

Hume's  History  of  England  .  .      London, 

Hutchinson's  Memoirs  .  .  London, 

Icon  Basilicon       ....      London, 
Kennet's  History          .  .  .  London, 

Lilly's  Life  and  Times       .  .    • 

Lloyd's  State  Worthies  .  .  London, 

Ludlow's  Memoirs  .  .  .      Switzerland, 

Macaulay's  England     .  .  .  London, 

Essays  .  .  .      London, 

Mackintosh's  England  .  .  .  London, 

Vindicise  Gallicae      .  .      London, 

Maseres'  Tracts 

Maston's  Naseby  ....      Leicester, 

May's  History  of  the  Parliament  .  London, 

Milton's  Prose  Works         .  .  .      London, 

Munroe's  Discipline  of  the  Suede          .  London, 

Napier's  Montrose  .  .  .      London, 

Newcastle,  Life  of  Marquis  of  .  .  London, 

Nichols's  History  of  Leicestershire 

Orrery's  Art  of  War     .  . 

Pamphlets,  King's  .    ( 

Pennant's  London 

Queen  of  Bohemia,  Life  of  .  j 

Rushworth's  Historical  Collection 

Russell,  Lord  John,  on  English  Government 

French  Revolution 

Saunderson's  Life  of  Charles  I. 

Secret  Memoirs  of  Charles  II. 

Shawe's  History  of  Staffordshire 

Shropshire  History,  Owen  and  Blakeway    . 

Somers's  Tracts 

Strickland's,  Miss,  Queens  of  England 

Thurloe's  State  Papers 

Vicars's  Jehovah  Jireh 

Walpole's  Noble  Authors 

— Anecdotes  of  Painting    . 

Warburton's  (Bishop)  Works  . 

Ward,  Life  and  Diary  of  . 

Warwick's  Memoirs     .  .  .  London, 


1683. 
1840. 
1754. 
1810. 
1846. 
1649. 
1719. 
1822. 
1764. 
1698. 
1849. 
]843. 
1830. 
1815. 

1792. 
1647. 
1806. 
1642. 
1840. 
1702. 


London,  1677. 

British  Museum. 

1790. 

1825. 

1703. 

1823. 

1832. 

1658. 

1792. 
(Brit.  Mus.  copy.) 

Do. 
London,  1811. 


London, 
London, 
London, 
London, 
London, 
London, 
London, 


British  Museum. 

Do. 

London, 
London, 
London, 
London, 


1759. 
1786. 
1788. 
1827. 
1702. 


563 


INDEX. 


Abstract  of  i  Rupert'  correspondence, 
i.  491. 

Albemarle,  Lord,  see  Monk,  General. 

Alphabetical  list  of  Prince  Rupert's 
correspondents  preserved  in  the 
« Benett'  family,  i.  472. 

Ambassadors,  Dutch,  arrival  of,  ii. 
374. 

Apprentices,  London,  enlist  in  trained 
bands,  ii.  65;  commanded  by  Ma- 
jor-General Skippon,  ii.  65. 

Armeatiers,  siege  of,  iii.  239. 

Army,  Covenanters,  at  Dunce,  i.  169; 
negotiate  with  Charles  I.  i.  170. 

Ireland,  disbanded  by  the  House 

of  Commons,  i.  200. 

Palatine,  see  Palatine. 

Plot,  chief    conspirators  of,  i. 

191  ;    petition   of,  i.    193  ;    King 
Charles  signs  petition  of,  i.  194  ; 
useful  to  everybody  except  the  King, 
i.  196. 

Parliamentary,  trained    bands 

exercised,  i.  253 ;  assembles  at  Not- 
tingham, i.   353 ;    equipped   from 
the  Tower  to  Hull,  i.  374;  Crom- 
well's advice  to,  ?'&.;  how  officered, 
i.  375;  costume  of,  ib. ;  description 
of  standard  of,  i.  376;  advanced- 
guard   of,    at   Worcester,   i.   401  ; 
movements  of,  i.  402  ;  parliament- 
ary horse  routed  at  Powick  bridge, 
i.  403 ;   costume  of,  i.  428 ;    ad- 
vance to  Keinton,  ii.  7;  Coventry 
reinforced,   ii.  9;    at  Edgehill,  ii. 
13;  flight  of  cavalry  at  Edgehill, 
ii.  23 ;  loss  of,  at  Edgehill,  ii.  30 ; 
retire  on  Warwick,  ii.  33;  reorgan- 
ized   at  Warwick,   ii.   39 ;    move- 
ments of,  ii.  46-7;  at  Woburn,  ii. 
52  ;  position  of,  ii.  52  ;  surrounds 
the  King  at  Acton,  ii.  59;  at  Brent- 
ford, ii.  63  ;  at  Turnham  Green,  ii. 
64  ;  at  Marlborough,  ii.  75  ;   de- 


Army,  Parliamentary,  continued. 
feat  of,  by  Lord  Newcastle,  ii.  79  ; 
invests  Oxford,  ii.  80-6-7;  move- 
ments of,  ii.  85;  Essex  advances 
on  Banbury,  ii.  91 ;  defeated  at 
Bradock  Downs,  ii.  99  ;  defeated  at 
Stratum  Downs,  ii.  100  ;  Sir  Wil- 
liam Waller  in  Cornwall,  ii.  101  ; 
positions  of,  in  January  1643,  ii. 
103 ;  position  of  in  Midland  Coun- 
ties, ii.  130  ;  besieges  Lichfield,  ii. 
132 ;  battle  of  Hopton  Heath,  ii. 
137;  marches  on  Reading,  ii.  140; 
Malmesbury  taken,  ii.  143 ;  Sir 
William  Waller  in  Wales,  ii.  145  ; 
Rousewell's  defence  of  Lichfield 
Close,  ii.  161,6-7-8-9-170;  Read- 
ing invested,  iii.  174-5,  7, 180  ;  Sir 
William  Waller  in  the  West,  ii. 
192 ;  returns  to  Oxford,  ii.  195  ; 
Chalgrove  fight,  ii.  203-9  ;  move- 
ments of,  ii.  217-8-9,220-1-2; 
battle  of  Lansdown,  ii.  233  ;  battle 
of  Roundway  Down,  ii.  234 ;  Sir 
N.  Fiennes  at  siege  of  Bristol,  ii. 
236;  capitulation  of  Bristol,  ii. 
259  ;  Cromwell  at  Gainsborough, 
ii.  271  ;  siege  of  Gloucester,  ii. 
279  ;  Gloucester  relieved,  ii.  285  ; 
Essex  attacked  in  Auborn  Chase, 
ii.  289-90-1  ;  battle  of  Newbury, 
ii.  293  ;  movements  of,  ii.  325  ; 
capture  of  Arundel  Castle,  ii.  328  ; 
Covenanters  march  to  Bath,  ii.  345; 
skirmishing  in  Midland  Counties, 
ii.  346-7  ;  siege  of  Nantwich,  note, 
ii.  365  ;  military  details,  ii.  370-1  ; 
operations  of  in  the  North,  note,  ii. 
380-1  ;  battle  of  Brandon  Heath, 
defeat  of  Hopton,  ii.  404  ;  Sir  Wil- 
liam Waller  takes  Winchester  Cas- 
tle, ii.  404;  invests  the  King  at 
Oxford,  ii.  413;  escape  of  the  King, 
ii.  414  ;  skirmish  at  Cropedy  bridge, 
O  0  2 


564 


INDEX. 


Ar.ny,  Parliamentary,  continued. 
ii.  420-1  ;  defeated  at  Lathom 
House,  ii.  429;  retire  to  Bolton,  ii. 
430;  battle  of  Bolton,  ii.  431; 
condition  of  at  Hessam  Moor,  ii. 
441 ;  battle  of  Marston  Moor,  ii. 
447;  plan  of  battle,  ii.  455;  re- 
sumed siege  of  York,  ii.  469  ;  dis- 
tribution of,  ii.  469  ;  position  of, 
after  Charles  quits  Oxford  for  Ex- 
eter, iii.  6  ;  position  of  Essex  at 
Foy,  iii.  11;  escape  of  Balfour's 
horse,  iii.  18  ;  Lord  Byron  defeated 
by,  iii.  21  ;  Sir  M.  Langdale  de- 
feated at  Malpas,  iii.  22;  position 
of,  before  second  battle  of  New- 
bury,iii.  24;  second  battle  of  New- 
bury,  iii.  29,  31  ;  strange  conduct 
of  commanders  of,  iii.  32;  Basing 
House  garrison  put  to  death  by 
Cromwell,  iii.  33;  dissolute  conduct 
of  soldiers  of,  iii.  36  ;  quarrel  of 
Manchester  and  Cromwell,  iii.  40; 
Fairfax,  Lieutenant-general  of,  iii. 
41;  treaty  of  Uxbridge,  iii.  42; 
Shrewsbury  surrendered,  Wey- 
mouth  taken,  iii.  58-9;  note,  iii. 
59 ;  battle  of  Pontefract,  iii.  67; 
Cromwell  takes  Blechington  House, 
iii.  76 ;  movements  of  Cromwell, 
iii.  77-9  ;  Plymouth  besieged,  iii. 
78  ;  Leicester  besieged,  iii.  87-8- 
9  ;  Cromwell  at  Banbury,  iii.  91  ; 
Taunton  relieved,  iii.  95;  Crom- 
well and  Fairfax,  iii.  97  ;  Ireton 
defeats  Cavaliers,  iii.  102  ;  junction 
of  Fairfax  and  Cromwell,  iii.  103  ; 
battle  of  Naseby,  iii.  103,  112; 
movements  of  Fairfax,  iii.  123  ; 
Scots  approach  Worcester,  iii.  136; 
Fairfax  and  Cromwell  in  the  West, 
iii.  153 ;  Bristol  taken,  in.  162, 
184;  Exeter  taken,  and  Oxford 
besieged,  iii.  218  ;  Oxford  taken, 
iii.  230  ;  strength  of  Parliamentary 
army  in  the  North,  iii.  246  ;  Cava- 
liers under  Hamilton  defeated  by 
Cromwell  at  Preston,  iii.  403  ;  be- 
siege Colchester  iii.  404-5. 

Army,  Royalist ;  its  composition,  i. 
167  ;  encamps  near  Berwick,  i. 
168;  negotiations  opened  with  Co- 
venanters, i.  190  ;  first  symptoms  of 
its  opposition  to  popular  power,  i. 
190 ;  army  plot,  i.  191  ;  at  Ripon, 
i.  197  ;  officered  by  soldiers  of  for- 
tune, i.  198  ;  demoralization  of,  i. 
199;  Lord  Holland,  General  of, 


Army,  Royalist,  continued. 

betrays  King's  cause  to  Parliament 
ib. ;  increase  of,  at  Nottingham,  i 
378  ;  Lord  Goring  surrenders  Ports 
mouth,  i.  379;  march  to  Derby,  i 
381  ;  joined  by  Lord  Paget,i.382 
imposing  appearance  of,  i.  382 
Lord  Northampton  attacks  Warwick 
Castle,  i.  383  ;  head-quarters  of,  at 
Shrewsbury,  i.  384 ;  speech  of 
Charles  I.  to,  i.  385  ;  want  of  arms 
for,  i.  389  ;  seizure  of  arms  at  Brad- 
gate,  i.  390  ;  leave  Worcester  and 
retire  towards  Shrewsbury,  i.  402  ; 
falls  back  upon  Ludlow,  i.  406  ;  ex- 
pedition of,  to  Chester,  i.  411 ;  cap- 
ture of  arms  at  Nantwich,  ih.  ; 
survey  of,  at  Shrewsbury,  i.  412, 
421  ;  mode  of  raising,  unlike  any 
before,  i.  417  ;  description  of  Lord 
Stuart's  troop  of  Guards,  i.  422; 
equipment  of  cavalry  in,  i.  424  ; 
description  of  infantry  in,  i.  426-9 ; 
list  of  principal  officers  in,  i.  430  ; 
advance  of,  in  three  divisions,  ii.  3  ; 
chiefly  composed  of  gentlemen,  ib.  ; 
strength  of,  at  Edgehill,  ii.  4  ;  ma- 
noeuvres of,  ii.  5  ;  jealousy  of  com- 
manders in,  ii.  8  ;  Coventry  sum- 
moned, ii.  9  ;  Lord  Digby  worsted 
at  Wolverhampton,  ib. ;  skirmish  at 
Wormleighton,  ii.  10  ;  manoeuvres 
of,  ib.  ;  jealousy  of  volunteers  at 
Edgehill,  ii.  17  ;  position  of,  after 
battle  of  Edgehill,  ii.  37  ;  at  Ban- 
bury,  ii.  39 ;  dilatory  movements 
of,  ii.  40  ;  progress  of,  to  London, 
ii.  53,  56,  61  ;  the  King's  position 
at  Acton,  ii.  59,  60  ;  at  Brentford, 
ii.  61  ;  battle  of  Brentford,  ii.  63  ; 
falls  back  upon  Reading,  ii.  66; 
garrisons  Wallingford  and  Brill, 
ii.  71 ;  Sir  William  Waller  takes 
Farnham  Castle,  ii.  73  ;  at  Oxford, 
ii.  76-9;  badly  equipped,  ii.  77, 
85  ;  Lord  Newcastle  in  the  North, 
ii.  78  ;  movements  of,  ii.  85  ;  Sir  J. 
Byron  at  Brentford,  ii.  90;  Brill 
Hill  garrisoned  by,  ii.  93  ;  battle  of 
Bradock  Downs,  ii.  99  ;  battle  of 
Strutton  Downs,  ii.  100  ;  Lord 
Digby  in  Wales,  ii.  101  ;  positions 
of,  in  January,  1643,  ii.  102  ;  Ru- 
pert takes  Cirencester,  ii.  109 ;  sum- 
mons Gloucester,  ii.  110;  position 
of,  ii.  143  ;  battle  of  Birmingham, 
ii.  152-3-4  ;  position  of,  in  Che- 
shire, ii.  158  ;  Rupert  attacks  Lich- 


INDEX. 


565 


Army,  Royalist,  continued. 

field,  ii.  159,  161-6-7-8-9;  Read- 
ing surrendered,  ii.  180;  junction 
of  Royalist  forces  in  the  West,  ii. 
192  ;  Prince  Maurice  at  Worcester, 
ii.  195  ;  Chalgrove  fight,  ii.  203-9  ; 
movements  of,  ii.  217-8-9,  220-1- 
2  ;  retrospect  of  campaign,  ii.  231  ; 
battle  of  Lansdown,  ii.  233  ;  retire 
to  Devizes,  ii.  234  ;  battle  of  Round- 
way  Down,  ib. ;    siege  of   Bristol, 
ii.  236  ;  loss  of,  at  siege  of  Bristol, 
ii.  265  ;  success  of,  ii.  271  ;  coun- 
cil  of  war  at  Bristol,    its   conse- 
quences, ii.  272 ;  besieges  Glouces- 
ter, ii.  275-6,280-1-2 ;  Cirencester 
surprised,  ii.  287  ;  battle  in  Auborn 
Chase,    ii.    289-90-1 ;    battle     of 
Newbury,   ii.   293;    movements  in 
West  of  England,  ii.  302-3  ;  move- 
ments of  Newcastle  in  the  North, 
ii.  307  ;  review  of  loss  of  leaders, 
ii.  314;    Bedford  taken,  ii.   321; 
movements   of  Lieutenant   Hopton, 
ii.  326  ;  mode  of  maintaining,   ii. 
335-6—7  ;    retrospect   of  campaign 
of  1643,  ii.   341  ;    skirmishing    in 
Midland  Counties,  ii. 346-7  ;  siege 
of  Nantwich,  note,  ii.  365  ;  military 
details,  ii.  370-1  ;  reinforced  from 
Ireland,  ii.  373  ;    state  of  Royalist 
forces  in  the  Noith,  ii.  381 ;  Newark 
relieved,  ii.  392-3-4-5-6-7  ;  battle 
of  Brandon  Heath,  ii.  404;  Crope- 
dy-bridge,  ii.  420-1  ;  relief  of  La- 
thom-house,  ii.  426-7-8-9;  battle 
of  Bolton,  ii.   430-1  ;    anxious   to 
engage  Parliamentary  forces,  ii.442  ; 
battle  of   Marston-Moor,    ii.   447 ; 
plan  of  battle,  ii.  455  ;  officers  of, 
address  a  letter  to   Essex  for  peace, 
iii.  8  ;  junction  of  Sir  R.  Grenville 
with,  iii.  11  ;  Essex  blocked  up  at 
Foy  by,  ib.  ;  details  of  campaign, 
iii.   12,   15;    Lord  Byron's  defeat, 
iii.  21  ;  defeat  of  Sir  M.  Langdale 
at  Malpas,  iii.  22  ;  distress  of  the 
garrisons,  ii.26  ;  Banbury  relieved, 
iii.  28  ;  second  battle  of  Newbury, 
iii.  29,  31  ;  Basing-House,  destruc- 
tion of  garrison,  iii,  33  ;  difficulties 
in  obtaining  supplies  for,  iii.  35  ; 
mode  of  obtaining  supplies,  iii.  58; 
Shrewsbury  surrendered,  Weymouth 
reduced,  iii.  58,   note,  iii.  59  ;  bat- 
tle of    Pontefract,    iii.   67,    note  ; 
Northern  horse  petition   for  home- 
quarters,  iii.  71  ;  movements  of,  iii. 


Army,  Royalist,  continued. 

73-4  ;    position    of,    before  battle 
of    Naseby,    iii.    85  ;    Goring    at 
Taunton,  iii.   86  ;  Campden- house 
dismantled,  iii.  87 ;    Leicester  be- 
sieged,  ib.   88-9;  defeat  of  Cava- 
liers by  Ireton,  iii.  102  ;  battle  of 
Naseby,  iii.  103,  112;  Goring  de- 
feated at  Lamport,  iii.  137  ;  siege  of 
Bristol,  iii.  162,  184  ;    council  of 
war  acquit  Rupert  of  surrendering 
Bristol  dishonourably,  iii.  201-2-3  ; 
Oxford  surrendered,  iii.  230  ;  Exe- 
ter taken  and  Oxford  besieged,  iii. 
218  ;  defeated  at  Preston,  iii.  403  ; 
Goring  defeated  at  Maidstone,  ib.; 
insurrection  in  Kent,  ib. ;  defence 
of  Colchester,  iii.  404-5  ;  death  of 
Sir  C.  Lucas  and  Sir  G.  Lisle,  iii.  ib. 
Arundel,  Lord  ;  goes  as  ambassador 
to    Vienna,  i.  71  ;    commands  the 
main  army  in  the  Scotch  war,  i.  165. 
Arundell,  Lady  ;  her  defence  of  War- 
dour  Castle,  ii.  215. 
Associated   Counties,    mustering    of 

forces  in,  ii.  312-3-4. 
Astley,  Sir  Jacob,  at  the  siege  of  Bre- 
da, i.  80  ;  prayer  of,  at  Edgehill,ii. 
21,  see  note,  ib. ;  Governor  of  Read- 
ing,  ii.   314;     to    Prince   Rupert, 
complaining  of  rapacity  of  soldiers, 
ii.  359 ;  memoir  of,  i.  467. 
Lord,  to  Prince  Rupert,  pro- 
gress of  new  levies,  iii.  145. 
Aston,  Sir  Arthur,  to  Prince  Rupert  ; 
military  operations  at  Reading,  ii. 
175  ;  Legge's  correspondence  with 
Governor  of  Gloucester,  ii.  276. 
Aubigny,  Lord,  slain  at  Edgehill,  ii. 

29  ;  note,  ib. 

Lady,  letters  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert, ii.  145,   note ;    implicated  in 
Waller's  Plot,  ii.  200. 
Auborn  Chase, battle  in,  ii.  289-90-1. 
Aylesbury,  Prince  Rupert's  foray  in 
Vale  of,  ii.  47  ;  battle  at,  ii.  48. 

Balfour,  Sir  William,  Lieutenant  of, 
the  Tower,  i.  195  ;  refuses  Lord 
StrafFord's  bribe,  ib. ;  resigns  his 
command  and  receives  3000/.  i. 
196. 

Banbury,  skirmish  near,  ii.  186. 

Bard,  Dudley,  son  of  Prince  Rupert, 
killed  at  siege  of  Buda,  iii.  467  ; 
note,  ib. 

Basing-House  garrison  put  to  death 
by  Cromwell,  iii.  33. 


566 


INDEX. 


Bassompierre,  his  description  of  Court 

of  Charles  I.  i.  72. 
Battles,  &c. 

Armeatiers,  siege,  iii.  239  j  Arundel 

Castle,  ii.  238  j  Auborn  Chase, 

ii.  289-90-1. 
Bristol,   siege,  ii.   236,  259;   iii. 

162  ;  Brentford,  ii.  63;  Brandon 

Heath,  ii.  404  ;  Birmingham,  ii. 

152-3-4  ;    Bradock  Downs,  ii. 

99;    Bolton,   ii.   341  ;  Basing- 

House,    iii.    33  ;     Blechington- 

House,  iii.  76. 
Cirencester,  ii.  109  ;  Chalgrove,  ii. 

203-9  ;  Cropedy  Bridge,  ii.  420. 
Colchester,  iii.  404-5. 
Edgehill,  battle  of,  ii.  13. 
Gainsborough,  ii.  271. 
Gloucester,  ii.  279. 
Hopton's  Heath,  battle  of,  ii.  136. 
Lichfield    siege,    ii.    132,    161-9; 

Lansdown,    ii.     230  ;     Lathom 

House,  ii.  429. 
Leicester  siege,  iii.  87-9. 
Lamport,  iii.  137. 
Marston   Moor,   ii.  447  ;  Mai  pas, 

iii.  22;  Maidstone,  iii.  405. 
Newbury,    ii.    293  ;    iii.    29-31  ; 

Nantwich,  ii.  365,  note  ;  Nase- 
,    iii.    103-12;    Newark,    ii. 


by, 
392. 


Preston,  iii.  403  ;  Plymouth,  siege, 

iii.  78  ;  Powick  Bridge,  i.  403  ; 

Pontefract,  iii.  67. 
Roundway  Down,  iii.  234. 
Stratton  Downs,  ii.  100  ;  Shrews- 

bury, iii.  58-9,  note;  Schonevett, 

iii.  503. 
Warwick  Castle,  i.  183  ;  Wolver- 

hampton,  ii.  9  ;   Wormleighton, 

ii.  10. 

Bavaria,  Duke  of,  reply  of,  i.  77,  see 
note,  ib. 

-  the  Duchess  of,  enmity  of,  to 
Prince  Rupert,  i.  102  ;   see  note, 
ib. 

Bedford,  Earl  of,  General  of  Parlia- 

mentary horse,  i.  376. 
Bellenden,   Sir  William,   to    Prince 

Rupert,  commissariat  supplies,   ii. 

402;     strength    of    Parliamentary 

army  in  the  North,  iii.  247. 
Benett,  Col.  (the  Prince's  secretary), 

Life  of  Prince  Rupert  by,  i.  441. 
Berkeley,  Sir  Robert,  committed  to 

prison,  i.  183. 

•  --  Capt.,  breaks  parole,  ii.  210 

-1-2. 


Berwick,  pacification  of,  i.  173. 
Birmingham,  battle   of,    Roundhead 
account  of,  ii.  152-3-4 ;  Royalist 
account  of,  ii.  154-5. 
Blake,  Mr.  treachery  of,  ii.  35  ;  hang- 
ed at  Oxford,  ib. 

Blake,  Col.  Robt.  instruction  to,  note, 
iii.  255  ;  blockades  Rupert  in  the 
Tagus,  iii.  301  ;  demands  the 
Princes  as  prisoners,  ib.  ;  refusal 
of  King  of  Portugal,  iii.  301  ;  en- 
deavours to  entrap  the  Prince  on  a 
hunting  excursion,  iii.  304,  note  iii. 
469. 

Bohemia,  King  of,  see  Frederick 
Prince  Palatine. 

Queen  of,  see  Queen. 

Bonavista,  description  of,  iii.  353. 
Bradgate,  seizure  of  arms,  i.  360. 
Bradock  Downs,  battle  of,  ii.  99. 
Brandon  Heath,  battle  of,  ii.  404. 
Breda,  surrender  of,  to  the  Prince  of 
Orange,  i.  82  ;  humorous  incident 
at,  ib. 

Brentford,  battle  of,  ii.  63. 
Bristol,  account  of  siege  of,  from  the 
Journal  of  Prince  Rupert,  ii.  236  ; 
taken,  note,  ii.  264  ;  Council  of 
War  at,  ii.  272  ;  siege  of,  by  Sir 
Thomas  Fairfax,  iii.  162  j  Rupert's 
declaration,  iii.  164  ;  condition  of 
the  garrison,  iii.  166  ;  condition 
of  fortifications,  iii.  169  ;  citizens 
promised  protection  by  Cromwell 
and  Fairfax,  iii.  171;  summons  of 
Fairfax,  iii.  172  ;  articles  of  agree- 
ment for  surrender  of,  note,  iii. 
176  ;  Parliamentary  Papers  relating 
to,  iii.  180-1-2-3-4. 
Brook,  Lord,  exhorts  the  citizens  of 
London  to  resistance,  ii.  55  ;  exag- 
gerates the  battle  of  Edgehill,  ii. 
56,  note,  ib.  ;  attacks  Lichfield  ; 
death  of,  ii.  134,  note,  ib. 
Buckingham,  Duke  of,  character  of,  i. 
145,  note,  ib. ;  impeachment  of,  i. 
148,  note,  ib. ;  besieges  Rochelle, 
i.  150,  note,  ib. ;  assassinated  by 
Felton,  i.  154,  note,  ib. 
Byron,  Sir  John,  pedigree  of,  i.  236, 
note  ;  at  Fawsley  Court,  ii.  51  ; 
letters  to  Prince  Rupert,  ii.  76, 
note,  ib. ;  defeats  detachment  at 
Brentford,  ii.  90 ;  at  siege  of  Bris- 
tol, ii.  262  ;  to  Prince  Rupert  on 
commissiariat  affairs,  ii.  329  ;  Go- 
vernor of  Chester,  ii.  329 ;  move- 
ments of  Royalists,  ii.  355. 


INDEX. 


567 


Byron.  Sir  N.  to  Prince  Rupert ;  ar- 
rival of  Lord  Ormond's  army,  ii. 
333. 

Sir  Richard,  made  Governor 

of  Newark,  ii.  401. 

Caldecot  House,  attack  of,  by  Prince 
Rupert,  i.  391  ;  gallant  defence  of, 
i.  392. 

Cant,  origin  of  term,  i.  343  ;  note,  ib. 

Capel,  Lord,  taken  prisoner  at  Col- 
chester ;  death  of,  iii.  408  ;  cha- 
racter, ib.  note. 

Carlisle,  Lady,  sends  Pym  notice  of 
Charles's  intention  to  seize  the  five 
members,  i.  220,  note,  ib. ;  taken 
by  the  Scots,  iii.  115. 

Carnarvon,  Earl,  death  of,  at  battle  of 
Newbury,  ii.  295 :  character,  ii. 
296  ;  note,  ib. 

Carolinum,  extracts  from  wanderings 
of  Charles  after  loss  of  Bristol,  note, 
iii.  191. 

Catholics,  Roman,  arbitrary  conduct 
of  Parliament  to,  i.  251  j  forbidden 
to  join  Charles  the  First's  army, 
i.  317  ;  see  note,  i.  318  ;  intrigues 
of,  to  deprive  Prince  Rupert  of 
command  in  Dutch  war,  iii.  500. 

Catholic  League,  i.  24. 

Cavaliers,  the  romantic  sentiments  of, 
i.  119;  origin  of  the  term,  i.  211, 
see  note  ib.  ;  their  manners  and 
costume,  i.  332,  see  note,  i.  335  ; 
review  of  their  conduct,  i.  348  ; 
earnest  and  devout  men,  i.  349  ; 
comprised  nineteen- twentieths  of 
the  gentlemen  of  England,  i.  359  ; 
described  by  Dr.  Symmons,  i.  414  ; 
note,  i.  416  ;  foraging  expedition 
of,  ii.  184  ;  gentlemanly  bearing  of, 
ii.  1 85  ;  their  near  approach  to 
London,  ii.  190 ;  encourage  profli- 
gate habits,  in  opposition  to  Puritan- 
ism, ii.  316,  note,  ib. ;  defeated  by 
Ireton,  iii.  102  ;  situation  of,  at  the 
close  of  the  war,  iii.  222  ;  at  sea, 
iii.  258 ;  lose  all,  except  honour, 
iii.  391  ;  rising  of,  after  the  execu- 
tion of  the  King,  iii.  402-5  ;  on  the 
Continent,  iii.  410. 

Cavalry,  mode  of  equipment  in  Royal- 
ist army,  i.  424,  note,  ib. 

Cave,  Richard,  to  Prince  Rupert,  loss 
of  Shrewsbury,  iii.  59. 

Charles  I.  sends  an  embassy  of  condo- 
lence to  Queen  of  Bohemia,  i.  55; 
visited  by  Prince  Rupert,  i.  58  ;  let- 
ter of,  to  Earl  of  Leicester,  on 


Charles  I.,  continued. 

Prince  Rupert's  intended  marriage 
i.  65 ;  to  Prince  Maurice  thereon 
i.  68 ;  visits  Oxford,  5.  71  ;  see 
note,  i.  71 ;  splendour  of  his  Court, 
i.  72  ;  see  note,  i.  73  ;  delights  in 
hunting,  i.  76  ;  encloses  Richmond 
Park,  ib ;  attempts  to  raise  money 
for  the  Palatine  expedition,  i.  77  ; 
subscribes  10,000/,  i.  78  ;  refuses  to 
assist  the  Queen  of  Bohemia,  ib.  ; 
negotiates  for  the  liberty  of  Prince 
Rupert,  i.  97,  98  ;  desires  the  pre- 
sence of  Prince  Rupert  in  England, 
i.  101  ;  escorts  the  Queen  to  Dover, 
i.  106;  meeting  with  Prince  Ru- 
pert, i.  106;  joined  by  Prince  Ru- 
pert, at  Leicester  Abbey,  i. Ill  ;  sets 
up  the  Royal  standard,  ib.  i.  328  ; 
description  thereof,  i.  116  ;  his  dif- 
ficult position,  i.  115  ;  his  standard 
blown  down,  i.  118  ;  progress  of 
the  people  in  the  reign  of,  i.  138  ; 
notes,  i.  139,  140,  141  ;  con- 
fidence of,  in  his  first  Parliament,  i. 
142—3  ;  note,  ib  ;  conduct  of  his  first 
Parliament,  i.  144,  145  ;  dissolves 
his  first  Parliament,  i.  145  ;  calls 
his  second  Parliament,  i.  147  ;  dis- 
solves it,  i.  148  ;  declares  war  with 
France,  i.  149  ;  summons  his  third 
Parliament,  i.  151 ;  note,  ib.  ;  peti- 
tion of  right,  presented  to,  i.  153  ; 
note,  ib.  •  Commons  denounceBuck- 
ingham  as  the  evil  adviser  of,  i. 
154  ;  levies  tonnage  and  poundage, 
without  the  consent  of  Parliament, 
i.  155 ;  note,  ib. ;  peace  with  France 
and  Spain,  i.  155 ;  despotism  of,  i. 
156  ;  note,  ib.  ;  his  three  advisers, 
ib.  ;  pays  an  embargo  on  emigrants, 
i.  162  ;  raises  a  revenue  by  tyranni- 
cal means,  i.  163  ;  see  note,  i.  162  ; 
sends  an  army  under  the  Marquis 
of  Hamilton,  to  Scotland,  i.  165  ; 
at  Berwick,  i.  170  ;  address  of,  to 
the  chief  Covenanters,  i.  171  ;  note, 
ib.  ;  his  conduct  to  Earl  of  Essex,  i. 
172  ;  see  note,  ib.  „•  gains  the  friend- 
ship of  Montrose,  i.  173;  adjourns 
Scotch  Parliament  on  pain  of  trea- 
son, i.  174 ;  summons  (short)  Par- 
liament, on  13th  April,  1640  ;  dis- 
solves it,  5th  May,  ib. ;  seizes  the 
Spanish  bullion,  i.  175  ;  raises  an- 
other arrny  against  the  Covenanters, 
ib.',  treaty  of  Ripon.i.  176;  summons 
council  of  Peers  at  York  i.  178; 


568 


INDEX. 


Charles  I.,  continued. 

summons  the  Long  Parliament,  i. 
178,  note,  ib.  ;  signs  petition  of  army 
plot,  i.  194  ;  deserted  by  his  coun- 
cillors, i.  195  ;  goes  to  Scotland, 
watched  by  Parliament,  i.  200  ; 
returns  to  London,  loyalty  of  the 
citizens,  i.  202  ;  remonstrance  of 
Commons  presented  to,  i.  204,  aee 
note,  ib.  ;  Irish  rebellion  attributed 
to,  i.  206,  note  ;  promises  his  minis- 
try not  to  interfere  with  Commons, 
i.  219  ;  goes  to  the  House  to  seize 
five  members,  i.  220,  note  i.  222  ; 
proceeds  to  the  City  to  demand  the 
five  members,  i.  223 ;  retires  to 
Hampton  Court,  i.  225  ;  attempts 
to  seize  Hull,  i.  242  ;  fallen  con- 
dition of,  i.  244  ;  his  plans  be- 
trayed, i.  245  ;  sanctions  the  ex- 
pulsion of  the  bishops  from  Par- 
liament, i.  245  ;  encroachments  of 
the  Commons,  i.  247  ;  Prince  of 
Wales,  demanded  by  Commons  as 
hostage,  ib.  ;  firmness  of  the  King 
on  the  Militia  Bill,  i.  248  ;  pro- 
ceeds to  York,  i.  250  ;  his  recep- 
tion in  the  North,  i.  254  ;  Sir  Phi- 
lip Warwick's  description  of,  i.  256  ; 
maintains  his  prerogative  by  the 
printing  press,  i.  257  ;  increase  of 
the  King's  Court  at  York,  i.  259 ; 
deprives  Lords  Essex  and  Holland 
of  their  offices,  ift, ;  proposes  to 
Parliament  to  visit  Ireland,  i.  261 ; 
attempts  to  seize  Hull,  i.  262  ;  the 
King  shut  out  at  Beverley  Gate,  i. 
264  ;  declares  Sir  J.  Hotham  a 
traitor,  i.  265  ;  watched  by  Par- 
liamentary committee,  i.  266  ;  pre- 
pares for  war,  i,  268  ;  issues  com- 
mission of  array,  i.  269  ;  nineteen 
propositions  of  Parliament  sent  to, 
j/;.,  see  note,  ib.  ;  joined  by  many 
Members  of  Commons  at  York,  i. 
274  ;  bases  his  actions  upon  the 
law,  i.  275  ;  unhappy  position  of 
the  King,  ib.  ;  summons  a  meeting 
of  Yorkshire  gentlemen,  i.  276 ; 
his  motives  defeated  by  Sir  Thos. 
Fairfax,  ib.  ;  summons  a  meeting 
of  freeholders  on  Heyworth  Moor, 
i.  277  ;  reception  of,  ib. ,  Sir 
Thomas  Fairfax  forces  a  petition  on 
the  King,  i.  278  ;  position  of  af- 
fairs, ib.  ;  declaration  to  his  sup- 
porters at  York,  ib.,see  note,  ib.;  at- 
tempts to  raise  money,  i.  282,  note, 


Charles  I.,  continued. 

it>.  ;  vigour  of  the  King,  i.  291  ; 
commencement  of  hostilities,  i. 
293,  294,  295,  296,  297,  293  ; 
leaves  York  and  proceeds  to  Be- 
verley, i.  301  ;  again  appears  be- 
fore Hull,  i.  309  ;  discomfiture  of,  i. 
310  ;  returns  to  York,  i.  311 ;  de- 
claration of  recapitulating  his 
wrongs,  i.  316 ;  forbids  Roman 
Catholics  to  join  his  army,  i.  3 17  ; 
leaves  York,  and  proceeds  to  Not- 
tingham, i.  319 ;  sets  up  his 
standard,  i.  320-8  ;  movement  of 
the  King,  i.  322  ;  repulsed  at  Co- 
ventry, i.  324 ;  retires  to  Leicester, 
joined  by  Prince  Ltupert,  i.  326  ; 
his  character  scrutinized  by  histo- 
rians, i.  329;  merits  of  quarrel 
between  him  and  Parliament,  i. 
340,  341  ;  his  efforts  neutralized 
by  his  party,  i.  351  ;  forebodings 
of,  at  Nottingham,  ib. ;  holds  a 
Chapter  of  the  Garter,  i.  353  ;  re- 
ceives news  of  the  loss  of  Ports- 
mouth, i.  354  ;  his  precipitation  in 
raising  standard,  i.  355  ;  nego- 
tiates with  Parliament,  i.  356  ;  re- 
ception of  his  ambassadors,  ib. ; 
renews  his  efforts  for  peace,  i,  357, 
note,  ib. ;  answer  of  Parliament,  i. 
358  ;  levies  of  the  King  increase, 
ib. ;  prepares  to  move  to  the  South, 
i.  359  ;  inclined  for  peace,  i.  371  ; 
at  Nottingham,!.  378  ;  buoyancy 
of  his  spirits,  i.  380 ;  goes  to 
Derby,  i.  381  ;  spares  C hartley 
Park,  seat  of  the  t  arl  of  Essex,  i. 
384  ;  head-quarters  of,  at  Shrews- 
bury, ib.  ;  speech  of,  to  his  army, 
i.  385  ;  letter  from,  to  Mayor 
of  Leicester,  disowning  Rupert's 
forced  loan,  i.  396  ;  letter  to  Prince 
Rupert,  to  protect  Worcester,  i. 
398  ;  goes  to  Chester,  i.  409  ;  his 
reception,!.  410;  begins  his  march 
to  London,  i.  431  ;  at  Sir  Wm. 
Chancies,  ii.  8  ;  at  Edgehill,  ii.  12, 
23  ;  his  address  to  his  soldiers,  ii. 
19,  see  note  ii.  20  ;  his  proclamation 
frustrated  at  Edgehill,  ii.  32  ;  his 
position  after  Edgehill,  ii.  37  ;  pas- 
sage from  his  Icon  Basilicon,  ii. 
38  ;  at  Woodstock,  ii.  43  ;  at  Ox- 
ford, ii.  44  ;  critical  position  of,  ii. 
53 ;  negotiation  opened  with  Par- 
liament, ii.  54-5-7-9,  note,  ib.  ; 
blamed  for  treachery,  ii.  58  ;  posi- 


INDEX. 


569 


Charles  I.  continued. 

tion  of,  at  Acton,  ii.  59  ;  falls  back 
upon  Reading,  ii.  66  ;  at  Hampton 
Court,  ii.  67;  letter  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert ;  mode  of  obtaining  supplies, 
ii.  71  ;  winters  at  Oxford,  ib.  ;  in- 
vested  at  Oxford,  ii.  81  ;  his  rela- 
tions with  foreign  powers,  ii.  86  ; 
prospects  of,  at  close  of  1642,  ii. 
87  ;  letters  to  Earl  Northampton, 
order  to  burn  Banbury,  ii.  91  ;  let- 
ter to  the  Marquis  of  Worcester,  ii. 
92  ;  letter  to  Prince  Rupert  — 
raising  supplies,  ii.  104;  receives 
deputation  from  Parliament,  ii. 
101-3-4;  letter  to  Prince  Rupert 
for  arms,  ii.  115;  receives  deputa- 
tion from  Scotland,  ii.  130  ;  Parlia- 
ment again  proposes  cessation  of 
hostilities,  ii.  131 ;  letter  to  Prince 
Rupert,  ii.  140  ;  his  privy  council, 
ii.  145;  anxiety  of,  to  join  his 
queen,  ii.  147  ;  Rupert's  advice, 
ib. ,  letter  to  Prince  Rupert — at- 
tack of  Reading  by  Parliament 
forces,  ii.  166 ;  recalls  Rupert  to 
Oxford,  ii.  171  ;  at  Nettlebed,  ii. 
177  ;  prospects  of,  after  Chalgrove 
fight,  ii.  212-3-4  ;  meets  the  Queen 
at  Edgehill,  ii.  229  ;  to  Prince 
Rupert — movements  of  Essex  near 
Aylesbury,  ii.  242-3  ;  counsel  of 
war  at  Bristol,  ii.  272  ;  summons 
Gloucester,  ii.  279 ;  neglects  to 
march  on  London,  ii.  284  ;  his 
want  of  vigilance,  ii.  288  ;  his  pro- 
spects after  battle  of  Newbury,  ii. 
315  ;  difficulty  in  obtaining  money 
ii.  338-9-10 ;  holds  Parliament  at 
Oxford  —  overtures  for  peace,  ii. 
363 ;  Oxford  Parliament  raises 
100,000*.  for  the  King,  ii.  374; 
to  Prince  Rupert  on  his  victory  at 
Newark,  ii.  397  ;  invested  by  Essex 
at  Oxford,  ii.  413;  escape  of,  ii. 
414  ;  regrets  not  following  Ru- 
pert's advice,  ii.  415  ;  pursued  by 
Sir  William  Waller,  ii.  416-17  ; 
letters  to  Rupert  referring  to  Lord 
Digby's  letters,  ii.  416  ;  at  Cropedy 
Bridge,  ii.  420-1 ;  to  Prince  Rupert, 
for  General  Goring,  ii.  435-6;  orders 
Rupert  to  relieve  York,  ii.  437-8;  let- 
ter to  Rupert  after  battle  of  Marston 
Moor,  ii.  471  ;  to  Lord  Newcastle 
on  his  leaving  England,  ii.  477  ;  re- 
ceives intelligence  of  Marston  Moor, 
lii.  2  ;  resolves  upon  expedition  to 


Charles  I.,  continued. 

Exeter,  ib. ;  his  progress,  iii.  3,  4, 
5  ;  reviews  four  thousand  troops  in 
Crediton  meadows,  iii.  6;  renews 
his  offers  of  peace  to  Essex,  iii.  7  ; 
promises  a  dukedom  to  Marquis  of 
Worcester,  iii.  18;  joined  by  Ru- 
pert, iii.  20 ;  to  Prince  Rupert, 
monetary  matters,  iii.  23  ;  begins 
his  march  to  Salisbury,  iii.  26  ;  re- 
turns to  Oxford  with  Rupert,  iii.  33  ; 
his  party  desirous  for  peace,  iii.  46; 
extracts  from  his  cabinet  to  various 
persons, ii.  485;  influenced  by  Lords 
Digby  and  Ashburnham,  iii.  64 ; 
begins  his  last  campaign,  iii.  85 ; 
his  indifference,  iii.  100;  decides 
for  battle  at  Naseby,  iii.  103  ;  his 
appeal  to  Cavaliers  at  Naseby,  iii. 
109  ;  a  fugitive,  flies  to  Ragland 
Castle,  iii.  113 ;  his  amusements,  iii. 
114  ;  endeavours  to  raise  the  Welsh, 
iii.  115;  at  Oxford  again,  iii.  116; 
Montrose's  victory  of  Kilsy  th  its  con- 
sequences to,  ib. ;  goes  to  Hereford, 
iii.  117  ;  to  Prince  of  Wales,  power 
of  granting  commissions  misunder- 
derstood,  iii.  122-3 ;  at  Barnstaple, 
iii.  124 ;  to  Rupert  for  advice,  ii. 
131  ;  promise  of  new  levies,  ii.  132  ; 
again  at  Ragland  Castle,  iii.  135  ; 
distracted  councils  of,  iii.  139  ;  his 
pecuniary  difficulties,  note,  iii.  140; 
supposed  intention  of,  to  visit  Ire- 
land, iii.  144;  determines  to  join 
Montrose,  iii.  148  ;  his  opinion  of 
his  affairs,  iii.  1 50 ;  affectionate 
letter  to  Rupert,  iii.  152 ;  state  of 
his  affairs,  iii.  159-60  ;  dismisses 
Rupert  from  all  commands,  iii.  161 ; 
his  anger  at  surrender  of  Bristol,  iii. 
184  ;  to  Prince  Rupert  on  the  loss 
of  Bristol,  iii.  185  ;  to  Prince  Mau- 
rice, surrender  of  Bristol,  iii.  188-9; 
wanderings  of,  after  loss  of  Bristol, 
iii.  191,  note,  ib.;  at  Newark,  iii. 
198 ;  meets  Prince  Rupert,  iii.  201; 
quarrels  with  Rupert  and  Cavaliers, 
iii.  204  ;  petition  of  Cavaliers  to, 
iii.  205,  note  i&.-206;  makes  fresh 
proposals  to  Parliament,  iii.  217  ; 
negotiates  with  the  Scots,  iii.  218  ; 
observations  on  the  close  of  the 
campaign,  iii.  220,  note,  ib.  ;  for- 
bids Rupert's  attendance  to  Scot- 
land, iii.  226  ;  escapes  from  Ox- 
ford as  a  servant,  iii.  226  ;  relies  on 
the  Scots,  and  betrayed  to  Parlia- 


570 


INDEX. 


Charles  I.,  continued. 

merit,  iii.  227  ;  his  last  order  to  his 
garrisons.note,  ib. ;  a  prisoner  at  Hol- 
denby,  iii.  228;  his  seizure  by  Cornet 
Joyce,  ib.;  conveyed  to  Carisbrook 
Castle,  iii.  229  ;  taken  by  Fairfax 
to  Hurst  Castle,  ib. ;  his  cause  ut- 
terly lost,  iii.  231  ;  feelings  of  the 
people  towards,  iii.  248-9  ;  letter 
to  Rupert  to  send  a  ship  to  Isle  of 
Wight,  iii.  261 ;  to  Sir  George  Car- 
teret,  Bart.,  Rupert's  intended  at- 
tack on  Guernsey,  iii.  280-1  ;  his 
want  of  tact,  iii.  393  ;  ennobled 
by  misfortune,  iii.  394  ;  speech  of 
to  Parliamentay  Commissioners,  iii. 
395 ;  Lady  D'Aubigny's  plan  of 
the  King's  escape  frustrated,  iii. 
397,  note,  ib.;  trial  of, iii.  398  ;  ex- 
ecution of,  iii.  400  ;  character  of, 
i.  140. 

Charles  II.  see  Wales,  Prince  of. 

Charles  Louis,  Prince,  visit  of,  to 
Charles  I.,  i.  57,  see  note,  i.  58  ; 
purposed  leader  of  a  West  Indian 
expedition,  i.  61  ;  letter  to  the 
Queen  of  Bohemia,  marriage  of 
Prince  Rupert,  i.  62 ;  Rupert's 
expedition  to  Madagascar,  i.  79  ; 
pays  a  part  of  his  mother's  debts,  i. 
78 ;  departs  for  Westphalia,  i.  80  ; 
joins  Prince  Rupert  at  the  Hague, 
i.  82,  see  note,  ib. ;  conduct  of  at 
the  battle  of  Lemgo,  i.  91 ;  his  in- 
difference to  the  fate  of  Prince  Ru- 
pert, i.  93,  see  note,  i.  105  ;  visits 
England,  h.  342  ;  his  intrigues,  it.; 
arrives  in  London,  iii.  24  ;  his  sor- 
did conduct  to  his  mother,  iii.  427 ; 
vices  of  his  Court,  ib.;  his  con- 
duct towards  Prince  Rupert,  iii. 
468. 

Chillingworth,  death  of,  at.  Arundel 
castle,  ii.  328. 

Cholmondeley,  Sir  Hugh,  joins  the 
Royal  cause,  ii.  129. 

Chronological  Catalogue  of  Letters  in 
Rupert  correspondence,  i.  474. 

Cirencester,  battle  of,  ii.  106-7-8-9. 

Civil  war,  position  of  parties  at  break- 
ing out  of,  i.  267  ;  England  during 
the,  i.  292 ;  review  of  parties  at 
commencement  of,  i.  338,  339, 340, 
370. 

Clarendon,  Lord,  see  Hyde,  Edward. 

Clubmen,  rising  of,  iii.  118. 

Cochrane,  John,  to,  mode  of  raising 
supplies,  ii.  335. 


Colebrook,  taken  by  Prince  Rupert 
ii.  51  ;  description  of,  in  City 
journals,  ib. 

Commission  of  array,  copy  of,  i.294. 

Conigsmark,  Count,  commands  the 
Palatine  army,  i.  83  ;  cowardice  of, 
at  Lemgo,  i.  87-90. 

Convocation,  the,  votes  money  to- 
wards Scotch  war,  i.  174,  see  note 
ib. 

Conway,  Lord,  general  of  horse  in 
Scotch  war,  i.  175;  routed  by  Gen. 
Leslie,  i.  176. 

Cornbury,  Lord  to  Duchess  of  Beau- 
fort ;  description  of  Queen  of 
Charles,  iii.  461-4. 

Court  Mercury,  its  first  appearance, 
ii.  89. 

Council  of  War,  minutes  of,  note,  iii. 
119;  before  Naseby,  iii.  98-9. 

Covenanters,  army  of,  described  by 
Baillie,  i.  167,  note. ;  open  negotia- 
tions with  the  English  general,  i. 
170;  moderate  demands  of,  i.  171  ; 
pacification  of  Berwick,  ib.;  garrison , 
Berwick,  ii.  310  ;  receive  100,000*., 
ii.  312  ;  spread  of  the  'Covenant,1 
ii.  342  ;  indulge  their  national  in- 
stinct, and  march  '  south,'  ii.  345  ; 
at  Newcastle,  ii.  376. 

Coventry,  description  of,  i.  324,  note, 
ib. ;  Charles  I.  repulsed  at,  i.  324. 

Crane,  Sir  Richard,  dispatched  to 
Charles  First  by  Prince  Rupert,  a 
prisoner  at  Warrendorp,  i.  92. 

Craufurd,  Lord,  to  Prince  Rupert,  for 
permission  to  attack,  ii.  184—6; 
foraging  parties,  ii.  194. 

Craven,  Lord,  Prince  Rupert's  por- 
trait, bequeathed  to,  i.  73  ;  sub- 
scribes 10,000*.  for  the  Palatine,  i. 
78  ;  joins  the  Palatine  army,i.  83  ; 
taken  prisoner  at  Lemgo,  i.  90  ; 
detained  at  Warrendorp  with  Prince 
Rupert,  i.  92,  see  note,  ib. ;  devotion 
of,  to  Queen  of  Bohemia,  iii,  441-5; 
executor  of  Prince  Rupert,  iii. 
542  ;  extracts  from  MSS.  in  pos- 
session of,  ib. 

Cromwell,  Oliver,  his  advice  to  Par- 
liamentary army,  i.  374  ;  descrip- 
tion of  his  '  Ironsides,'  i.  375  ;  con- 
fides to  his  '  Ironsides '  that  he 
would  shoot  the  King,  i.  377  ;  trains 
his  '  Ironsides,'  ii.  313  ;  raises  siege 
of  Lyme,  ii.  422 ;  comparatively 
unknown  at  Marston  Moor,  ii.  454  ; 
his  stern  bravery,  ii.  459;  puts 


INDEX. 


571 


Cromwell,  Oliver,  continued. 

garrison  of  Basing-House  to  death, 
iii.  33 ;  quarrel  with  Earl  Man- 
chester, iii.  40 ;  organizes  new 
model  army,  iii.  51  ;  exempt  from 
self-denying  ordinance,  iii.  76 ; 
takes  Blechington-house,  ib.  77  ; 
baffled  at  Farringdon,  note,  iii.  79- 
81  ;  at  Banbury,  iii.  91—2;  move- 
ments of,  iii.  97  ;  junction  with 
Fairfax,  iii.  103 ;  at  Naseby,  iii. 
107 ;  as  Protector,  iii.  399 ;  at  the 
coffin  of  Charles  First,  iii.  400. 

Cropedy  Bridge,  skirmish  at,  ii.  420-1. 

Culpepper,  Sir  John,  brief  sketch  of, 
i.  218. 

Dabridgecourt,  Thomas,  to  Prince 
Rupert,  complaining  of  the  Welsh, 
ii.  385-6. 

D'Aubigny,  Lady,  plans  the  escape 
of  Charles  at  Windsor,  iii.  397. 

Davenant  Will.,  Sir,  Lieutenant-gene- 
ral of  Ordnance,  ii.  78  ;  to  Prince 
Rupert,  ii.  434. 

Deddington,  Sir  Francis,  takes  Wood- 
house  and  hangs  fourteen  men, 
iii.  5. 

Deering,  Sir  Edward,  brings  in  bills 
for  depriving  the  bishops  of  their 
votes,  i.  208. 

Denbigh,  Lord,  expedition  of,  to  re- 
lieve Rochelle,  i.  154  ;  death  of, 
ii.  155  ;  character,  ii.  156. 

Countess  of,  letters  to  her 

son  to  leave  Parliamentary  army, 
ii.  157. 

Basil,  Earl  of,  declaration 

of,  312. 

Derby,  Earl  of,  brief  memoir  of,  i. 
299,  note  ;  denounced  by  the  Par- 
liament, i.  410  ;  to  Prince  Rupert, 
attack  and  burning  of  Lancaster, 
ii.  143  ;  to  Prince  Rupert,  assist- 
ance for  Lathom  House,  ii.  382-3- 
4,  note,  ib. ;  at  battle  of  Bolton,  ii. 
431  ;  his  devotion  to  the  Royal 
cause,  iii.  413  ;  death  of,  ib. 

Countess  of,  see  note,  i.  362  ; 

letter  to  Prince  Rupert,  i.  364  ;  for 
assistance  at  Lathom  House,  ii. 
149 ;  her  defence  of  Lathom 
House,  ii.  426  ;  heroism  of,  ii.  428- 
9. 

,  Lord,  accompanies  the  Queen 
to  England,  i.  109,  note,  ib.  ;  ad- 
vises Charles  I.  to  seize  Five  Mem- 
bers of  Commons,  i.  220  ;  attempts 


Dig'by, 
to  E 


Digby,  Lord,  continued. 

to  organize  a  new  army  plot,  i.  241  j 
taken  prisoner  at  Hull,  i.  301 ; 
persuades  Sir  J.  Hotham  to  sur- 
render the  town  to  the  King,  ib.  • 
character  of,  i.  304  ;  his  influence 
with  the  King,  ib. ;  see  note,  i.  306- 
7 ;  to  Prince  Rupert,  letter  of  ex- 
planation, i.  368 ;  defeated  at 
Wolverhampton,  ii.  9  ;  to  Prince 
Rupert,  movements  of  Essex,  ii. 
290  ;  his  intrigues,  ii.  318-9  ;  to 
Prince  Rupert,  Colonel  Gamel,  ii. 
375  ;  congratulatory  letter  on  his 
victory  at  Newark,  ii.  399  ;  state  of 
King's  affairs  at  Oxford,  ii.  416-7; 
flight  of  the  King,  ii.  418-9  j  to 
Prince  Maurice, offers  of  L'Estrange 
to  seize  Lyme,  ii,  421  ;  movements 

of  Royalists,  ii.  473-4  ;  to , 

departure  of  Newcastle  and  other 
matters,  ii.  475-6  ;  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert, Marston  Moor,  ii.  476  ;  the 
King's  progress  to  Exeter,  iii.  2 ; 
supplants  Lord  Wilmot,  iii.  10, 
note  ;  to  Prince  Rupert,  details  of 
campaign  in  the  West,  iii.  11-12- 
15;  on  various  matters,  iii.  25; 
second  battle  of  Newbury,  iii.  29  ; 
Hopton's  arrival  at  Oxford,  loss  of 
Weymouth  and  other  matters,  iii. 
65-6—7  ;  movements  of  Cromwell, 
Blechington  House,  iii.  77-81  ;  to 
Lord  Goring,  powers  of  Prince  of 
of  Wales'  Council,  iii.  122,  note  ; 
to  Colonel  Legge,  Rupert's  con- 
duct at  Naseby,  iii.  126;  to  Lord 
Jermyn,  supposed  cause  of  Ru- 
pert's enmity  to  Digby,  iii.  135  ;  to 
Prince  Rupert,  distracted  councils 
of  the  King,  Lord  Herbert's  Irish 
mission,  iii.  ] 42-3-4  ;  to  Captain 
Beckman,  respecting  "his  captivity, 
iii.  155;  hatred  of,  to  Rupert,  iii. 
190  ;  blamed  for  dismissal  of  Ru- 
pert, iii.  198  ;  endeavours  to  avoid 
Rupert,  iii.  198  ;  leaves  the  King 
to  join  Montrose,  iii.  200 ;  disgrace 
and  downfall  of,  ib. 

Dingley,  Mr.  Thomas,  to , 

movements  of  the  Queen  of  Bohe- 
mia, ii.  196. 

D'Israeli,  his  description  of  the  Court 
of  Charles  I.  i.  73. 

Dives,  Lewis,  letter  to  Charles  I., 
report  of  state  of  Royalist  troops,  ii. 
85;  letter  to  Prince  Rupert,  de- 
scription of  Cavaliers,  ii.  103  ;  to 


572 


INDEX. 


Dives,  Lewis,  continued. 

Prince  Rupert,  movements  of  Es- 
sex, ii.  102;  to  the  King,  reduction 
of  Weymouth,  iii.  58,  note  ;  inter- 
cepts dispatch  of  storming  of 
Bridgewater,  iii.  147. 

Documents  relating  to  years  1642-3-4, 
i.  490. 

Dorset,  Earl  of,  to  Prince  Rupert,  ad- 
vising his  stay  in  England,  iii.  213. 

Drydeu,   John,  on  the  battle  of  the 
English  and  Dutch,  iii.  47-8. 

Dutch,  expedition  of,  to  Sheerness, 
iii.  494. 

Edgehill,  battle  of,  ii.  12 ;  the  pause 
before  the  battle,  ii.  29 ;  Prince 
Rupert's  charge  at,  ii.  22  ;  capture 
of  Royal  standard  at,  ii.  25  ;  Capt. 
Smith  retakes  Royal  standard,  ii. 
26  ;  disputed  victory,  ii.  28  ;  loss 
of  Royalist  forces  at,  ii.  29  ;  loss 
of  Parliamentary  forces  at,  ii.  30, 
note,  ib. ;  the  day  after  the  battle,  ii. 
31;  concluding  remarks  upon,  ii.  36. 
Editions  of  works  quoted  in  these 

volumes,  iii.  561-2. 
Elizabeth,  see  Queen. 
Princess,  her  intended  mar- 
riage broken  off  on   religious   mo- 
tives, iii.  442  ;  enters  a  convent,  ib. 
Emigrants,  see  note,  i.  161  ;  embaigo 

on,  i.  162,  note,  ib. 
England,  description  of,  during  Civil 
War,  i.  292  ;    social    and    political 
condition  of,  under  the   Puritans, 
described,  iii.  414-15-16. 
Ernly,  Sir   Michael  ;    loss   of  Mont- 
gomery Castle,  iii.  25. 
Essex,  Earl,   in  Scotch  war,  i.  166, 
note,  ib.  ;  deprived  of  his  office  by 
Charles  I.  i.  259  ;  joins  the  Parlia- 
ment,   i.    210  ;     appointed     com- 
mander of  Parliamentary  army,  i 
290  ,  takes  command  of  Parliamen 
tary  army,  i.  372  ;  position  of,  a 
Lord-General,    i.   373,  note,   ib. 
arrives  at   Northampton,  ib. ;   en 
courages  loyalty,  i.  377,  note,  ib. 
enters  Worcester,  i.  410  ;   his  in 
activity,  ii.  5  ;  his  forbearance  at 
Edgehill,    ii.     18-33;    ordered   to 
give    the  King  battle,  ii.   41  ;  re- 
ceives 5000/.  from  Parliament  for 
victory  of  Edgehill,  ii.  52  ;  marches 
to  Turnham  Green,  ii.  64  ;  reluct- 
ance of,  to  press  the  King  to  extre- 
mity, ii.  67  ;  invests  Oxford,  ii,  80- 


Essex,  Earl,  continued. 

6-7  !  advances  on  Banbury,  ii.  91; 
marches  on  Reading,  ii.  140;  re- 
turns to  Oxford,  ii.  195  ;  to  Sir  H. 
Fiennes,  ii.  196;  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert; broken  parole,  ii.  212; 
movements  of,  near  Aylesbury,  ii. 
242—3-5 ;  musters  on  Hounslow 
Heath,  ii.  285  ;  relieves  Gloucester, 
ib. ;  attacked  by  Rupert  in  Auborn 
Chase,  ii.  289-290-1  ;  at  battle  of 
Newbury,  ii.  297  ;  retires  to  Read- 
ing, ii.  298  ;  reception  of,  in  Lon- 
don, ii.  311  ;  overtures  of  the  King 
to,  ii.  363 ;  invests  the  King  at 
Oxford,  ii.  413;  reply  of,  to  the 
King's  offer  for  peace,  iii.  7  ;  block- 
ed up  at  Foy  by  Sir  R.  Grenvillc, 
iii.  11  ;  resigns  his  command  and 
receives  10,OOOJ.  per  annum,  iii.  41. 

Fairfax,  Sir  Thomas,  see  note,  i.  166; 
forces  a  petition  on  the  King  at 
Heyworth  Moor,  i.  278  ;  proposed 
seizure  of,  see  note,  i.  319  ;  to  Earl 
of  Essex,  operations  of  Parliament 
forces  in  the  North,  ii.  380-1  ;  at 
Marston  Moor,  ii.  462  ;  organized 
model  army  at  Windsor,  iii.  51  ;  at 
Naseby,  iii.  106-7  ;  besieges  Bris- 
tol, iii.  162  ;  promises  protection  to 
citizens,  iii.  171  ;  copy  of  summons 
of,  iii.  172  ;  besieges  Oxford,  iii. 
230 ;  copy  of  his  pass  to  Prince 
Rupert,  iii.  233,  note  ;  defeats  Go- 
ring in  Kent,  iii.  403 ;  besieges 
Colchester,  iii.  404-5;  condemns 
Sir  C.  Lucas  and  Sir  G.  Lisle  to 
death,  iii.  405;  accused  of  private 
vengeance,  iii.  407. 
Faithful,  Sir  Fortescue,  defection  of, 

at  Edgehill,  ii.  22-3. 
Falkland,  Lord,  speech  of  on  episco- 
pacy, i.  208,  note  ;  leading  inci- 
dents in  the  life  of,  i.  212,  note,  z'ft.; 
negotiates  between  King  and  Par- 
liament, i.  357;  quarrels  with  Prince 
Rupert,  ii.  11;  death  of,  at  battle 
of  Newbury,  ii.  294 ;  note,  ib. 
Fane,    Colonel,   killed   at    Farnham 

Castle,  ii.  73. 
Fawsley,    Court,    plundered    by   Sir 

John  Byron,  ii.  51. 
Ferdinand  of  Gratz,  Emperor  of  Ger- 
many, educated  by  Jesuits,  i.  21  ; 
character  of,  i.  22  ;  wages  war  for 
thirty  years,  tfr.j  Bohemians  revolt 
against,  ib. 


INDEX. 


573 


Ferdinand  TIL  confines  Prince  Ru- 
pert in  the  castle  of  Lintz,  i.  92 ; 
employs  Count  KuflFstein  to  convert 
him,  i.  93  ;  relents  towards  his 
captive,  i.  98  ;  is  persuaded  to  grant 
his  release,  i.  102. 

Fereme,  Colonel,  taken  prisoner  at 
Lemgo,  i.  92. 

Fielding,  Colonel,  surrenders  Read- 
ing, ii.  180;  shot,  ii.  181. 

Fiennes,  Sir  Nathaniel,  Governor  of 
Bristol,  articles  of  capitulation  with 
Prince  Rupert,  ii.  259. 

Foraging  expedition  of  Cavaliers,  ii. 
193  ;  note,  ii.  194. 

Fortescue,  Sir  E.,  to  Colonel  Sey- 
mour, iii.  14. 

Fortescue,  Sir  Faithful,  defection  of 
at  Edgehill,  ii.  22. 

Frederick,  Prince  Palatine,  his  cha- 
racter, i.  24  ;  accepts  the  crown  of 
Bohemia,  i.  26  ;  coronation  of,  i. 
27  ;  marries  the  Princess  Elizabeth, 
i.  25  ;  his  kingdom  invaded  by  the 
emperor,  i.  33 ;  forsaken  by  his 
allies,  i.  36 ;  note  ib.  53  ;  defeated 
at  the  battle  of  Prague,  ib. ;  takes 
refuge  in  Holland,  i.  40  ;  note,  i. 
40  ;  protected  by  Gustavus  Adol- 
phus,  i.  53  ;  see  note,  i.  52  ;  death 
of,  i.  54. 

Gabor,  Bethlem,  godfather  to  Prince 
Rupert,  i.  32. 

Gassion,  Mareschal,  death  of,  iii.  247. 

Cell,  Sir  John,  besieges  Lichfield,  ii. 
135  ;  his  dastardly  conduct,  ib.  ; 
brutal  conduct  at  Hopton  Heath,  ii. 
137. 

Gerrard,  Sir  Gilbert,  to  Prince  Rupert, 
ransom  of  prisoners,  ii.  337. 

Glamorgan,  Lord,  see  Herbert,  Lord, 
Edward. 

Gloucester,  siege  of,  ii.  279  ;  note,  ib. 
journal  of  siege,  ii.  280;  its  con- 
sequences, ii.  299. 

Godolphin,  Lord,  imprisoned  by  Com- 
mons, i.  252. 

Godolphin,  Sidney,  slain  at  Chag- 
ford,  ii.  99. 

Goring,  Lord,  at  the  siege  of  Breda,  i. 
80  ;  wounded  at  Breda,  i.  82  ;  see 
note,  i.  194,  betrays  army  plot,  i. 
195  ;  receives  the  thanks  of  Parlia- 
ment, i.  196  ;  governor  of  Ports- 
mouth, i.  245  ;  treachery  of,  i.  354  ; 
duplicity  of,  intrigues  with  King 
and  Parliament,  i.  312  ;  appointed 


Goring,  Lord,  continued. 

general  of  Parliamentary  horse,  i. 
313,  note.  ib.  ;  joins  the  King's 
party,  i.  314  ;  surrenders  Ports- 
mouth, i.  379  ;  to  Prince  Rupert 
ii.  172;  to  Mr.  Henry  Percy,  ii. 
181  ;  to  Prince  Rupert,  strength  of 
Royalist  forces  in  the  North,  ii.  182  ; 
his  gallantry  at  Marstou  Moor,  ii. 
458  ;  appointed  general  of  horse, 
iii.  7  ;  to  Prince  Rupert,  mutinous 
state  of  King's  soldiers,  iii.  16; 
permits  Balfour's  horse  to  escape, 
iii.  18 ;  advises  the  King  to  go  to 
Newbury,  iii.  27  ;  in  Somersetshire, 
iii.  39  ;  anecdote  of,  iii.  40 ;  to 
Rupert,  weakness  of  the  King's  re- 
sources, iii.  46  ;  symptoms  of  his 
intrigues,  iii.  51  ;  to  Prince  Rupert, 
denying  underhand  means  to  obtain 
independent  commission,  iii.  52  ; 
loses  Weymouth.  iii.  65 ;  movements 
of,  iii.  75  ;  to  Prince  Rupert,  Court 
intrigues,  iii.  94  ;  abandons  siege  of 
Taunton,  note,  iii.  95 ;  to  Lord 
Digby,  defeat  at  Lamport,  iii.  137  ; 
saying  of,  note,  iii.  153  ;  villainy 
of,  iii.  215-6-7  ;  flies  to  France, 
ib. ;  defeated  by  Fairfax,  iii.  403; 
taken  prisoner  at  Colchester,  iii. 

Grandison,  Lord,  taken  prisoner,  ii. 
75  ;  escapes  to  Oxford,  ib. 

Greenfield,  Captain,  copy  of  Rupert's 
passport  to,  iii.  38. 

Grenville,  Sir  Bevil,  to  Sir  John 
Trelawney,  on  joining  the  King's 
standard,  i.  120;  letter  to  his,  note, 
i.  420  ;  to  Colonel  Seymour,  mili- 
tary movements,  ii.  232  ;  death  of 
ii.  233. 

Grenville,  Sir  Richard,  besieges  Ply- 
mouth, iii.  78,  note,  ib. 

Gunter,  Major,  death  of,  at  Powick 
Bridge,  i.  404. 

Gustavus  Adolphus,  kindness  of,  to 
his  soldiers,  i.  45  ;  see  note,  i.  45  ; 
army  of,  invincible,  i.  47. 

Hamilton,  Marquis  of,  character  of,  i. 
159  ;  management  of  Scotland  con- 
fided to,  i.  160  ;  note,  ib ;  expedi- 
tion to  Scotland  entrusted  to,i.  165. 

Hampden,  John,  at  Edgehill,  ii.  33  ; 
vigilance  of,  ii.  72  ;  death  of,  at 
Chalgrove  fight,  ii.  208-9. 

Harrington,  Lord,  tutor  to  the  Prin. 
cess  Elizabeth,  i.  29  ,  see  note,  ib.~ 


574 


INDEX 


Harvey,  the  physician,  at  Edgehill,  ii. 
17  ;  see  note. 

Hastings,  Colonel,  attempted  seizure 
of,  at  Leicester,  i.  297  ;  see  note, 
i.  298  ;  to  Prince  Rupert  invitation 
to  attack  Derby,  ii.  96 ;  model  of 
partizan  chief,  ii.  97  ;  note,  ib.  ,• 
to  Prince  Rupert,  siege  of  Lich- 
field  Close,  ii.  162;  for  ammuni- 
tion, ii.  373  ;  Governor  of  Leices- 
ter, iii.  91  ;  qnarrels  of  Cavaliers, 
iii.  146. 

Heath,  Judge,  holds  court  of  Justice 
at  Oxford,  ii.  93. 

Henrietta  Maria,  Queen  ;  see  Qneen. 

Princess,     marries 

Prince  Ragotski,  iii.  144. 

Henry  VIII.,  taxation,  and  its  conse- 
quences in  the  reign  of,  i.  125. 

Herbert,  Lord,  letter  to  Prince  Rupert, 
ii.  101  ;  acknowledgment  of  his 
services  from  Rupert,  ii.  357  ;  his 
eccentric  note  to  Rupert,  iii.  22  ; 
surrenders  Montgomery  Castle,  ib. ; 
Edward,  his  mission  to  Ireland,  iii. 
139. 

Hertford,  Lord,  see  note,  i.  298 ;  be- 
sieged in  Sherborne  Castle,  see  note, 
ib.  354 ;  movements  of,  in  Wales, 
ii.  105;  attacks  Cirencester,  ii. 
106  ;  note,  ib. 

Heylin,  Dr.  publishes  Court  Mercury, 
ii.  89. 

Holland,  Lord,  pedigree  of,  i.  192 
note ;  commands  cavalry  in  Scotch 
war,  i.  165;  irresolution  of,  at 
Dunce,  i.  169  ;  disgraceful  retreat 
of,  i.  170;  betrays  the  King's 
cause  to  Parliament,  i.  199 ;  joins 
the  Cavaliers ;  taken  prisoner  and 
beheaded,  iii,  407-8. 

Hopton,  Sir  Ralph,  imprisoned  by 
Commons,  i.  252  ;  defeats  Round- 
heads at  Bradock  Downs,  ii.  99 ; 
advances  on  Plymouth,  ib. ;  battle 
of  Stratton  Downs,  ii.  100;  clears 
West  of  England  of  Parliament 
forces,  ib.  ;  movements  of,  in  search 
of  Waller,  ii.  231;  at  battle  of 
Lansdown,  ii.  253  ;  created  a  peer, 
ii.  275  ;  to  Prince  Rupert ;  arrival 
of  arms  at  Bristol,  ii.  278  ;  applies 
for  a  Lieut.-Governor,  ii.  291  ; 
movements  of,  in  the  West,  ii.  326 ; 
removal  of  a  regiment,  ii.  333 ; 
complaining  of  his  difficulties,  ii. 
359  ;  defeated  at  Brandon  Heath, 
ii.  404. 


Hopton  Heath,  battle  of,  ii.  156. 

Hostilities,  commencement  of,  between 
Charles  I.  and  the  Parliament,  i. 
293. 

Hotham,  Sir  J.,  treachery  of,  i.  301, 
303  ;  Governor  of  Hull  ;  shuts  the 
King  out  at  Beverley  Gate,  i.  264  ; 
denounced  a  traitor  by  the  King,  i. 
265,  see  note  i.  310  ;  protected  by 
Parliament,  ib.;  joins  Royal  cause, 
ii.  129  ;  character  of,  i.  243,  note. 

Hotham,  junr.,  his  attempt  on  Arch- 
bishop Williams,  i.  304. 

Howard,  R.  Capt.,  humorous  ac- 
count of  his  difficulties,  iii.  56-7. 

Hughes,  Mrs.,  an  actress,  description 
of,  iii.  491  ;  ensnares  Prince  Ru- 
pert, iii.  492 ;  marries  General 
Howe,  iii.  512. 

Hull ;  Charles  I,  shut  out  at  Bever- 
ley-gate,  i.  264  ;  and  attempt  of  the 
King  upon,  i.  309;  reinforced  by 
500  Parliament  soldiers,  ib. 

Hurst  Castle,  situation  of,  described, 
iii.  396. 

Hyde,  Sir  Edward,  conversation  with 
Sir  Edmund  Varney,  on  the  state  of 
feeling  in  Charles  I.'s  camp,  i.  121  ; 
brief  sketch  of,  i.  215,  see  note,  ib. ; 
to  Prince  Rupert,  position  of  John 
Hampden,  ii.  72  ;  on  various  mat- 
ters, iii.  92-3-4  ;  arrival  of  stores 
and  ammunition  at  Dartmouth,  iii. 
96 ;  Goring  at  Lamport,  iii.  134  ; 
difficulty  of  equipping  Rupert's  fleet, 
iii.  274  ;  on  carrying  the  Royal 
standard  on  board  Rupert's  ship, 
iii.  277  ;  to  Sir  Edward  Fanshaw 
—  Rupert's  motions  —  Batten's 
treachery,  iii.  278-9,  note ;  to  Prince 
Rupert — death  of  Charles  I.  and 
other  matters,  iii.  282-3  ;  soliciting 
memorials  for  history,  iii.  292-3  ;  on 
various  matters,  iii.  295-6;  to  Prince 
Rupert,  urging  him  to  join  the  King, 
iii.  419  ;  his  enmity  to  Rupert,  iii. 
422,  note  i.  215. 

Index  and  abstract  to  Rupert  corres- 
pondence, i.  491. 

Icon  Basilicon,  authorship  of,  doubt- 
ful, ii.  38.  note. 

Inchiquin,  Lord,  leaves  the  King  and 
goes  to  Ireland,  iii.  6. 

Infantry,  description  of,  in  Royalist 
army,  i.  426. 

Ireton,  General,  defeats  Cavaliers,  iii. 
102. 


INDEX. 


575 


Ironsides,  Cromwell's,  described,  i. 
375. 

James  I.,  his  cowardly  advice  to  the 
Prince  Palatine,  i.  30  ;  brief  review 
of  his  reign,  i.  129  ;  his  character, 
i.  130,  note,t'6.  ;  progress  of  the 
people  in  the  reign  of,  i.  134  ;  his 
conduct  to  the  twelve  judges,  i.  135; 
Parliament  postpones  supplies,  i. 

136,  note,  ib. ;  foreign  policy  of,  i. 

137,  note,  ib.  138. 

James  II.  to  Duke  of  Beaufort ;  re- 
peal of  Test  acts,  iii.  550. 

Jermyn,  Lord,  description  of,  ii.  229, 
note  to  ;  Oxford  Parliament  raises 
100,000/.  for  the  King,  ii.  374  ;  to 
Prince  Maurice,  siege  of  Lyme,  ii. 
422-3  ;  to  Prince  Rupert,  marriage 
of  Prince  Edward,  iii.  82;  expe- 
diency of  Prince  of  Wales  going  to 
Scotland,  iii.  308  ;  French  news, 
Charles  II.  in  Scotland,  iii.  389  ; 
to  Prince  Rupert,  urging  him  to 
join  Charles  II.,  iii.  420. 

Jones,  Inigo,  at  the  Court  of  Charles 
L,  i.  72. 

Jonson,  Ben,  Poet  Laureate  to  Charles 
I.,i.  72. 

Killigrew,  Sir  Henry,  defeat  reply 
of,  when  called  upon  to  declare  his 
views,  i.  288  ;  declares  for  the  King, 

King,  General,  at  the  battle  of  Lem- 
go,  see  note,  i.  80,  i.  99  ;  cowardice 
of,  at  Lemgo,  ii.  444  ;  hatred  of,  to 
Rupert,  ib. 

Kuffstein,  Count,  Governor  of  Lintz, 
attempts  to  convert  Prince  Rupert, 
i.94. 

Mademoiselle,  de,  her  at- 
tachment to  Prince  Rupert,  i.  95, 
100. 

Langdale,  Sir  M.,  defeated  at  Malpas, 

iii.  22 ;  at  Pontefract,  iii.  67. 
Langrish,  Captain,  informs  Speaker  of 

Commons  of  Charles's  intention  to 

seize  five  members,  i.  222. 
Lansdown,  battle  of,  ii.  233. 
Lathom  House,  siege  of,  ii.  426 ; 

garrison  make  a  sally,  ii.  427. 
Laud,  Archbishop,  conscientiousness 

of,  i.  156-164  ;  impeached  by  Long 

Parliament,  i.  183  ;  beheaded,  iii. 

42-3,  note  ;  character  of,  i.  435. 


Leicester,  Earl  of,  to  Charles  First, 
marriage  of  Prince  Rupert,  i.  63  ; 
to  Mr.  Secretary  Windebank  there- 
on, i.  66. 

— trial  of  strength  at,  i.  294  ; 

Colonel  Hastings  proclaims  the 
Royal  Commission  at,  i.  296 ; 
Prince  Rupert  levies  contributions 
on,  i.  397  ;  letter  to  the  mayor  of,  i. 
394 ;  citizens  of,  remonstrate  to  the 
King,  i.  395  ;  letter  from  Charles 
L,  to  the  mayor,  disavowing  Prince 
Rupert's  act.  i.  396 ;  siege  of,  iii. 
87-8-9  ;  effects  of,  iii.  90. 

Legge,  Major,  pedigree  of,  see  note,  i. 
201  ;  taken  prisoner,  ii.  163  ;  com- 
mands in  Oxfordshire,  ii.  340 ; 
order  from  Council  of  War  to,  ib. ; 
appointed  master  of  horse,  ii.  406-7 ; 
to  Rupert,  defeat  of  Lord  Byron, 
iii.  21 ;  appointed  governor  of  Ox- 
ford, iii.  83  ;  to  Lord  Digby, 
Rupert's  conduct  at  Naseby  vindi- 
cated by,  iii,  128-9-130;  imprison- 
ed, iii.  189;  released  from  prison, 
iii.  212 ;  advises  Rupert  to  offer  his 
services  to  the  King,  iii.  213;  a 
prisoner  to  Parliament,  iii.  416. 

Lemgo,  battle  of,  i.  85. 

Leopold,  Archdeacon,  visits  Prince 
Rupert  while  prisoner  at  Lintz,  i. 
97 ;  endeavours  to  obtain  his  re- 
lease, i.  101. 

Leslie,  General,  commands  Cove- 
nanters' army,  i.  169  ;  routes  Lord 
Conway  at  the  Tyne,  i.  176. 

Lesley,  Count,  endeavours  to  obtain 
release  of  Prince  Rupert,  i.  101. 

Lichfield  Cathedral,  desecrated  by 
the  Puritans,  see  note,  ii.  169. 

Lindsey,  Lord,  see  note  i.  320-1  ; 
raises  600  men  for  the  King,  i. 
378  ;  his  advice  at  Edgehill  over- 
ruled, ii.  14;  resigns  command  of 
Royal  Army,  ii.  15  ;  death  of,  ii. 
25,34. 

Lincolnshire,  paper  of  advice  on 
putting  troops  in,  ii.  218,  note. 

Lisle,  Sir  G.,  death  of,  at  Colchester, 
ii.  405;  epitaph  of,  ii.  407. 

Lichfield,  besieged  by  Lord  Brook, 
ii.  132-3-4-5. 

London,  loyalty  of  the  citizens  to 
Charies  I.  203,  see  note  i.  204  ; 
aspect  of  in  the  time  of  the  Cavaliers, 
i.  226,  note,  ib. ;  citizens  of,  sym- 
pathize with  Parliament  i.  134 ; 
alarm  of  citizens  after  battle  of 


576 


INDEX. 


London,  continued. 

Kdgehill,  ii.  40 ;  apprentices  of, 
enlist  in  trained  bands,  ii.  65  ;  ci- 
tizens of,  petition  for  peace,  ii.  1 1 1  ; 
described  by  a  Frenchman  in 
1643,  ii.  351. 

Loughborough,  Lord,  see  Hastings, 
Colonel. 

Louisa,  Princess,  enters  a  convent, 
iii.  443. 

Lucas,  Sir  Charles,  to  Prince  Rupert, 
military  details  in  the  North,  ii. 
370;  death  of,  at  Colchester,  iii. 
405 ;  epitaph  of,  iii.  407,  note 
to, 

Lundy  Island,  summoned  to  sur- 
render to  Parliament,  iii.  3,  note. 

Lunsford,  Sir  Thomas,  description  of, 
i.  note  ;  offers  of,  to  Charles  I.  to 
seize  the  five  members,  i.  223. 

Madagascar,  proposed  expedition  to, 
i.  59. 

Mansfeldt,  see  note,  i.  42. 

Manchester,  Earl,  his  quarrel  with 
Cromwell,  iii.  40. 

Marston  Moor,  note,  ii.  446  ;  battle 
of,  ii.  447  ;  note,  ib. ;  plan  of 
battle,  ii.  455 ;  loss  of  life  at,  ii. 
463  ;  note,  ib. ;  state  of  Northern 
army  before  battle  of,  ii.  481. 

Marvel,  Andrew,  on  the  execution  of 
Charles  I.  iii.  400. 

Mary,  see  Queen. 

Martinique,  description  of,  iii.  371- 
2-3. 

Massey,  Edward,  to  Governor  of 
Abingdon  ;  Rupert's  march  to  Ox- 
ford, iii.  81. 

Maurice,  Prince,  birth  of,  i.  40  ;  at 
the  siege  of  Breda,  i.  80  ;  goes  to 
a  French  university,  i.  82  ;  embarks 
with  Prince  Rupert  for  England, 
i.  109  ;  quarrels  with  Lord  Hert- 
ford, i.  269  ;  his  haughty  character, 
ib.  ;  cause  of  quarrel,  note,  ib.  ; 
takes  Exeter,  ii.  305  ;  at  Polesloe, 
ii.  303  ;  note  ib.\  illness  of,  ii. 
307  ;  at  Reading,  ii.  360  ;  to  Co- 
lonel Seymour,  ii.  361  ;  to  King 
Charles  I.  military  arrangements, 
ii.  411  ;  appointed  to  government 
of  Wales,  iii.  51  ;  to  Prince  Rupert 
thereon,  ib. ;  summons  meeting  of 
associated  counties,  iii.  53  ;  to 
Prince  Rupert  thereon,  ib. ;  for  in- 
crease of  power,  iii.  54 ;  desertion 
of  his  soldieis,  iii.  60  j  in  Wales, 


Maurice,  Prince,  continued. 

iii.  61  ;  appoints  rendezvous  at 
Wrexham,  ib.  ;  at  Chester,  iii.  61  ; 
his  order  of  march,  iii.  72  ;  his 
affection  for  Rupert,  iii.  189,  333  ; 
fidelity  to  the  King,  iii.  225  ;  em- 
barks for  Holland,  iii.  236  ;  hoists 
his  flag  in  the  Defiance,  iii.  362  ; 
lost  in  a  hurricane  in  the  West 
Indies,  iii.  384  ;  reports  of  his  re- 
turn to  Europe,  iii.  428,  note. 

Maximilian  invades  Bohemia,  i.  37  ; 
battle  of  Prague,  ib. 

Mazarine,  French  ambassador,  arrives 
at  Oxford,  ii.  319. 

Milton,  John,  sonnet  by,  affixed  to 
his  house,  ii.  41,  note. 

Mennes,  Sir  John,  to  Prince  Rupert, 
reinforcements  from  Ireland,  ii. 
373. 

Mezzotinto.  discovered  by  Prince  Ru- 
pert, iii.  435;  invention  of,  claimed 
by  Sir  C.  Wren,  iii.  436  ;  said  to 
be  discovered  by  a  soldier,  iii.  437  ; 
early  etchings  in  British  Museum, 
iii.  438  ;  observations  on  Rupert's 
claims  to  discovery  of  iii.  439-40- 
1-2  ;  list  of  Prince  Rupert's  en- 
gravings, iii.  546. 

Monk,  General,  a  lieutenant  at  the 
siege  of  Breda,  i.  80  ;  a  soldier  of 
fortune,  i.  198,  note  ;  taken  pri- 
soner at  Nantwich,  ii.  334 ;  note, 
iii.  469 ;  joint  commander  with 
Rupert  of  English  fleet,  iii.  472  ; 
note,  iii.  479. 

Montgomery,  Castle,  surrendered,  iii. 
22,  5. 

Montrose,  Earl  of,  becomes  attached 
to  the  cause  of  Charles  I.i.  173  ; 
note,  iii.  45  ;  gains  battle  of  Kil- 
syth  ;  its  consequences,  iii.  116  ; 
to  Prince  Rupert  ;  letter  of  con- 
gratulation, iii.  254;  correspond- 
ence of,  with  Prince  Rupert,  iii. 
267-8-9-70,  307. 

Nintwich,  capture  of,  by  Lord  Gran- 
disun,  i.  411  ;  siege  of,  note,  ii. 
365. 

Naseby,  battle  of,  council  of  War,  iii. 
98  ;  aspect  of  country  round,  iii. 
101,  note,  ib.  ;  the  King  decides  for 
battle,  iii.  103,  note,  ib.  •  position 
of  Fairfax  and  Cromwell  at,  ib. ; 
plan  of  battle,  iii.  104  ;  Fairfax  and 
Cromwell  at,  iii.  107  ;  battle-cry  at, 
iii.  106;  description  of,  iii,  108  9j 
the  King's  appeal  to  Cavaliers  at', 


INDEX. 


577 


Naseby,  battle  of,  continued. 
108-9  ;    loss  at,  iii.  110,  note,  ib.  ; 
Royal  Standard  taken  at,  iii.  Ill, 
note,  ib.  -  the  King's  private  letters 
taken  at,  111,  112,  note,  ib. 

Navy,  seamen  the  first  to  declare  for 
Charles  II.,  iii.  470 ;  Rupert  an 
Admiral,  mutiny  of  sailors  for  want 
of  pay,  iii.  473 ;  battle  with  the 
Dutch,  iii.  474-9. 

Newark,  victory  at,  ii.  392-7 ;  its  con- 
sequences, ii.  403  ;  attempted 
treachery  at,  iii.  49  ;  garrison  of, 
extravagance  of,  iii.  198. 

Newbury,  battle  of,  fatal  to  Royal 
cause,  ii.  293  ;  second  battle  of,  iii. 
29  ;  extracts  from  Rupert's  diary 
of,  iii.  31. 

Newcastle,  Earl  of,  sent  by  Charles 
I.,  to  seize  Hull,  i.  241,  note,  26.  ; 
receives  orders  to  attend  Parlia- 
ment, i.  243 ;  his  progress  in  the 
North,  ii.  78,  see  note,  ii.  79  ;  to 
Prince  Rupert,  congratulatory  note, 
ii.  95  ;  luxurious  habits  of,  ii.  126  ; 
to  Prince  Rupert,  letter  of  con- 
gratulation, ii.  275  ;  movement  of, 
in  the  North,  ii.  307  ;  his  disincli- 
nation to  join  the  King,  ii.  308  ; 
to  Prince  Rupert,  letters  of  congra- 
tulation, ii.  309  ;  at  York,  ii.  346  ; 
to  Prince  Rupert,  Sir  C.  Lucas,  ap- 
pointed, ii,  356 ;  advance  of  the 
Scots,  ii.  368  j  at  Shrewsbury,  ii. 
371  to  the  King,  state  of  Royalist 
forces  in  the  North,  ii.  381  ;  on  the 
relief  of  Newark,  ii.  397  ;  for  relief, 
ii.  400 ;  defeat  of  Colonel  Bellasis 
at  Selby,  ii.  433,  note  ;  relieved  at 
York  by  Prince  Rupert,  ii.  443  ; 
quarrels  with  the  Prince,  ii.  445-6  ; 
arrives  at  the  battle  of  Marston 
Moor,  ii.  454  ;  disgraceful  flight  to 
Hamburgh,  ii.  467,  note,  ib,  ;  state- 
ment of  Royalist  forces  under  his 
command,  ii.  481. 

taken,  ii.  469,  note,  ib. 

Newport,  Lord,  appointed  Master- 
general  of  Ordnance,  i.  236  ;  signi- 
ficant orders  to,  from  Parliament,  ib. 

Newspapers,  increase  of,  i.  237. 

Nicholas,  Mr.  "  Secretary,"  to  Prince 
Rupert,  clothing  for  troops,  ii.  115; 
treaty  between  King  and  Parlia- 
ment, ii.  150;  military  movements 
of  Essex,  ii.  159-160  ;  news  from 
Oxford,  ii.  104  ;  recall  of  Rupert 

VOL.  III. 


Nicholas,  Secretary,  continued. 

to  Oxford,  ii.  173-6;  on  various 
matters,  ii.  188-9  ;  political  ru- 
mours, ii.  144  ;  escort  of  the  Queen, 
ii.  223-5  ;  victory  of  Roundway 
Down,  ii.  226 ;  movements  of 
Essex  near  Aylesbury,  ii.  245  ;  to 
the  King,  ii.  278  ;  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert, efforts  of  Charles  to  conciliate 
his  officers,  ii.  321  ;  supplies  of 
bread,  ii.  323  ;  movements  of  Par- 
liamentary army,  iii.  326 ;  arrival  of 
supplies,  ii.  326  ;  on  various  mat- 
ters, ii.  327  ;  Sir  William  Waller 
at  Basingstoke,  ii.  330  ;  position  of 
troops,  arrival  of  the  Elector  Pala- 
tine, iii.  24  ;  Cromwell  at  Farring- 
don,  iii.  79 ;  Cromwell's  move- 
ments about  Banbury,  iii.  91  ; 
Fairfax  and  Cromwell,  iii.  97 ;  move- 
ments of  Parliamentary  army,  iii. 
123  ;  importance  of  Rupert's  ser- 
vices to  the  King,  iii.  214-5. 

Northampton,  Lord,  see  note,  i.  322  ; 
letter  to  Prince  Rupert,  state  of  the 
country,  ii.  84. 

,    Earl    of,    desperate 

charge  of,  at  Hopton  Heath,  ii. 
136 ;  to  Prince  Rupert,  complain- 
ing of  harsh  levies,  ii.  187  ;  death 
of,  ii.  137  ;  character,  ib. 

Northumberland,  Earl  of,  see  note,  i. 
249 ;  appointed  General-in  chief  in 
Scotch  war,  i.  175;  at  Oxford,  ii. 
139. 

O'Neile,  Captain,  letter  to  Prince 
Rupert,  insubordination  of  troops, 
ii.  82;  note,i&. 

Orange,  Prince  of,  besieges  Breda,  i. 
80. 

Ordinance,  self-denying  object  of,  iii. 
41. 

Ormond,  Lord,  to  Prince  Rupert, 
raising  men  in  Ireland,  ii.  409  ; 
power  of,  to  conclude  peace  in  Ire- 
land, iii.  158. 

Osborne,  Colonel,  to  Prince  Rupert, 
his  mission  to  Parliament  for  pa>,s, 
for  Rupert  and  Cavaliers,  iii. 
208-9-10-11. 

Ottley,  Francis,  to  Prince  Rupert, 
ii.  368. 

Owen,  Sir  John,  sentenced  to  be 
hanged,  letter  to  Sir  Thomas  Fair- 
fax, on  his  reprieval,  iii.  409. 

Oxford,  City  of,  respected  by  Parlia- 
mentary troops,  ii.  44  ;  gaiety  of 

P  P 


578 


INDEX. 


Oxford,  City  of,  continued. 

Charles  1/s  Court  at,  ii.  45  ;  lends 
10,0001.  to  the  King,  ii.  77  ;  in- 
vested by  Essex,  ii.  80;  in  1642, 
ii.  81  ;  diplomacy  at,  ii.  138  ;  the 
Earl  of  Northumberland  at,  ii.  139  ; 
the  Queen  arrives  at,  ii.  217  ;  re- 
joicings at,  for  capture  of  Bristol, 
ii.  270  ;  Parliament  held  at,  ii. 
363  ;  100,000/.  voted  for  the  King, 
ii.  374  ;  surrender  of,  to  Sir  Thomas 
Fairfax,  iii.  230. 

Palatine  Army,  organized  at  Mepping, 
i.  82;  see  notes,  i.  84,  85  ;  dispersed 
at  Lemgo,  i.  91. 

Elector,    see   Frederick     and 

Charles  Louis. 

Parliament,  English,  unconscious  of  its 
power  in  Henry  VII.'s  reign, i.  241  ; 
note  i.  125;  confidences  of  Charles  I 
in  his  first  Parliament,  i.  142  ;  con- 
duct of  first  Parliament,  i.  144,  145  ; 
dissolved,  ib.',  second  parliament  as- 
sembled, i.  147;  dissolved,  i.  148  ; 
war  declared  with  France,!.  149  ; 
third  Parliament  summoned,  i.  151; 
presents  petition  of  right  to  the  King, 
i.  153;  Commons  denounce  the  Duke 
of  Buckingham,  i.  154  ;  tonnage  and 
poundage  levied  without  consent  of, 
i.  155;  peace  with  France  and  Spain, 
ib. ;  (Short)  Parliament  summoned, 
i.  174;  dissolved,  ib. ;  (Long)  Par- 
liament called,  i.  178;  strength  of 
reform  party  in  Long  Parliament,  i. 
179;  impeaches  Lord  Strafford,  i. 
180;  Strafford  committed,  i.  181  ; 
bill  of  attainder  against  Strafford,  i. 
185;  Commons  disband  Irish  army, 
i.  200;  appoint  three  members  to 
watch  the  King,  i.  201;  Commons 
present  the  remonstrance  to  the  King, 
i.  204;  bishops  deprived  of  their 
seats,  i.  207-245;  Sir  Edward  Deer- 
ing's  bill,  i.  208;  raises  forces  by 
conscription,  i.  209;  growing  power 
of,  ib.  239 ;  Charles  I.  attempts  to 
seize  Five  Members  of  Commons,  i. 
220;  committee  of,  meets  Five  Mem- 
bers in  the  City,  i.  224  ;  triumphant 
return  of  Five  Members  to,  i.  225  ; 
citizens  of  London  sympathise  with, 
i.  234;  appoint  Major- General  Skep- 
pon  Lieutenant  of  Tower,  i.  236  ; 
passes  Militia  bill,  i.  241 ;  appoints 
Sir  J.  Hotham  governor  of  IIull,  i. 


Parliament,  English,  continued. 

243;  encroachments  of  the  Commons, 
i.  247;  demand  Prince  of  Wales  as 
hostage,  i.  247;  Charles  I.  refuses 
his  assent  to  Militia  bill,  i.  248;  pre- 
pares for  war,  i.  249;  arbitrary  con- 
duct of,  to  Roman  Catholics,  i.  25 1 ; 
Charles  I.  proposes  to  visit  Ireland, 
i.  261;  refusal  of  Commons,  i.  262; 
attempt  of  the  King  to  seize  Hull, 
ib.  ;  the  King  refused  admittance  by 
Sir  J.  Hotham,  i.  264 ;  protects  Sir 
J.  Hotham,  i.  265  ;  committee  of, 
refuse  to  leave  the  King,  i.  266;  pre- 
pares for  war,  i.  268  ;  nineteen  pro- 
positions of,  sent  to  the  King,  i.  269; 
copy  of,  ib ;  false  position  of  Par- 
liamentary leaders,  i.  270  ;  reformers 
guilty  of  falsehood,  i.  271;  members 
of,  allowed  U.  per  week,  i.  272  ;  de- 
clares itself  indissoluble,  ib  ;  consti- 
tution of  Long  Parliament,  ii.  479  ; 
Long  Parliament  maintained  by  the 
eloquence  of  a  few,  i.  273  ;  position 
of  affairs,  i.  278  ;  many  members 
join  the  King  at  York,  i.  274  ;  levies 
troops,  i.  279  ;  offers  eight  per  cent, 
for  money,  i.  280  ;  liberality  of  the 
citizens  to,  i.  281  ;  raises  a  loan  of 
100,OOOJ.;  levy  10,000  volunteers  in 
London,  i.  288;  appoint  committee 
of  public  safety,  i.  289;  statement  of 
forces  of,  i.  290;  commencement  of 
hostilities,  i.  293;  reinforces  Hull, 
i.  309;  brief  review  of  Parliament- 
ary leaders,  i.  344  ;  note,  i.  343-4- 
5-6-7;  Charles  I.  makes  overtures 
of  peace  to,  i.  356  ;  haughty  recep- 
tion of  ambassadors  by,i6  ,•  the  King 
renews  his  efforts  for  peace,  i.  357; 
answer  of  Parliament  to  the  King, 
i.  358 ;  policy  of,  towards  the  King, 
i.  359;  offers  pardon,  to  their  oppo- 
nents, with  certain  exceptions,  i. 
409;  alarm  of,  at  advance  of  Royal- 
ists, ii.  6;  see  note,  ii.  7 ;  alarm  of, 
after  battle  of  Edgehill,  ii.  39;  opens 
negotiations  with  the  King,  ii.54-5- 
7-9;  monopolises  revenue  and  taxes, 
ii.  77 ;  efforts  of,  to  gain  a  Scotch 
alliance,  ii.  78;  note,  ib.  ;  forms  as- 
sociated counties,  ii.  79;  members  of, 
allowed  41.  per  week,  ii.  94 ;  sends 
deputation  to  Charles  I.,  ii.  112- 
3-4;  again  proposes  cessation  of  hos- 
tilities, ii.  131;  alarmed  at  Royalist 
successes,  ii.  270;  seek  aid  from 


INDEX. 


579 


Parliament,  English,  continued. 

Scotland,  ib  ;  Essex  advises  peace, 
ii.  271;  denounces  the  troops  from 
Ireland,  its  consequences,  ii.  390; 
grants  Essex  10,OOOZ.  per  annum — 
self-denying  ordinance  passed,  iii.  4 1 ; 
Parliamentary  distinction  between 
Englishmen  and  Irishmen,  iii.  73  ; 
exempts  Cromwell  from  self-denying 
ordinance,  iii.  76;  refuses  pass  to 
Rupert  and  Cavaliers  to  leave  Eng- 
land, iii.  208;  grants  a  pass  con- 
ditionally, iii.  210-11 ;  sends  remon- 
strance to  French  Court  for  counten- 
ancing Rupert,  iii.  421 ;  declaration 
of  Prince  Rupert  to,  iii.  481-3-4; 
Test  Act,  iii.  497. 

(Scotch)     adjourned     by 

Charles  on  pain  of  treason,  i.  174. 

(Long)  constitution  of,  ii. 


479. 

Penniman,  Sir  W.,  raises  600  men  for 
the  King,  i.  379. 

People,  the,  progress  of,  i.  124,  126, 
127,  134,  161. 

Peterborough,  Earl  of,  General  of  Par- 
liamentary Ordnance,  i.  376. 

Petition  of  Northern  horse  for  home 
quarters,  iii.  71. 

Pitts,  Capt.,  narrative  of  Rupert's  voy- 
age from  the  Straits  to  West  Indies, 
iii.  531. 

Plague,  the,  at  Bristol  and  Winchester, 
iii.  124. 

Plunder,  supposed  origin  of  word,  ii. 
142. 

Pontefract,  battle,  iii.  67,  note. 

Portsmouth,  loss  of,  its  consequences  to 
the  King,  i.  356 ;  surrender  of,  to 
Sir  William  Waller,  i.  579. 

Powick  Bridge,  skirmish  at,  i.  402-3- 
4-5  ;  moral  effect  of,  i.  406. 

Prayer,  description  of,  i.  26. 

Printing  press,  arrival  of  the  King  at 
York,  i.  257  ;  notice  of,  i.  258. 

Prisoners,  ransom  of,  source  of  reve- 
nue, ii.  336-7,  note,  ib. 

Protestant  Princes  unite  in  defence  of 
their  privileges,  i.  21.  see  note  ib. 

Proverb,  German,  i.  102. 

Puritans,  their  manners  and  costume, 
i.  333  ;  qualities  of  leaders  of,  i.  344 
-348,  see  note  ib.  ;  intolerance  of, 
i.  350  ;  the  condition  of  England 
under  their  rule  described,  iii.  415- 
16-17. 

Pym,  John,  impeaches  Lord  StrafFord, 


Pym,  John,  continued. 

i.  180  ;  prepares  Bill  of  Attainder 
against  Lord  Strafford,  ii.  185  ;  army 
plot  known  to,  195;  one  of  the  Five 
Members  attempted  to  be  seized  by 
Charles,  i.  220  ;  sec  note,  i.  224  ; 
despotism  of,i.  237,  see  note,  i.  344  ; 
exempt  from  pardon  by  the  King,  ii. 
112  ;  letter  to  Sir  William  Waller, 
ii.  141  ;  death  of,  iii.  350. 
Pyne,  Captain,  biography  of  Prince 
Rupert,  by,  note,  i.  39,  i.  463. 

Queen  Mary,  progress  of  the  people  in 

the  reign  of,  i.  126. 
Elizabeth,  progress  of  the  people 

in  the  reign  of,  i.  127,  note,  i.  128. 

Henrietta  Maria,  description  of 

her  Court,  i.  74  ;  goes  to  Holland, 
i.  106-7  ;  raises  money  on  crown 
jewels,  ib.  ;   her  energy  in  raising 
supplies  for  the  King,  i.   1 08  ;  in 
Holland,  i.  246  ;  sends  General  Gor- 
ing to  England  with  arms  for  the 
King,  ii.  126  ;  escorted  from  Hol- 
land by  Van  Tromp,  ii.  1 27,  note 
ib. ;    lands  at   Burlington   Bay,   ii. 
128  ;  protected  by  Van  Tromp  from 
Parliament  cruisers,  ii.  128-9,  note 
ib.  ;  arrives  at  York,  ii.  130,  note,  ii. 
139  ;  at  Oxford,  ii.  217,note,ii.  221  ; 
meets  the  King  at  Edgehill.  i .  229  ; 
demands  promotion  for  her  favour- 
ites, ii.  230  ;  evil  councils  of,  ii.  283; 
her  influence  on  the  King,  ii.  300  ; 
her  intrigues  ruinous  to  royal  cause, 
ii.  301-2-15  ;  jealous  of  Prince  Ru- 
pert,  ib.;  leaves  Oxford,  ii.  405; 
confinement   of,   423 ;    escapes    to 
France,  ii.   424  ;    opposed  to   the 
landing  of  Charles  I.  in  France,  iii. 
395. 

Elizabeth  of  Bohemia,  marries 

Elector  Palatine  of  Bohemia,  i.  29  ; 
taunting  advice  to   her  husband,  i. 
25,   note  ;    crowned   at    Prague,  i. 
28  ;    educated    by    Lord    Harring- 
ton, i.   29  ;    commencement  of  her 
career,  i.  30 ;   her  magnanimity,  i. 
38  ;  escapes  from  Prague,  ib. ;  takes 
refuge  in  Custun  Castle,  i.  39  ;  fi- 
nally settles  at  the  Hague,  i.  40  ; 
fascinating  manner  of,  i.  41  ;  devo- 
tion of  her  followers,  i.  42 ;  her  fa- 
ther's dying  request,  i.  43  ;  death  of 
her  jiusband,  i.  54  ;  Charles  I.  sends 
an  embassy  of  condolence  to,  i.  55, 


580 


INDEX. 


Queen  Elizabeth,  continued. 

see  note,  ib.  ;  levity  of  her  Court,  i. 
69,  see  note,  i.  70 ;  endeavours  to 
release  Prince  Rupert  from  prison,  i. 
93  ;  pretended  letter  of  disowning 
acts  of  Rupert,  iii.  148  ;  to  Sir  Jacob 
Astley  inviting  him  to  the  Hague,  ii. 
198  ;  pawns  her  jewels  to  fit  out 
Rupert's  fleet,  iii.  281  j  her  dis- 
tressed condition,  supported  by  the 
States,  iii.  427-442  ;  Lord  Craven's 
devotion  to,  iii.  441-2 ;  10,OOOJ. 
voted  to  her  by  English  Parliament, 
iii.  444  ;  arrives  in  England, iii.  445 ; 
death  of,  iii.  ib. 

Rabutin,  M.  de,  description  of  Cavalier 
life,  ii.  83. 

Ramsey,  Sir  John,  taken  prisoner,  ii. 
75. 

Reading,  siege  of,  ii.  180  ;  breach  of 
articles  of  war,  ib. 

Rebellion  (Irish),  its  consequences  to 
Charles  I.,  i.  207. 

Rhodes,  Joseph,  to  Prince  Rupert  ; 
attempted  treachery  at  Newark,  iii. 
48-9. 

Richmond,  Duke  of,  to  ;  Dig- 

by's  intrigues  ;  refusal  of  Essex  to 
treat  with  the  King,  iii.  7,  note. 

Rigby,  Colonel,  attacks  Lathom-house, 
ii.  427. 

Ripon,  Treaty  of,  i.  176. 

Rivers,  Countess  of,  her  house  at- 
tacked, ii.  121,  note. 

Robinson,  Thomas,  letter  of ;  state  of 
the  City  of  London,  ii.  95. 

Rohan,  Mademoiselle  de,  intended  mar- 
riage of,  i.  61  ;  attachment  of,  to 
Prince  Rupert,  i.  63  ;  marries  Henri 
Chabot,i.69. 

Roundway  Down,  battle  at,  ii.  234. 

Roundhead,  origin  of  the  term,  i.  210, 
note,  ib. 

Roundheads,  the  social  condition  of 
England  under  their  rule  described, 
iii.  4 15-1 6-1 7. 

Rousewell,  Colonel,  defence  of  Lich- 
field-close,  ii.  161 — 9. 

Rubens,  P.,  domiciled  in  England,!.  73. 

Rudyard,  Sir  Benjamin,  patriotic  con- 
duct of,  i.  267  ;  character  of,  i.  283  ; 
manly  speech  of,  i.  284  ;  speech  of, 
ii.  131,  note  ;  death  of,  see  note,  i. 
315. 

Rupert  Prinoe,  early  history  of,  little 
known,  i.  17  ;  varied  career  of,  i. 


Rupert,  Prince,  continued. 

18,  see  note,  ib.  ;  birth  of,  i.  27,  31  ; 
joy  of  the  Bohemians,  i.  32,  note,  if).  ; 
Bethlem  Gaber  godfather  to,  ib.  ;  his 
escape  from  the  Battle  of  Prague,  i. 
38  ;  educated  at  Leyden,  i.  44  ;  his 
early  passion  for  war,  ib.  ;  at  the 
siege  of  Rhynberg,  i.  49,  see  note,  ib. ; 
carries  off  the  palm  at  a  tournament, 
i.  50  ;  letter  from  his  father  at  Mu- 
nich, L  51  ;  makes  his  first  campaign, 
i.  56  ;  visit  of,  to  Charles  I.  i.  58  ; 
proposal  of  Laud  to  make  him  a 
bishop,  i.  59  ;  proposal  to  make  him 
Viceroy  of  Madagascar,  i.  59  ;  his 
intended  marriage  with  Mademoiselle 
de  Rohan,  i.  61  ;  singular  correspond- 
ence thereon,  i.  62  ;  imprisoned  at 
Lintz,  i.  68  ;  made  Master  of  Arts 
at  Oxford,  i.  71  ;  picture  of,  at 
Combe  Abbey,  i.  73  ;  his  taste  for 
the  arts,  i.  74  ;  delights  in  hunting, 
i.  76  ;  departs  for  the  Hague,  i.  80  ; 
at  the  siege  of  Breda,  i.  80  ;  his 
vigilance  and  courage,  i.  81  ;  returns 
to  the  Hague,  ib. ;  organizes  a  little 
army  at  Mepping,  i.  83  ;  commands 
a  regiment  of  cavalry,  ib. ;  desperate 
charge  of,  at  Rhennius,  ib. ;  joined 
by  Swedes  under  General  King,  i. 
13  ;  description  of  this  Palatine 
army,  i.  84  ;  at  the  Battle  of 
Lemgo,  i.  87  ;  his  singular  escape 
and  ultimate  capture  at  Lemgo, 
i.  89-90  ;  detained  a  prisoner  at 
Warrendorp,  i.  92  ;  solicits  aid  from 
Charles  I.  ib.;  removed  to  the  Castle 
of  Lintz,  ib.  ;  efforts  of  his  mother 
to  save  him,  i.  93  ;  his  attempted 
conversion  by  Count  Kuffstein,  i. 
94,  see  note,  ib. ;  his  attachment  to 
Mademoiselle  de  Kuffstein,  i.  9 5,  see 
note,  ib  ;  visited  by  Archduke  Leo- 
pold, i.  97  ;  is  placed  on  his  parole, 
ib.  ;  Charles  I.  negotiates  for  his 
liberty,  ib.  ;  offends  the  Emperor 
Ferdinand  III.,  i.  98,  see  note,  ib.  ; 
his  amusements  in  prison,  i.  99, 
see  note,  ib.  ;  Archduke  Leopold 
renews  his  efforts  to  obtain  his 
release,  i.  101  ;  released  on  his 
parole,  i.  103,  note,  ib.  ;  Ferdinand 
tries  to  win  him  over  to  his  service, 
ib. ;  -offered  a  command  against  the 
French  and  Swedes,  ib.  ;  his  refusal, 
ib.  ;  his  devotion  to  the  cause  of 
the  Cavaliers,  i.  104 ;  visits  King 


INDEX. 


581 


Rupert,  Prince,  continued. 

Charles  I.  in  England,  ib.  ;  his  tem- 
perance, i.  105  ;  meets  the  King  at 
Dover,  i.  106,  note,  i.  107  ;  returns 
to  the  Hague,   i.  109  ;    appointed 
General  of  Horse  to  Charles  I.,  ib. ; 
embarks  for  England,  ib.  ;    narrowly 
escapes    Parliamentary   cruisers,    i. 
110  ;     dislocates   his    shoulder,  ib.9 
see  note,   ib.  ;    joins   Charles    I.   at 
Leicester    Abbey,   i.   Ill  ;    infuses 
new  life  in  the  King,  i.  112;  descrip- 
tion of  the  person  of,  i.  1 1 3,  note,  ib.', 
meets   Charles    I.   at    Leicester,   i. 
326,  327  ;    sole  referee  of  Charles 
i.  361-366  ;  letter  from  the  Countess 
of  Derby  to,  soliciting  protection,  i. 
364  ;  his  peculiar  position  in  Royal 
camp,   i.   367,  note  ib. ;  enmity  of 
Lord  Digby  to  the  Prince,  its  con- 
sequences, ib.  ;  letter  from  Lord  Dig- 
by  to  the  Prince,  commencement  of 
misunderstanding,  i.  368;  activity  of, 
i.  383  ;  plan  of  campaign,  i.  384  ; 
Knight  of  the  Garter  and  General  of 
Horse,  i.  386  ;  ii.  488-490;  recruits 
the  Royalist  army,i.  387;  his  mode  of 
raising  levies,  ib. ;  terror  of  his  name, 
i.  388 ;  seizes  arms  in  Puritan  houses, 
i.  390 ;  attacksCaldecot  manor-house. 
i.  391  ;  his  gallantry  to  Mrs.  Purefoy, 
i.  392  ;  at  Queenborough,  i.  393  ; 
levies  contributions  on  Leicester,  i. 
393  ;  letter  to  the  Mayor,  i.  394  ;  a 
good  pistol  shot,  i.  396  ;  his  address 
to  the  jury  at   Carm  Hall,  i.  397  ; 
receives   orders   to  protect  Worces- 
ter, i.    398 ;    letter    from    Charles 
I.  to,    ib. ;   challenges  the   Earl   of 
Essex  to  single  combat,  i.  399,  400, 
note  ib.  ;    routs  the   Parliamentary 
horse  at  Powick  Bridge,  i.  403-4- 
5,  note,  ib. ;  falls  back  upon  Lud- 
low,  i:   406  ;    enters   the    Puritan 
camp  in  disguise,  i.  407-8  ;  arrives 
at   Shrewsbury,  i.   409 ;    summons 
Coventry,    ii.   9  ;,  advances    of,   to 
Wormleighton,  ii.   10  ;  quarrel  with 
Lord  Falkland,  ii.  1 1  ;  plan  of  battle 
at   Edgehill,  ii.   15  ;   his  charge  at 
Edgehill,  ii.  22 ;  captures  rear-guard 
of  Parliament  army,  ii.  35  ;  offers  to 
advance  on  London,  ii.  37  :  his  ad- 
ventures at  Warwick,  ii.  41  ;  his 
foray  at  Aylesbury,  ii.  47,  note  ib,  ; 
attacks  Windsor,  ii.  49  ;  retires  to 
Kingston,    ii.    50 ;   attacks   Surrey 


Rupert,  Prince,  continued. 

trained  bands,  ii.  51  ;  takes  Cole- 
brook,  ii.  51  ;  captures  two  London 
merchants,  ii.  61;  their  "simple" 
tale,  ii.  62;  attacks  Brentford,  ii. 
63  ;  at  Brentford-bridge,  ii.  67 ; 
his  paper  of  advice,  68-9-70  ;  a 
good  forager,  ii.  77  ;  at  Banbury, 
ii.  83;  at  Cirencester,  ii.  93-103; 
description  of  his  cavalry,  ii.  103  ; 
takes  Cirencester,  ii.  106-7  ;  at- 
tacked by  Parliamentary  press,  7- 
8-9;  summons  Gloucester,  ii.  110- 
ii.  118;  publishes  his  declaration, 
ii.  119;  extract  from  "reply"  to  his 
declaration,  ii.  1 25  ;  offers  to  convoy 
the  Queen  to  Oxford,  ii.  147;  his 
expedition  to  York,  ii.  148-151  ; 
takes  Birmingham,  ii.  152-3-4-5  ; 
attacks  Lichfield  Close,  ii.  161-6- 
7-8-9-170  ;  recalled  to  Oxford,  ii. 
171-3  ;  characteristic  anecdote  of, 
ii.  179;  foraging  expedition  of, 
ii.  183;  at  Chalgrove  fight,  ii. 
206-12  ;  paper  of  advice,  note,  ii. 
217  ;  amusing  incident  of,  ii.  223  ; 
meets  the  Queen  at  Stratford,  ii, 
227  ;  charmed  life  of,  ii.  230  ;  at 
siege  of  Bristol,  ii.  236  ;  acquitted 
by  governor  of  Bristol  of  plundering, 
ii.  267  ;  advises  peace,  ii.  272  ; 
attacks  rear  guard  of  Essex,  ii.  286  ; 
note,  ib.  surprises  Cirencester,  ii.  287; 
surprises  Charles  at  Picquet,  ii.  288; 
attacks  Essex  in  Auborn  Chase,  ii. 
289-290-1,  note,  ib. ;  reforms  his 
cavalry  after  battle  of  Newbury, 
ii.  298  ;  resistless  charge  of,  ib.  ; 
jealousy  of  the  Queen  towards,  ii. 
302  ;  takes  Bedford,  ii.  321 ;  to  Gene-  • 
ral  Goring,  ii.  324  ;  friends  at  Court, 
ii.  356  ;  scheme  to  entrap,  ii.  361-2  ; 
made  President  of  Wales,  ii.  363  ; 
to  the  Governor  of  Shrewsbury, 
announcing  his  approach,  ii.  366-7  ; 
loyalty  of,  questioned,  ii.  369  ;  at 
Shrewsbury,  ii.  376;  in  want  of 
money,  ii.  379,  note,  ib.  ;  order  of, 
to  Mayor  of  Chester  to  assess  inhabit- 
ants, ii.  484  ;  difficulties  of  his  posi- 
tion as  President  of  Wales,  ii.  387-8; 
visits  the  various  garrisons,  ii.  389  ; 
thirteen  soldiers  hanged  by  Governor 
of  Nantwich,  ii.  390 ;  the  Prince's 
revenge,  ii.  391  ;  relieves  Newark, 
ii.  392-3-4-5-6-7  ;  his  proclama- 
tion for  contributions  for  Conway, 


582 


INDEX. 


Rupert,  Prince,  continued. 

ii.  401  ;  to  Will.  Legge,  appoint- 
ment of  Master  of  Horse,  ii.  406  ; 
attends  council  of  war  at  Oxford,  ii. 
409  ;  advice  of,  ii.  410  ;  returns  to 
Shrewsbury,  ii.  411  ;  his  advice  ne- 
glected, its  consequences,  ii.  412  ;  to 
the  Constable  of  Harleigh  Castle,  ii. 
425  ;  brilliant  career  of,  in  the  North, 
ii.  425  ;  relieves  Lathom  House,  ii. 
429  ;  desperate  charge  at  Bolton, 
ii.  430  ;  to  Bishop  of  Chester,  care 
for  his  troops,  ii.  432  ;  at  Knares- 
borough,  ii.  440  ;  relieves  York,  ii. 
442  ;  quarrels  with  Earl  of  New- 
castle, ii.  445-6  ;  note,  ib.,  position 
of,  at  Marston  Moor,  iii.  449  ;  his 
charge  at  Marston  Moor,  ii.  458; 
deserted,  ii.  460  ;  his  retreat  from 
Marston  Moor,ii.  461 ;  reaches  York, 
ii.  406  ;  death  of  his  dog,  ii.  465  ; 
reaches  Shrewsbury,  ii.  47 1  ;  meets 
Montrose,  ib. ;  at  Bristol,  iii.  26  ;  to 
Colonel  Legge  —  his  relation  with 
Digby,  iii.  27  ;  second  battle  of 
Newbury,  iii.  29  ;  extracts  from 
his  diary  of  second  battle  of  New- 
bury, iii.  31  ;  exchanges  compli- 
ments with  garrison  at  Basing-house, 
iii.  33 ;  enters  Oxford  with  the 
King,  iii.  33  ;  Generalissimo,  iii. 
34  ;  his  difficulties  in  obtaining  sup- 
plies, iii.  35  ;  his  influence  over  his 
officers,  iii.  37  ;  copy  of  passport  of, iii. 
38  ;  to  Essex,  for  pass  for  Duke  of 
Richmond  and  Lord  Southampton, 
iii.  41-2  ;  Uxbridge  treaty,  iii.  53  ; 
Sir  A.  Aston's  pass,  iii.  62  ;  to  Col- 
nel  Legge — anticipated  rebellion  in 
Wales,  iii.  63-4  ;  for  stores  or 
money,  iii.  68-9  ;  on  various  matters, 
iii.  70;  engages  Massey  at  Hereford, 
hangs  thirteen  Parliament  soldiers, 
iii.  72;  to  Colonel  Legge, detailing  his 
movements,  iii.  73  ;  movements  of 
Goring,  iii.  75  ;  on  his  Oxford  com- 
mand, iii.  83;  squib  against,  iii. 
84  ;  his  difficulties  before  battle  of 
Naseby,  iii.  85-6  ;  at  siege  of  Lei- 
cester, iii.  88-9  ;  his  advice  neg- 
lected— endeavours  to  meet  Crom- 
well at  Naseby,  iii.  105  ;  after  bat- 
tle of  Naseby,  iii.  113  ;  advises  the 
King  to  agree  with  Parliament,  iii. 
117  ;  pacifies  the  club-men,  iii.  119; 
to  Colonel  Legge,  battle  of  Naseby, 
iii.  120  ;  to  Sir  John  Owen,  for  men 


Rupert,  Prince,  continued. 

and  ammunition,  iii.  121  ;  remark- 
able note  of,  iii.  145  ;  raises  new 
levies,  ib.  ;  to  the  Duke  of  Rich- 
mond ;  the  King's  intended  Scotch 
visit,  iii.  149  ;  to  Colonel  Legge, 
state  of  Bristol,  iii.  151  ;  prepares 
for  siege  of  Bristol,  iii.  153  ;  to 
Sir  Edward  Nicholas,  ammunition 
at  Dartmouth,  iii.  153  ;  to  Colonel 
Legge,  the  King's  Scotch  visit,  iii. 
156  ;  surrenders  Bristol,  iii.  162  ; 
the  Prince  blamed,  ib.  ;  declaration 
of,  iii.  ]  64  ;  his  narrative  of  condi- 
tion of  garrison  of  Bristol,  iii.  166  ; 
calumniated  for  loss  of  Bristol,  iii. 
183  ;  note,  ib.; passport  of,  iii.  186  ; 
to  the  King,  on  receiving  his  dis- 
missal and  passport,  iii.  187-8 ; 
determines  to  see  the  King,  iii. 
190-9  ;  extracts  from  his  diary, 
iii.  193  ;  meets  the  King  ;  de- 
mands court-martial  ;  verdict  of 
council  of  war  in  favour  of,  iii. 
201—2  ;  Clarendon's  opinion  of  the 
King's  conduct  towards,  iii.  203  ; 
copy  of  Rupert's  petition  to  the  King, 
iii.  205  ;  account  of  quarrel  with 
the  Cavaliers  and  the  King,  iii. 
206,  note  ;  applies  to  Parliament 
for  pass  for  himself  and  Cavaliers, 
iii.  207 ;  refuses  conditional  pass, 
and  fights  his  way  to  Woodstock, 
iii,  211  ;  returns  to  his  duty,  iii. 
223  ;  acknowledges  his  errors  to 
the  King,  iii.  224 ;  volunteers  to 
follow  the  King  to  Scotland,  iii. 
225  ;  taken  prisoner  at  Oxford,  iii. 
229  ;  obtains  special  terms  in  honour 
of  his  achievements,  iii.  230  ;  re- 
move to  Oatlands,  iii.  234  ;  ordered 
by  Parliament  to  leave  England  in 
ten  days,  iii.  235  ;  to  the  speaker 
thereon,  ib.  ;  arrives  at  St.  Germains, 
iii.  236  :  invited  to  enter  French 
service,  ib. ;  made  Mareschal  de  Camp, 
iii.  237 ;  invitation  to  Sir  John 
Owen  to  enter  French  service,  ib. 
note  ;  at  siege  of  Armeatiers,  iii.  238; 
adventures  with  Marshal  Gassion, 
iii.  239-241-4-5;  at  Arras,  iii.  240; 
at  La  Basse,  iii.  243  ;  meets  Lord 
Goring  and  Colonel  Gage,  ib. ; 
wounded  in  the  head,  iii.  245: 
meets  the  Prince  of  Wales  at  St. 
Germains,  iii.  248  ;  receives  a  kind 
letter  from  Charles,  at  Hampton 


INDEX. 


583 


Rupert,  Prince,  continued. 

Court,  ib. ;  at  the  Hague,  iii.  249  ; 
again  solicited  to  join  French  ser- 
vice, iii.  249  ;  sails  for  the  Downs 
with  the  Prince  of  Wales,  ib.  ; 
mutiny  of  his  seamen,  iii.  250  ;  join- 
ed by  Captains  Batten  and  Jordan, 
ib. ;  proposes  to  deliver  the  King,  ib. ; 
takes  command  of  the  fleet,  iii.  255  ; 
undertakes  a  naval  expedition,  iii. 
256 ;  Royal  exiles  depend  upon  Ru- 
pert for  support,  iii.  257  ;  levies 
contributions  on  the  high  seas,  iii. 
258  ;  his  mode  of  barter,  iii.  260  ; 
maintains  Royal  exiles,  ib.  •  re- 
organises his  seamen,  iii.  261  ;  win- 
ters at  the  Hague,  iii.  263  ;  sup- 
presses a  mutiny,  iii.  264  ;  his 
scruples  at  taking  command  of  fleet, 
iii.  271  ;  endeavours  to  rescue  the 
King  at  Carisbrook,  iii.  272  ;  his 
ships  badly  bound,  iii.  273  ;  de- 
parture of  his  fleet  from  Helvoets- 
luys,  iii.  279  ;  the  Antelope  sold  to 
equip  the  rest,  iii.  281  ;  disperses 
English  fleet  in  the  Downs,  iii.  282  ; 
receives  news  of  Charles's  execu- 
tion at  Kinsale,  iii.  283  ;  receives 
new  commission  from  Charles  II.  iii. 
285  ;  to  his  mother,  iii.  286  ;  takes 
many  prizes  —  relieves  the  Scilly 
Islands,  iii.  288  ;  one  of  his  ships 
taken  by  Parliament  cruisers,  iii. 
290  ;  disposition  of  prize-shares, 
iii.  288-9  ;  welcomed  by  Lord 
Taafe  in  Ireland,  iii.  291  ;  block- 
aded by  Parliament  fleet  in  Kin- 
sale,  iii.  292-3-4  ;  perilous  posi- 
tion of,  iii.  297  ;  takes  fort  of 
Kinsale,  ib.  ;  sails  from  Ireland,  iii. 
298  ;  steers  for  Portugal,  iii.  299  ; 
captures  a  Malaga  man  and  two 
English  ships,  ib.  ;  arrives  in  the 
Tngus,  iii.  300  ;  received  by  the 
King  of  Portugal,  iii.  301  ;  refits  his 
ships,  ib. ;  blockaded  by  Blake  in 
the  Tagus,  iii.  ib.  ;  Blake  demands 
of  the  King  of  Portugal  to  surrender 
up  the  Prince,  iii.  302  ;  refusal  of 
the  King,  ib.  ;  scheme  of  Blake  to 
entrap  the  Prince,  iii.  304  ;  breaks 
blockade,  iii.  309  ;  his  account  of 
his  cruise  of  Bayonne,  iii.  311-12  ; 
sails  for  the  '»  Straits,"  iii.  313  ;  ad- 
ventures in  the  Mediterranean,  iii. 
315-16  ;  arrives  at  Toulon,  iii.  318; 
his  reception  by  the  French  autho- 


Rupert,  Prince,  continned. 

rities,  iii.  319-20  ;  sells  his  prizes, 
iii.  321  ;  refits  his  ships,  iii.  322  ; 
loses  part  of  his  fleet,  ib.  ;  buys 
the  "Honest  Seaman,"  iii.  324; 
joined  by  Captain  Craven  in  the 
"  Loyal  Subject,"  ib.  ;  leaves  the 
Mediterranean, and  takes  a  Genoese, 
ib*  ;  captures  a  Spanish  Indiaman, 
iii.  325  ;  arrives  at  Madeira,  ib.  ; 
mutiny  in  his  fleet,  iii.  326 ;  reach 
the  Canaries,  ib.  ;  parts  company 
with  the  "  Honest  Seaman,"  iii. 
327  ;  arrives  at  the  Azores,  iii.  328  ; 
proceedings  there,  iii.  328  ;  sails  for 
Terceira,  and  meets  the  "Honest 
Seaman,"  iii.  329 ;  captures  a  Spanish 
galleon,  ib.  ;  the  "  Admiral"  springs 
a  leak,  iii.  330  ;  storms  and  mutiny, 
iii.  331-2  ;  danger  of  the  Prince, 
iii.  333  ;  devotion  of  Prince  Mau- 
rice, iii.  334  ;  magnanimity  of  the 
"  Admiral's"  crew,  iii.  335  ;  loss  of 
the  "Admiral"  and  333  men,  iii. 
336 ;  loss  of  the  u  Loyal  Subject,"  ib. ; 
wreck  of  a  Spanish  galleon,  iii.  337  ; 
dispute  about  salvage,  iii.  338-9  ; 
leaves  the  Azores,  iii.  342  ;  at  Cape 
Blanco,  iii.  343  ;  proceedings  there, 
iii.  344  ;  his  adventures  with  the 
Moors,  iii.  344-5-6-7  ;  dispatches 
a  vessel  with  letters  to  France,  iii. 
348  ;  letter  to  Charles  II.,  giving 
an  account  of  his  cruise,  iii.  ib. — to 
Sir  Edward  Hyde  ;  supplies  to 
Charles  II.  and* Duke  of  York,  iii. 
349;  to  the  Earl  of  Craven — account 
of  his  voyage,  iii.  350  ;  sails  from 
Cape  Blanco  to  the  Cape  de  Verds, 
iii.  351  ;  at  Bonavista,  iii.  351  ;  de- 
scription of  Bonavista,  iii.  353 ; 
Captain  Pitt's  narrative  of  the 
Prince's  voyage  to  the  West  Indies, 
iii.  531  ;  at  St.  Jago's,  iii.  354  ;  his 
reception  by  the  governor,  ib. ;  let- 
ter of  thanks  to  the  King  of  Portu- 
gal, iii.  356  ;  sails  for  river  Gambia, 
iii.  357  ;  Colonel  Vermuy den's  nar- 
rative, iii.  538  ;  takes  an  English 
ship,  iii.  358  ;  takes  a  Spanish  pink, 
iii.  359  ;  at  Elephant  Island,  iii. 
360 ;  description  of  Elephant  Island, 
iii.  3G1  ;  anchors  at  Reatch,  iii.  363  ; 
adventures  there,  ib.  363-4-5 ;  re- 
turns to  the  Cape  de  Verds — cap- 
tures an  English  prize,  iii.  367 ; 
sails  for  the  West  Indies,  iii.  370  ; 


584 


INDEX. 


Rupert,  Prince,  contimted. 

arrives  at  St.  Lucia — description  of 
St.  Lucia,  iii.  371  ;  at  Martinique — 
description  of  Martinique,  iii.  372-3 
-4 ;  at  Guadaloupe  and  Montserrat, 
iii.  375  ;  at  Nevis — description  of, 
iii.  376;  captures  a  ship,  ib. ;  at 
Basse  Terre,  iii.  377  ;  at  the  Virgin 
Islands — refits  ships  in,  Cavaliers' 
Harbour,  iii.  378  ;  short  of  pro- 
visions, iii.  379  ;  description  of 
Virgin  Islands,  iii.  379  ;  hurri- 
cane, iii.  381-2  ;  loss  of  Prince 
Maurice  and  the  Honest  Seaman, 
iii.  382  ;  returns  to  Guadaloupe, 
iii.  383 ;  takes  two  English  ships 
in  Five  Island  Harbour,  iii.  384  ; 
homeward  bound,  iii.  386  ;  his  un- 
courteous  reception  at  Fayal  and  St. 
Michael's,  iii.  385  ;  sails  for  France, 
iii.  386;  arrives  at  Nantes,  iii.  387; 
abandons  the  sea,  iii.  417  ;  illness 
of,  iii.  418  ;  invited  to  visit  Charles 
II.,  iii.  419  ;  invited  by  Louis  XIV. 
to  Paris,  iii.  421  ;  made  master  of 
horse  to  Louis  XIV.,  ib. ;  offers  to 
head  Scotch  insurgents,  iii.  423  ; 
narrowly  escapes  drowning,  iii.  424, 
note,  ib.  ;  attacked  near  the  Louvre, 
iii.  425 ;  invited  by  Emperor  of 
Germany  to  command  his  army,  iii. 
426  ;  charged  with  a  commission 
from  Charles  II.  to  Court  of 
Vienna,  ib.  ;  visits  his  mother  at  the 
Hague  ;  iii.  427-443  ;  at  Heidelberg, 
iii.  430 ;  difficulty  of  tracing  his 
movements,  iii.  429  ;  employs  him- 
self in  philosophical  pursuits,  iii.  431  ; 
discovers  a  new  gunpowder,  iii.  433; 
discovers  the  composition  of"  Princes 
Metal,"  ib.  ;  "  Rupert's  Drop  "  at- 
tributed to  him,  iii.  ib. — note,  ib  ; 
his  suggestions  for  his  biography,  iii. 
434  ;  mezzotint  engraving  discovered 
by,  iii.  435,  note,  ib.  ;  list  of  his 
mezzotint  engravings,  iii.  546  ;  his 
etchings,  iii.  548  ;  shews  his  process 
to  Evelyn,  iii.  436  ;  observations  on 
his  discovery  of  mezzotint  engraving, 
iii.  437-8-9-40  ;  arrives  in  England, 
iii.  444  ;  reconciled  with  Sir  Edward 
Hyde,  iii.  446  ;  letters  to  Col.  Legge 
on  money  affairs,  iii.  447  ;  Turkish 
war,  iii.  448;  Swedish  war,De  Rues, 
the  engineer,  iii.  448  ;  his  position 
at  Vienna,  iii.  450  ;  Court  gossip, 
iii.  452  ;  Turkish  war,  iii.  ib.  ; 


Rupert,  Prince,  continued. 

money  matters,  iii.  453  ;  war  in 
Transylvania,  iii.  454  ;  sickness  of 
Austrian  officers,  iii.  455 ;  on  his 
leaving  Vienna,  iii.  456  ;  at  Frank- 
fort, iii.  457  ;  his  reception  by 
Charles  II.,  iii.  459,  note,  ib.; 
Charles  II.  and  Buckingham  visit 
his  "  workshop,"  iii.  ib.  ;  converts 
a  turret  of  Windsor  Castle  into  a 
workshop,  iii.  460 ;  made  a  bencher  of 
"  Inner  Temple,"  member  of  Privy 
Council,  and  F.R.S.,  iii.  461  ;  his 
affection  for  Francisca  Bard,  iii.  466 ; 
solicits  an  estate  from  his  brother, 
Charles  Louis,  to  enable  him  to 
marry,  iii.  467  ;  noticed  in  Pepys's 
Diary,  iii.  ib.  ;  change  in  his  cha- 
racter, iii.  468,  note,  an  admiral,  iii. 
472,  note;  battle  with  the  Dutch, 
iii.  474-9;  his  declaration  to  Par- 
liament on  his  naval  battles  with 
the  Dutch,  iii.  480,  3-4-5  ; 
avoids  party  politics,  ib.  ;  illness  of, 
iii,  486;  at  Tunbridge  Wells,  iii. 
487  ;  the  Prince  described  by  Count 
Hamilton,  iii.  489;  captivated  by 
Mrs.  Hughes,  ib.  ;  Lord  Orford's 
description  of  the  Prince,  iii.  490-1 ; 
returns  to  Windsor,  iii.  ib.  ;  repels 
the  Dutch  in  the  Medway,  iii.  492-4 ; 
abstains  from  politics,  iii.  495  ;  in- 
come of,  how  derived,  iii.  ib.  ; 
appointed  Lord  High  Admiral,  iii. 

497  ;  Popish  intrigues  against,  iii. 

498  ;  attacks  Dutch  fleet  at  Schone- 
velt,  iii.  501;  his  indignation  at  the 
neglected  state  of  the  navy,  iii.  504 ; 
Governor  of  Hudson's    Bay    Com- 
pany, iii.  508  ;  anecdote  of,  iii.  509; 
death,  iii.  512  ;  programme  of  his 
funeral,    iii.   555 ;    Lord    Craven's 
account  as  his   executor,  iii.  558  ; 
fragmentary  correspondence  of,   iii. 
553  ;  life  of  the  Prince,  by  Colonel 
Benett,  i.441 ;  Captain  Pyne's  narra- 
tive of,  i.  5. 

Ruthven,  Lord,  note,  ii.  15  ;  commands 
Royal  army  at  Edgehill,  ii.  16  ;  plan 
of  battle  at  Edgehill,  ib. 

Rutland,  Earl  of,  see  note,  ii.  97 ;  de- 
clines to  act  as  Commissioner  of 
Great  Seal,  ii.  98 ;  committed  to 
Custody  of  Serjeant-at-Arms,  ii.  99. 

Sabran,  M.  de.,  extract  from,  iii.  132. 

Sackville,  Sir  Thomas,  to  Prince  Rupert, 
offer  of  service  of  his  son,  ii.  93. 


INDEX. 


585 


St.  John,  Lord,  slain  at  Edgehill,  ii.  30. 

St.  Lucia,  description  of,  iii.  379. 

Sandys,  Colonel,  death  of  at  Powick- 
bridge,  i.  404. 

Scotch  war,  evil  effects  of,  to  the  King, 
i.  172,  173. 

Scottish  Parliament,  adjourned  by 
Charles  I.  on  pain  of  treason,  i.  174. 

Scroop,  Sir  Gervase,  anecdote  of  at 
Edgehill,  ii.  33,  note. 

Scultetus,  Abraham,  horror  of,  at  the 
coronation  of  Frederick,  i.  28 ; 
attacks  the  national  form  of  religion, 
i.  34. 

Self-denying  ordinance,  object  of,  iii.  4 1 . 

Shakspeare,  see  note,  ii.  228. 

Shrewsbury,  head- quarters  of  Royal 
army,  i.  384  ;  disgraceful  surrender 
of,  iii.  58,  note,  iii.  59. 

Skippon,  Major-general,  made  Governor 
of  the  Tower,  i.  326. ;  harangue  to 
apprentices,  ii.  66. 

Smith, Captain,recovers  Royal  Standard 
at  Edgehill,  ii.  26  ;  knighted  on  the 
field  of  battle  by  the  King,  ib.  note. 

Sophia,  Princess,  marries  Bishop  of 
Osnaburgh,  iii.  443. 

Speke,  Mr.,  testimony  of  Prince  Rupert 
in  favour  of,  iii.  509. 

Standard,  Royal,  raising  the,  i.  Ill, 
note,  ib. ;  description  of,  i.  116,  123. 
228  ;  ill  omen  at,  i.  1 1 8,  see  note,  ib. ; 
reasons  for,  315;  amount  of  the  King's 
forces  at  the,,  ceremony  of,  i.  320  ; 
melancholy  forebodings  of  Charles  I. 
at,  ib.  ;  consequence  of,  i.  332  ;  de- 
scribed by  Clarendon,  i.  352  ;  cap- 
ture of,  at  Edgehill,  ii.  25  ;  re-taken 
by  Captain  Smith,  ii.  26 ;  captured 
at  Naseby,  iii.  111. 

Strafford,  Marquis  of,  Viceroy  of  Ire- 
land, i.  157  ;  his  government,  i. 
158,  see  note,  ib.  ;  Lieut.-  General 
in  Scotch  war,  i.  175  ;  attacks  the 
Scotch  at  Durham,  i.  177  ;  impeached 
by  (Long)  Parliament,  i.  180  ;  com- 
mitted to  the  Keeper  of  Black  Rod, 
i.  181  ;  magnanimity  of,  i.  182,  note, 
ib.  ;  trial  of,  i.  184  ;  accused  by  re- 
presentatives of  the  three  kingdoms, 
i.  185  ;  bill  of,  attainder  against,  ib.  • 
answer  of  to  Lieutenant  of  the  Tower, 
i.  1 86,  note,  ib. ;  attempts  to  bribe 
Lieutenant  of  Tower,  i.  195  ;  death 
of,  ib.  ;  tribute  to  his  genius,  i.  187  ; 
chief  cause  of  his  overthrow,  i.  I5i8, 
note,  i.  189. 

VOL.  III. 


Stratton  Downs,  battle  of,  ii.  100. 
Stuart,  Lord  Bernard,  description  of  his 

troop  of  guards,  i.  422,  note,  ib.  ;  at 

Edgehill,  ii.  17. 
Sudford,   Thomas,   to  Prince  Rupert, 

offer  of  his  services,  ii.  331. 
Sunderland,  Earl,  death  of  at  battle  of 

Newbury,  ii.  295. 
Surrey    trained    bands,    attacked    by 

Prince  Rupert,  ii.  50. 
Sydney,  Algernon,wounded  at  Marston 

Moor,  ii.  465. 
Symmons,   Dr.,    extract  from    sermon 

preached  before  Royal  army,  i.  413  ; 

his  description  of  "A  complete  Ca- 
valier," i.  414. 

Taafe,  Lord,  to  Prince  Rupert,  welcome 
to  Ireland,  iii.  290  ;  forces  from  Ire- 
land, ii.  320. 

Talt  Zouch,  Mr.,  brings  forward  self- 
denying  ordinances  in  Commons,  iii. 
41. 

Taylor,  Jeremy,  one  of  Charles  I. 
Chaplains,  i.  415. 

Test  Act,  object  of,  iii.  497. 

Thirty  years'  war,  its  influences  on 
England,  i.  20. 

Tracy,  Sir  Humphrey,  to  Lord  Digby, 
arrears  of  ship  money,  ii.  1 1 7. 

Train  Bands,  description  of,  i.  438,  see 
note,  i.  253. 

Trevor,  Arthur,  to  Major  Legge,  mili- 
tary rumours  relating  to  Tewkesbury, 
ii.  163;  to  Prince  Rupert,  on  various 
political  subjects,  ii.  377-8  ;  mone- 
tary matters,  ii.  387-8  ;  success  at 
Newark,  ii.  400. 

Trooper,  description  of  a,  i.  336. 

Tunbridge  Wells,  description  of,  iii. 
487. 

Urry,  Colonel,  deserts  Parliamentary 

army,  ii.  203. 

atrocious  conduct  of,  iii.  30. 

Usher,  Colonel,  killed  at  siege  of  Lich- 

field  Close,  ii.  169. 
Uxbridge,  treaty  of,  iii.  42  ;  progress 

of,  iii.  44,  note,  ib. ;  its  failure,  iii. 

45. 

Vandyke,  domiciled  in  England,  L  73  ; 
his  portrait  of  Prince  Rupert,  ib.  ; 
bequeathed  to  Lord  Craven,  ib. 

Van  Tromp,  Admiral,  escorts  Queen  of 
England  to  Holland,  i.  107  ;  his  ac- 
tion with  Prince  Rupert,  iii.  504. 

Q   Q 


580 


INDEX. 


Varney,  Sir  Edmund,  his  conversation 
with  Lord  Clarendon  on  the  state  of 
Charles  I.'s  camp,  i.  121. 

Varney,  Sir  Ralph,  death  of  at  Edge- 
hill.ii.  25. 

Vavasour,  Sir  William  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert ;  intrigues  against  Rupert,  ii. 
332. 

Veymuyden,  Col.,  summary  of  Rupert's 
voyage  to  Gambia,  iii.  538. 

Vicars,  Jehovah  Jireh,  quoted  ;  ex- 
cesses of  Londoners,  ii.  213,  note,  ib. 

Vieuville,  Marquis  of,  death  of,  ii. 
292. 

Virgin  Islands,  description  of,  iii.  381. 

Wagstaff,  Colonel,  taken  prisoner,  ii.91. 

Wales,  Prince  of,  demanded  by  Com- 
mons as  a  hostage,  i.  247  ;  made 
Knight  of  the  Garter,  i.  354  ;  sent 
to  West  of  England,  iii.  64  ;  at 
Bristol,  iii.  68  ;  maintained  by  Lord 
Hopton,  ib.;  Sails  from  Holland  for 
the  Downs,  iii.  249 ;  chased  by 
Parliament  fleet,  iii.  251  ;  returns 
to  Holland,  iii.  252;  loses  Ports- 
mouth fleet,  ib. ;  illness  of,  iii.  264  ; 
pecuniary  difficulties  of,  iii.  308  ; 
efforts  of,  to  recover  his  kingdom,  iii. 
412;  vices  of  his  Court,  iii.  422, 
466-7  ;  restoration,  iii.  440  ;  his 
reception  of  Prince  Rupert,  iii.  459  ; 
visits  Rupert's  workshop,  iii.  ib  ;  goes 
to  Portsmouth  to  meet  his  future 
queen,  iii.  461  ;  interested  in  his 
navy,  iii.  470  ;  naval  expeditions  in 
his  reign,  iii— 471 ;  his  conduct  to  his 
men,  iii.  473-4  ;  disgraceful  neglect 
of  his  navy,  iii.  503-4. 

Waller,  Sir  William,  to  Sir  Ralph 
Hopton,  i.  416  ;  takes  Farnham 
Castle,  ii.  73. 

Waller,  Sir  William,  takes  Malmes- 
bury,  ii.  142  ;  defeats  Lord  Her- 
bert, ii.  144  ;  his  Welsh  campaign, 
ii.  145  ;  surnamed  William  the 
Conqueror,  ii.  221  ;  battle  of  Round- 
way  Down,  ii.  234  ;  flies  to  Glou- 
cester, ii.  235  ;  his  quarrel  with 
Essex,  ib.  ;  reinforced  at  Basing- 
House,ii.  327-3  ;  takes  Winchester 
Castle,  ii.  404  ;  junction  with  Essex 
— invests  Oxford,  ii.  413;  pursues 
Charles  I.  ii.  41 6 ;  to  Prince  Rupert, 
— exchange  of  prisoners,  iii.  38  ;  to 
General  Goring — exchange  of  pri- 
soners, iii.  39  ;  in  Somersetshire,  ib. 


Waller's  plot,  detected  by  Pym,  ii. 
200  ;  its  object,  ib. 

War,  Civil,  summary  of  events  pre- 
ceding the,  i.  123. 

Wardour  Castle,  defence  of,  ii.  215. 

Warwick,  Sir  P.,  his  description  of 
Charles  I.  i.  256. 

Warwick,  Lord,  pedigree  of,  i.  260, 
note  ;  tried  for  treason,  i.  312  ; 
chases  Prince  of  Wales  to  Holland, 
iii.  251  ;  his  fleet  supplied  from 
Rotterdam,  iii.  263  ;  anchors  near 
Prince  Rupert,  iii.  246  ;  sails  for 
England,  iii.  266. 

Watson,  General,  to  Colonel  Roe,  in- 
tercepted despatch  of  storming  of 
Bridge  water,  iii.  147. 

Wentworth,  Lord,  movements  of,  in 
Buckingham,  ii.  80;  to  Prince  Rupert, 
turbulence  of  Cavaliers,  ii.  191  ;  ac- 
count of  a  foraging  expedition,  ii. 
193. 

Whitelocke,  Bui  strode,  prophetic  speech 
of,  i.  286. 

Williams,  Archbishop,  see  note,  i.  303  ; 
attack  upon,  by  Hotham,  junr.,  i. 
304. 

Willis,  Sir  R.,  superseded  as  Governor 
of  Newark,  iii.  203  ;  demands  a 
trial  by  council  of  war,  iii.  204  ; 
quarrels  with  the  King,  ib.  ;  petition 
of  the  Cavaliers,  iii.  205,  note. 

Willoughby,  Lord,  raises  600  men  for 
the  King,  i.  378  ;  taken  prisoner  at 
Edgehill,  ii.  25,  35  ;  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert, skirmish  near  Banbury,  ii. 
186. 

Wilmot,  Sir  H.,  his  disinclination  to 
fight,  ii.  74,sec  note,z'6. ;  takes  Wan- 
tage, ii.  75. 

Wilmot,  F.  H.,  at  Roundway  Down, 
ii.  235  ;  to  Prince  Rupert  ;  move- 
ments of  Essex,  ii.  273  ;  quartered 
near  Buckingham,  ii.  324  ;  arrest 
of,  iii.  9  ;  created  Lord  Rochester, 
iii.  10,  note ;  officers  petition  Charles 
I.  on  his  removal,  iii.  1 7. 

Windebank,  Secretary  to  Earl  of  Lei- 
cester, on  Prince  Rupert's  intended 
marriage,  i.  66. 

Colonel,  shot  for  sur- 
rendering Blechington-house,  iii. 
76. 

Windsor,  Prince  Rupert's  attack  upon, 
ii.  49. 

Witte,  De,  testimony  of  English  va- 
lour, iii.  480. 


INDEX.  587 


Wolstenholrae,  John,  to  Sir  F.  Fair- 
fax ;  dissolute  conduct  of  Puritan 
soldiers,  note  iii.  36. 

Worcester,  Marquis  of,  garrisons  Rag- 
land  Castle,  ii.  101  ;  the  King  pro- 
mises Dukedom  of  Somerset  to,  iii. 
1 8  ;  shelters  the  King  after  battle  of 
Naseby,  iii.  113,  note  ib,  •  besieged 
in  Ragland  Castle,  iii.  411  ;  his 
estates  confiscated,  death  of,  iii. 
412  ;  intended  speech  of,  statement 
of  his  services,  iii.  515. 


Wonnleighton,  skirmish  at,  ii.  10. 

Wren,  Sir  Christopher,  claims  disco- 
very of  art  of  mezzotint  engraving, 
iii.  438. 

Wyndham,  Edmund,  disinclined  to 
fight  under  Hopton,  iii.  47. 

York,  Archbishop  of,  to  Prince  Ru- 
pert ;  quarrel  with  Royal  com- 
manders in  Wales,  iii.  55. 

York,  Duke  of,  incapacitated  by  Test 
Act,  iii.  495. 


THE    END. 


LONDON : 

Printed  by  8.  ft  J,  HE.NTLEY  and  HENRY  FLEY, 
Bangor  House.  Shoe  Lane. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


