


  








    Elizabeth: July 1567, 11-20 | British History Online
    


      




    
    
    
    
    



  Skip to main content



  
    





  
    
          
  
    
  
      
      BHO | British History Online
    
      
  


    
                      
    Main navigation
    
  
  
        

  
    
      
    
    
                    
              
                  Browse Catalogue
                      
          
                  Subject guides
                      
          
                  Using BHO
                      
          
                  About
                      
          
                  Subscribe
                      
          
                  News
                      
        
  
    
  


  


    
                      
    Login
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Login
              
          
        Register
              
        
  


  



    
  

  
  

  

  

  

  

    

      
      
      
            
  
    
        ';" aria-label="breadcrumb">
    Breadcrumb
    
          
                  Home
              
          
                  Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth
              
        
  

  


  
    
      
  Elizabeth: July 1567, 11-20



  

  
    
      

  
    Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. 

    
    Originally published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1871.

    
  

    This free content was digitised by double rekeying. All rights reserved. 
    

  
    
      Citation:
        
          BHO
          Chicago
          MLA		
        
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: July 1567, 11-20', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568, ed.  Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp279-290 [accessed 21 September 2026].
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: July 1567, 11-20', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Edited by   Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online,  accessed September 21, 2026,
 https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp279-290.
    
    
      
"Elizabeth: July 1567, 11-20". Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Ed.  Allan James Crosby (London, 1871), British History Online. Web. 21 September 2026. https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp279-290.
    
  
  
    
  

  
    
      
        
          
            
          
        
        
          
            This volume has gold page scans.Access these scans with a gold subscription. 
          
        
      
    

  

            
        Keyword Highlight
        
        Search
        
      
     
    
            
  



July 1567, 11-20



[Page 279]

July 11.

1430. Sir John Forster to Cecil.




As there has been no justice ministered of long time by
the Wardens of Scotland, he has been forced to appoint
meetings with the most worshipful gentlemen of the Borders
for the stay and quiet of the same. After an agreement with
them in writing he devised a purpose for the apprehending
of the rebels of England, who escaped so hardly as they left
their saddles behind.—Alnwick, 11 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


July 11.

1431. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




This afternoon the Ambassador passes into Scotland. Lord
Home and Lethington meet him at Coldingham; at whom
as they came by Dunbar there were shot four or five great
shot but did no harm. The disorder of the Borders increases.
—Berwick, 11 July 1567. Signed.
P. ½.


July 12.

1432. Advices from Antwerp.




Progress and numbers of the Duke of Alva's force and
other news from Antwerp. 12 July.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 2.


July 12.

1433. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. Yesterday at two in the morning the Earl of Morton
with 100 horse and 200 footmen marched to Fawside House
and got out of the same certain jewels of the Queen's. If it
were the coffer she . . . . had carried heretofore with her it is
of great value. It is judged that the Earl of Argyll is drawn
from the devotion of the Hamiltons. The Hamiltons have
made large offers to France.




2. Of late there came from them a message to the Lords
at Edinburgh that if they would not deliver the Queen out
of captivity, she should be placed in some other place and
Stirling named, with as many of theirs for her guard as of
the rest, and so they would join them in the following of
the murder and the preservation of the Prince.—Berwick,
12 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


July 12.

1434. Sir John Forster to the Earl of Bedford.




Yesterday the subjects of Scotland ran a foray at Newton.
Their doings will appear by the bill here enclosed.—Alnwick,
12 July 1567. Signed.
Add. P. ½.


July 11.

1435. Foray by the Scots.




William Strudder of Kirk Newton complains that the
young Laird of Creuston with his accomplices to the number
of 200 men, came and feft away 400 nowt, 300 sheep, and
took prisoners and hurt sundry men on the 11th July 1567.
P. 1. Enclosure.

[Page 280]

July 12.

1436. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




1. On the 11th he lodged at Fast Castle with the Lord
Home and Lethington. By the conference he had with
Lethington he finds that the Lords and he have left nothing
unthought of which may be either to their danger or work
them surety; they find more peril to grow unto them
through the Queen's dealings than by the French or any
contrary faction amongst themselves, for they assure themselves that the Queen will leave them in the briars if they
run her fortune. Although they acknowledge great benefit,
as well to them as to the realm of England, by the Queen's
doings at Leith; yet since they have observed such things in
her doings as have tended to the danger of such as she has
dealt withal. Finds a disposition in them either to make
their bargain with France or else deal with neither, but
do what they shall think meet for their own surety. They
think it convenient to proceed with both for a while pari
passu.




2. They take the matter very unkindly that no better
answer was made to the letter which the Lords sent to the
Queen. Throckmorton answered and alleged their own proceedings so obscurely with the Queen, and that he had been
sent to inform her thoroughly of the state of the matter, and
upon declaration of their minds to such purposes as shall be
by him proposed on the Queen's behalf they shall be reasonably answered. At this Lethington smiled and shook his
head, and said it were better to leave them alone than to do
good to neither, as he feared in the end it would prove.




3. If there be any truth in Lethington the Queen shall
lead her life in an abbey in France reclusit, the Prince at the
French devotion, the realm governed by a council of their
election of the Scottish nation, and the forts committed to
the custody of such as shall be chosen amongst themselves.
Finds no great likelihood of his access to the Queen; it is
objected they may not so displease the French King unless
they were sure to find the Queen of England a good friend.
As for the Queen's liberty, which he first proposed, they said
that thereby they perceived the Queen meant their undoing,
for as for the rest of the matters it were but folly to talk of
them, the liberty going before. In the end they said the
English should refuse their own commodity, before they
concluded with any other. — Fast Castle, 12 July 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2½.
Printed in Wright's Queen Elizabeth, Vol. I., p. 252.


July. 12.

1437. N. Stopio to —.




Sends news from Vienna, 3 July, and Posen of the 2nd
July.—Venice, 12 July 1567. Signed.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 2.

[Page 281]

July 13.

1438. Pietro Bizzari to Cecil.




Sends intelligence from Rome, 5 July 1567; also from
Posen, relating chiefly to the wars against the Turk in
Hungary and Transylvania.—Venice, 13 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. Pp. 2¼.


July 13.

1439. The Earl of Bedford to the Queen.




Cannot devise how to preserve the peace on the Borders,
unless she commands her Ambassador in Scotland to treat
for order to be taken for the holding of days of truce as has
been accustomed. Desires that he may have her pleasure
for his duty in writing.—Newcastle, 13 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


July 13.

1440. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




Complains of the disorderly state of the Borders. If the
support demanded of the Lords had been granted them it
might have been occasion to have kept the Borders in better
quiet.—Newcastle, 13 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1½.


July 13.

1441. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




Sends him the warrants of the ten gunners late of Guisnes
who cannot get their pay. If causes be not compounded
shortly, the Borders cannot be kept in order. — Carlisle,
13 July 1567. Signed..
Add. Endd. P. 1.


July 13.

1442. The Earl of Bedford to the Earl of Leicester.




Understands that the Queen means to give no support to
the Lords of Scotland, which will be the readiest way to
wreck the Borders, as the disordered people will not only be
permitted but encouraged to do all manner of spoil. Desires
him to be a means to get him some good and sure warrant,
as thereby he may do such service as may stand with her
Majesty's pleasure, her people's safety and his own honour,
or else to procure his discharge from this place, wherewith
for his health's sake he could be better satisfied. Sends
herewith the copy of a letter from the Earl Morton to the
Lord Warden of the Middle Marches, wherein he may see
his request (see Morton to Sir John Forster, 6 July).—
Newcastle, 13 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


July 13.

1444. Thomas Jenye to Cecil.




The Earl of Murray being in hazard of detaining by force
besides some peril of his person, required Sir Henry Norris
to assist him by some policy to escape secretly out of France,
Was despatched to Dieppe or Rye to stay some English bark
for he will pass in no Frenchman. Means to return to Dieppe
[Page 282]
where a messenger attends his arrival to give knowledge to
Murray. There are promises of new garboils.— Rye, 13 July.
Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.
Printed in Wright's Queen Elizabeth, Vol. I., p. 255.


July 14.

1445. The Queen to Throckmorton.




As he shall deal with the Lords having charge of the young
Prince for the committing of him into her realm, so shall he
in treaty with the Queen offer her the same. He shall so
deal with her to stay her from inclining to the French practise
to convey the Prince into France.
Endd. P. 1.


July 14.

1446. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




News from Rome, 7 June 1567, proceedings against the
Archbishop of Toledo. News from Vienna, 5 June, war
with the Muscovites in Lithuania. Proceedings at the
Imperial Court. Injury done to the Campanile of St. Mark's
at Venice by a tempest.—Venice, 14 July 1567. Signed.
Much injured by damp. Add. Endd., with seal. Ital.
Pp. 3.


July 14.

1447. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the Queen.




1. Came to Edinburgh on the 12th. The 13th being
Sunday, appointed for a solemn communion in this town and
also a fast, he could not have conference with the Lords,
which however was grounded principally on the absence of
certain others of the Council. Lethington said that where
he pressed greatly to have speedy access to the Queen, there
was great difficulty especially because they had refused the
French King's Ambassador the like. Throckmorton answered
that one ambassador was sent before these accidents happened
to impeach the Queen's marriage, and the other could have
no order forth of France concerning these matters; and he
might boldly say that the Queen had better deserved unto
the most of this assembly and the whole of the realm than
the French had. Lethington said that for his own part he
was much bounden to her, but to be plain there were not
many of this assembly that had found so great obligation at
the Queen's hands as at the French King's, for the Earls
of Morton and Glencairn were the only persons who took
benefit by her aid at Leith, and the Queen and the whole
world took as much benefit by that as the realm of Scotland
did: and Morton and such as were with him for the death
of Davy found but cold favour at the Queen's hands when
they were banished.




2. The Queen of Scots remains in good health at Lochleven,
guarded by Lords Lindsey and Lochleven. Lord Ruthven is
employed on another commission because he began to show
great favour to her and give her intelligence. She is waited
[Page 283]
on by five or six ladies, four or five gentlemen, and two
chamberers. The Earl of Buchan has liberty to come to her
at his pleasure. The Lords who have her in guard keep her
very straightly. Their rigour proceeds by the order of these
men, because she will not by any means be induced to lend
her authority to prosecute the murder, nor will not consent
to abandon Bothwell, but avows constantly she will live
and die with him, and say that if it were put to her choice
she would leave her kingdom and dignity to live as a simple
damoisel with him, and that she will never consent that he
shall fare worse or have more harm than herself. The Lords
mean a divorce between the Queen and Bothwell, which
cannot take place if the Queen be at liberty and have power in
her hands. They do not intend to touch the Queen in surety
or in honour, for they speak of her with respect and reverence.




3. The Lords have for the guard of this town 450 harquebusiers, for whose entertainment they sue to her to aid them
with 10,000 or 12,000 crowns of the sun.




4. Howsoever La Forrest and La Croc have used language
in the Queen's favour and to the Lords disadvantage to her.
La Croc carries with him such matter as shall be little to
the Queen's advantage. So as it is thought the French King
upon his coming will rather satisfy the Lords than pleasure
the Queen, for they have their party so well made as the
French will rather make their profit by them than any other
way. Sends the last bond signed by the Hamiltons, Argyll,
Huntly, and sundry others. Since his coming the Hamiltons
have sent to him a gentleman with a letter from the Bishop
of St. Andrew and the Abbot of Arbroath, as has also the
Earl of Argyll.




5. On the 20th there is a general assembly of all such
churches, shires, and borough towns as be contented to repair
to these Lords, where the whole state of this matter will be
handled; and he fears much to the disadvantage of this
Queen, unless Lethington and some others who be best
affected to her provide some remedy. The great number and
in manner all, but chiefly the common people, who have
assisted in these doings, greatly disfavour the Queen, and
mind seriously either her deprivation or her destruction.
Has used the best means to prorogue this assembly. The
chief Lords here dare not show so much leniency to the Queen
as they could be contented to for fear of the rage of the
people. The women be most furious and impudent against
her, and yet the men be mad enough, so as a stranger over
busy may soon be made a sacrifice amongst them.




6. The Earl of Lennox is much desired by these Lords.
Believes she may use him to promote her purpose with them.
Finds amongst the Hamiltons, Argyll, and that company,
two strange and sundry humours. The Hamiltons prosecute
the Queen's liberty because they would have these Lords
destroy her rather than she should be recovered from them
by violence. Another time they seem to desire her liberty,
[Page 284]
because they would compass a marriage betwixt her and the
Lord of Arbroath. The Earl of Argyll affects her liberty
because he would marry her to his brother.




7. Knox is in the west parts, he will be at the great
assembly. Fears his austerity against the Queen.




8. There is a disposition of the Queen of Scots to retire
into England or France. If she comes into England without
the French King's consent she will lose her dowry; and if
she goes into France she may be an instrument to work some
new unquietness. Desires to know her pleasure with speed
how he shall answer the same if it be propounded unto him.
—Edinburgh, 14 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 6½.




1448. Draft copy of the above.
Endd. Pp. 14.


July 12.

1449. The Bishop of St. Andrew's and the Abbot of Arbroath
to Throckmorton.




Certify him of the good mind of the greatest part of the
nobility to employ themselves for the Queen's relief, willing
no ways the hurt of the noblemen the detainers of the Queen,
but always deliberate to procure their security. If they
refuse they doubt not of the favour and assistance of the
Queen of England.—Hamilton, 12 July 1567. Signed.
Copy. Endd. P. ¾. Enclosure.


July 14.

1450. Throckmorton to the Bishop of St. Andrew's and the
Abbot of Arbroath.




Perceives by their letter their honourable disposition for
the enlargement of their Sovereign annexed to other good
considerations, whereof he will not fail to advertise the Queen
of England.—Edinburgh, 14 July 1567.
Copy. Endd. P. ½. Enclosure.


July 11.

1451. The Earl of Argyll to Throckmorton.




Sends his special servant with his mind to him to know
the state of matters as he shall think most expedient to
communicate with him.—Castle Campbell, 11 July 1567.
Signed.
Copy. Endd. P. ½. Enclosure.


July 14.

1452. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the Earl of Argyll.




Has declared to his servant the heads which the Queen of
England has given him in charge to treat of with these
noblemen here.—Edinburgh, 14 July 1567. Signed.
Copy. Endd. P. ½. Enclosure.


July 14.

1453. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Refers him to his letter to the Queen of this date. Finds
by Lethington that it is no time to speak of the delivery of
their Prince. He wishes that the Queen had not made such
difficulty to have employed amongst them 10,000 or 12,000
[Page 285]
crowns in respect publicly that she would pursue such a
murder committed against her subject and kinsman, and to
separate such an avouterer from her cousin as Bothwell.—
Edinburgh, 14 July. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


July 15.

1454. News from Germany.




The associated Princes and the free towns has asked the
Emperor to set at liberty the Duke of Saxony, who answered
that the charges against him had not been sufficiently examined.
The Turk is displeased with the Venetians. The Count
Palatine has sent his ambassadors with a present to the
French King. News from Vienna of the 15th July, concerning the measures for raising an army to resist the Turk.
One of the Emperor's captains being taken prisoner by the
Turks has for his cruelty against them been rolled down a
hill in a cask studded with nails.
Endd. Fr. Pp. 2.


July 15.

1455. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




Besides two forays committed at his last writing, the Scots
have been on the Borders last night with 500 horse, and
to night they look to have with them 1,000. The Queen
must either plant men on the Borders and seek redress by
way of justice, or else give her subjects leave to revenge
themselves. Is exclaimed on by the subjects of England,
and neither can procure them justice, nor dares give them
leave to procure their own amends. Has not heard anything
of the Queen's pleasure these three months. Would be glad
to know whether he should levy the power of the bishopric
and bring them to the Borders or muster his whole charge.—
Berwick, 15 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2¼.


July 15.

1456. The Earl of Bedford to the Queen.




Complains of the disorders on the Borders, and desires to
receive instructions and order as to what he shall do; and
whether he shall levy the people in the bishopric and bring
them to the Borders or else muster his whole charge. —
Berwick, 15 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


July 16.

1457. Advices from Antwerp.




Report of the King of Spain's intended journey to the Low
Countries.—Antwerp, 16 July.
Endd. Ital. P. 1.


July 16.

1458. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




Lord Herries having made proclamation that all disordered
persons should enter unto him and lie in sureties before
yesternight, this day the most part being ready to come in
[Page 286]
and be received to pardon upon composition, got secret
intelligence that he had "umbewrappid" them about with
400 of his best men. Whereupon suddenly they all to the
number of 300 men "lappe" from him, and crying Treason,
Treason, continued in chase shouting and pricking either party
at other the most part of the day till night, and many great
strokes, spears broken, and "pickt" on both sides.—Carlisle,
16 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


July 16.

1459. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the Queen.




On the 15th the Lords came to his lodging, where he
delivered her letter and declared his instructions. They,
however, would give no answer without the advice and
consent of their fellows. He advertised them of a great spoil
made on the frontiers, and they promised to send the Laird of
Grange to set things in good stay. The Queen of Scots is in
great fear of her life, and can be well content either to live in
a nunnery or with the old Duchess of Guise. Bothwell has
been with the Earl of Huntly, who will not adventure much
for him. He has gone to Spynie, and will go to the Orkneys.
The Hamiltons and Argyll begin to enter into traffic with
these Lords. The Lords have sent Melville to Lochleven.
Lord Robert of Holyrood came here yesterday. The Lords
will not suffer Mr. Nicholas Elveston [Elphinstone] sent from
the Earl of Murray to have access to the Queen nor to send
his letter to her.—Edinburgh, 16 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 3½.


July 16.

1460. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




These Lords be on the way to make an end of their matters
with their Sovereign amongst themselves. It were well to
make a virtue of necessity, unless the Queen will use arms
against them.—Edinburgh, 16 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.
Printed in Wright's Queen Elizabeth, Vol. I., p. 256.


July 16.

1461. Charles IX. to the Queen.




Letter of credence for M. De Lignerolles sent into Scotland.
—Escouen, 16 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Royal letter. Fr.


July 16.

1462. Catherine De Medicis to the Queen.




Letter of credence for M. De Lignerolles, whom she has
directed to visit her on his way into Scotland.—Escouen,
16 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Royal letter. Fr.


July 16.

1463. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




On the 13th received letters from Dieppe. The bark
"Young" and another are ready rigged into Brazil as is said,
[Page 287]
but it is thought she will a roving. There is not any good
ship in the haven which has not gone abroad. There is also
commission come there for all the ordnance to be mounted
with speed. Villeroye is returned without having had access
to the Queen of Scots. There is a most wicked Englishman
named Nicholas Saunders, who has set forth two most
detestable works, one entitled, "The treatise of the Image of
Christ and of his Saints," and that it is unlawful to break
them and lawful to honour them, wherein he speaks most
unreverently of Henry VIII. The Earl of Murray has
refused their gifts and offers. The Protestants have made
some motion that the Queen should assist them with some
piece of money.—Paris, 16 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1¾.


July 16.

1464. Count Rocandolf to Cecil.




Thanks him for his goodness in trying to obtain from the
King of France a safe-conduct for him for forty days to go to
France to justify himself, and begs that he will continue his
favour.—London, 16 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Fr. P. 1.


July 17.

1465. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




M. De Croc was sent from the King with a present of plate
worth 3,000 crowns. The Duke of Chatelherault has come
to the Court.—Paris, 17 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


July 17.

1466. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




The Borders continue in great fear of breach, for the
outlaws and others continue their riding. This is Bothwell's
procuring as the Lords affirm. They have promised for their
friends and all whom they may command that good quietness
shall be used. The Queen of Scots is calmed and better
quieted than of late, and takes both rest and meat, and also
some pastime as dancing and play at the cards, much better
than she was wont, so as (it is said) she is become fat.—
Berwick, 17 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


July 18.

1467. Sir John Forster to the Earl of Bedford.




Has bound the gentlemen of Scotland till Lady-day next,
save only the Laird of Bedrule who refused. He with others
who are summoned for the King's death are they who seek
the disorders upon the Borders for the better help of their
evil matters. Martin Elliott has been with him. Has promised to bring him to Bedford at Berwick. Martin says that
Bothwell was within these ten days in Tividale, where he
talked with a company for the breaking upon the Borders.
Had never a falser company to deal with than the gentlemen
of Scotland.—Bamborough, 18 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.

[Page 288]

July 18.

1468. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the Queen.




1. Cannot perceive that as yet access to the Queen will be
granted to him. Robert Melville returned from the Queen
on the 17th, who has written desiring better treatment, and
has offered to commit the government wholly to the Earl of
Murray, or else to the Duke of Chatelherault and other noblemen. She has written that he may have access to her. She
will by no means abandon Bothwell for her husband. She
yields to the prosecution of the murder. Has found means
to let her know that he has been sent hither for her relief,
and has persuaded her to renounce Bothwell. She sends
word that she would rather die, taking herself to be seven
weeks gone with child, and by renouncing him she would
acknowledge herself to be with child of a bastard. Knox
arrived on the 17th. Has persuaded with him and Craig
to preach leniency. Finds them both very austere in this
conference. The Bishop of Galloway assures these Lords
that there is a good disposition in the other party to concur
with them, and they can be content that the Queen's restraint
be continued until the murder be punished. Captain Clerke
who served at Newhaven has killed Wilson a seaman, by
whose death the enterprise to impeach Bothwell is dashed.
The Hamiltons would concur with these Lords in all things
in any extremity against the Queen, so that the Earl of
Lennox's son should not inherit after the Prince.




2. Though the Lords and counsellors speak reverently and
charitably of their Queen, so that he cannot gather from their
speech any intention to cruelty or violence, yet he finds that
the Queen is in very great peril of her life, by reason that
the people mind vehemently her destruction. It is a public
speech that she has no more privilege to commit murder and
adultery than any private person. Earl Bothwell has been
put to the horn. His porter and another servant have confessed that he was one of the principal executors of the
murder in his own person accompanied with sundry others.
Bothwell is still in the north. These Lords keep the passages
from the north and west with their harquebusiers. Of late
this Queen has written a letter to the Captain of Dunbar,
which being surprised discovers matters little to her advantage.
—Edinburgh, 18 July 1567. Signed.
Pp. 4.




1469. Copy of the above.
Pp. 4.


July 18.

1470. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Never saw greater confusion amongst men, for they change
their opinions very often. They be always resolute to use
all severity against the Queen. She is in very great danger.
They will not suffer Mr. Elphinstone to have access to her.
The people be greatly animated against her.—Edinburgh,
18 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.

[Page 289]

July 19.

1471. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Prays him to advise what is best, this Queen being dead
either in body or estate, that this country run not the French
devotion. Herewith sends a tragical dialogue.—Edinburgh,
19 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


July 19.

1472. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




The Borders have grown rather to further disorders. The
spoils committed upon the subjects of England are so
intolerable that they come to him with outcries and exclamations tending to his great dishonour, as if he should
either wink at the Scots or encourage them thus to do. The
Scots are so lusty as this last night they came within courier
shot of the castle wall, and had not the scouts raised the
alarm they had carried away a right good booty. There is
come one Cormack O'Connor, to whom he has delivered 10l.
for his charges to the Court. Desires some direction and
order from the Queen.—Berwick, 19 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2¼.


July 19.

1473. Advices from Stopio.




Intelligence from Messina, 4 June 1567; from Rome of the
12th July; from Vienna, the 10th, and Posen, the 9th July.
—Venice, 19 July 1567. Signed.
Orig. Endd. Ital. Pp. 4.


July 19.

1474. Proclamation by the Earl of Bedford.




Commands all within his charge to abstain from reiving
or stealing from the subjects of Scotland. For such riefs as
have been made upon them, the Queen minds to have the
same mended by justice.—Berwick, 19 July 1567.
P. ¾.


July 19.

1475. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




Finds the Greames willing to have no other dealing in any
action of Scotland than as they are appointed. M. De Croc
minds to impeach the coming of the Earl of Murray into
Scotland, and has despatched letters for his detainment.—
Carlisle, 19 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


July 19.

1476. The Senate of Hamburg to the Queen.




Express their willingness to maintain friendly relations
with her subjects and their goodwill towards her.—Hamburg,
19 July 1567.
Add. Endd. Lat. Parchment.


July 20.

1477. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the Earl of Bedford.




Finds here that they mean to do him (Bedford) all the
displeasure they can so soon as they find the Queen will not
[Page 290]
favour them in their present actions. Assures him that the
late offence upon the Borders was not by any knowledge from
these Lords, but by Ferniehurst at the solicitation of Bothwell.
Warns him to travail for some order from above, for it is high
time. Was never in so busy and dangerous a legation in his
life. They have not yet given him audience. Has been
written to by the other side. Bears them all fair in hand that
he may the better discover their meanings and designs. The
Queen is in great danger by reason of the great rage and fury
of the people against her.—Edinburgh, 20 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¼.
Printed in Wright's Queen Elizabeth, Vol. I., p. 256.


July 20.

1478. The Queen to Throckmorton.




Has received his letter of the 14th, wherein he says that
the Lords are loath to have him repair to the Queen. Can in
no respect allow her captivity. If any device can be found
by them whereby the Queen may be restored to her liberty
and estate, they will find her very ready to satisfy any
reasonable requests for aid to the prosecution of the murder
and the preservation of the Prince; otherwise she cannot
consent to their demands how beneficial soever they may be
to her, by aiding them from adhering to the French whilst
their Queen is in captivity. Likes well his dealing with
Argyll and the Hamiltons. With respect to the Queen's
coming into England cannot yet resolve any certain answer.
Is to require redress for the late spoils on the Borders.
Draft, corrected by Cecil. Endd. Pp. 3.


July 20.

1479. The Queen to the Earl of Bedford.




He is to require Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to make
ample declaration of the disorders on the Borders to such of
the Council of Scotland as he shall think meet, and to press
them for speedy and particular redress to be made by the
Wardens; adding that if redress shall not follow it must not
be found strange that restitution be sought by her subjects
in the best way they can. In the meantime he is to cause
the power of the Marches to be in readiness. Means not to
give aid for the continuance of the Queen of Scots' captivity,
but rather to procure her liberty.
Draft. Endd. Pp. 3.


July 20.

1480. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




The troubles and disorders upon the Borders grow and
increase. The remedy exceeds order of justice. Hopes that
he will procure order and direction for him to follow.—
Berwick, 20 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


July 20.

1481. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends intelligence from Rome, 12 July 1567; and Posen,
9 July.—Venice, 20 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Ital. Pp. 4.







      

  


  

  
    
      PreviousTable of contentsNext
  


      
      

    

  

  
      
      
        
              
  
    
      
            
      
  

    
                      
    Footer menu
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Help
              
          
        About the project
              
          
        Terms of use
              
          
        Privacy and Cookies
              
          
        Accessibility
              
        
  


  


  
    
      
            Version 6.0. © 2024, University of London
      
  


        
      
    
  

  









