


  








    Elizabeth: July 1567, 1-10 | British History Online
    


      




    
    
    
    
    



  Skip to main content



  
    





  
    
          
  
    
  
      
      BHO | British History Online
    
      
  


    
                      
    Main navigation
    
  
  
        

  
    
      
    
    
                    
              
                  Browse Catalogue
                      
          
                  Subject guides
                      
          
                  Using BHO
                      
          
                  About
                      
          
                  Subscribe
                      
          
                  News
                      
        
  
    
  


  


    
                      
    Login
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Login
              
          
        Register
              
        
  


  



    
  

  
  

  

  

  

  

    

      
      
      
            
  
    
        ';" aria-label="breadcrumb">
    Breadcrumb
    
          
                  Home
              
          
                  Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth
              
        
  

  


  
    
      
  Elizabeth: July 1567, 1-10



  

  
    
      

  
    Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. 

    
    Originally published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1871.

    
  

    This free content was digitised by double rekeying. All rights reserved. 
    

  
    
      Citation:
        
          BHO
          Chicago
          MLA		
        
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: July 1567, 1-10', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568, ed.  Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp267-278 [accessed 21 September 2026].
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: July 1567, 1-10', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Edited by   Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online,  accessed September 21, 2026,
 https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp267-278.
    
    
      
"Elizabeth: July 1567, 1-10". Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Ed.  Allan James Crosby (London, 1871), British History Online. Web. 21 September 2026. https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp267-278.
    
  
  
    
  

  
    
      
        
          
            
          
        
        
          
            This volume has gold page scans.Access these scans with a gold subscription. 
          
        
      
    

  

            
        Keyword Highlight
        
        Search
        
      
     
    
            
  



July 1567, 1-10




July.

1378. Instructions for Throckmorton.




1. The Queen of Scots to be at liberty with these provisions
following:—




2. The truth of Bothwell's fact to be duly proved before her
and a divorce to be made, and that she give commission to
certain noblemen to proceed against Bothwell. Parliament
to be assembled, a general peace to be proclaimed. The establishing of the succession of the crown to be renovated. The
cause of religion to be established. The Queen of England
may be moved to be a maintainer of the same Parliament.
Draft, in Cecil's writing. Endd. Pp. 2.
Printed in Keith, Vol. II., 674, from a copy in the British
Museum.


July 1.

1379. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




The Lord Keeper's opinion concurs with Cecil's for the
necessary having of the Prince of Scotland. Notes by
Randolph's letters that the pursuit of the murderers will not
stand with the Queen of Scots' liberty. She is not like to
be enlarged until the principals and accessories be tried and
convicted. Mislikes the Hamiltons having Dumbarton at
their devotion, and Argyll's being among his "red shanks."
The Queen should take heed that she cause not the divided
factions to accord one way or the other and every way to her
disadvantage. Has been with the Earl and Countess of
[Page 268]
Lennox, to whom he declared briefly the Queen's honourable
intent; they were much troubled with want of money. Tomorrow he will set forward.—London, 1 July. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


July 1.

1380. Robert Melville to Cecil.




1. Has imparted the Queen's good disposition in the assisting
these Lords to prosecute the murderers of the King and to
preserve the Prince in the custody of the Earl of Mar. The
most part of the noblemen are gone to their houses. The
cause of their going is by some bragging of the Hamiltons
with the Earl of Huntly minding to convene their forces for
the delivery of the Queen. They fear the King's murder will
be laid to the charge of the Bishop of St. Andrew. The
noblemen have used France so discreetly that neither France
may have just cause to be offended or the Queen of England
ill pleased. The Lords presently need but money, for they
have already enlisted divers men of war and take up more.
The Hamiltons be maintained by the Queen's substance and
countenanced by France.




2. Desires some may be sent with Throckmorton, for the
necessity they will be pressed to will be within eight or ten
days.—Edinburgh, 1 July. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


July 1.

1381. Maitland of Lethington to Cecil.




Understands by Melville of his allowance of this common
quarrel enterprised by a good number of their noblemen to
recover the honour of the country almost lost for that
shameful murder, and that the Queen is inclined to allow and
advance the same. The ministers of foreign Princes have
made great and honest offers. It is convenient that they
keep France in hand and do nothing whereby they may take
just offence, or think they have altogether cast them off, yet
he will always find this nobility addicted to like best the
amity of England. They have levied some companies of
harquebusiers and pray that they may have some comfort at
the Queen's hands of money.—Edinburgh, 1 July. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2¾.


July 1.

1382. The Queen to Gresham.




Warrant for him to take up 7,000l. and pay it over to the
Lord High Treasurer.—Richmond, 1 July 1567.
Draft. Endd. Pp. 2.


July 1.

1383. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. It is held now for certain that the Duke is in the castle
of Spynie. There is a proclamation to be proclaimed to day
or tomorrow upon certain knowledge that the Duke was not
only consenting to the murdering of the King, but laid hands
himself upon him, and whosoever can bring his head shall
have 1,000 crowns.

[Page 269]



2. The Hamiltons have proclaimed all persons to be ready
within nine hours' warning to seek the liberty of the Queen.
Thinks that by Lord Seton's means both secret speeches and
letters passed between M. De Croc and the Queen.




3. P.S.—The altar of the Queen's chapel is defaced. She
better digests her being at Lochleven and uses some exercise.
Though the Hamiltons pretend the liberty of the Queen, yet
is the same not for her good, for neither likes she of them or
they of her. Already it is, What is he, a Hamilton or a
Stewart?—Berwick, 1 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


July 2.

1384. The Queen to Sir Henry Percy.




Sir Andrew Carr of Scotland being his prisoner and upon
bonds at his liberty in Scotland gives many occasions of
discord upon the Border. Requires him to charge Carr to
come to him, and to detain him until the Borders be in more
quietness. Licenses him for his health to absent himself from
Tynemouth.
Draft, corrected by Cecil. Endd. Pp. 1½.


July 2.

1385. Sir Henry Norris to the Queen.




Incontinent upon word brought of the Queen of Scots
taking the Earl of Murray was sent for, and has been continually plied with fair words and great promises if he will
stand at the devotion of the French, touching the helping
hither of the Prince and his mother. They have offered him
the Order and great gifts of land and living. D'Andelot has
commission to reinforce the frontiers where the King of
Spain's army pass. It is reported that the Pope shall give
the countries of Venassin and Avignon to the King of Spain
to spite the French King. The Duke of Savoy and the Swiss
be agreed together. All things here are like to be very
troublesome, having not only their brother-in-law suspect,
but also in much fear of their own countrymen Protestants.
The Emperor makes his claim for Metz, and the Duke of
Savoy for the Duchy of Burgundy. They look that Her
Majesty intends to be a third. Time never served better for
it than now.—Poissy, 2 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 2.


July 2.

1386. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




On the 2nd had audience touching Count Rocandolf's
affairs, Sir Robert Stafford, the prisoners at Marseilles, and the
redelivery of L'Estrille. Touching the Count, the King said
he had four months at two sundry times appointed him to
come and answer such things as were alleged to him.
Touching the rest he is referred again to the Council. They
are so vexed what for fear of King Philip and the Protestants
here and for the report of the Queen of Scots' murder, that
he never saw people more dismayed. There is marvellous
[Page 270]
working made to the Earl of Murray only to be of their
faction and to put his helping hand to the getting hither the
Prince. The time never better served to make any claim or
take any enterprise in hand. Touching religion, the like
proclamation that was made in Paris has been also this day
at Poissy. Thinks they will be extirpated for ever in Court
and country if they provide not to withstand the devilish
attempts now in hand against them.—Poissy, 2 July 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1¾.


July 2.

1387. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




De Croc has made to the Hamiltons great offers, which
breeds them more courage. The Queen begins to like better
of Lochleven than she did.—Berwick, 2 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


July 2.

1388. The Earl of Murray to Cecil.




Desires him to give credit to the bearer upon such cases as
he will declare. Believes Cecil will put to his helping hand
when occasion offers as he has done at other times.—Paris,
2 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


July 2.

1389. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Passed by the French Ambassador this day, whom he found
at cards with M. De Villeroy, who moved him that it might
please the Queen that her minister might concur with such as
the French King should send into Scotland to procure the
Queen's liberty, for that is the only mark they shoot at. As
they desire that matter first without any conditions he thinks
the Queen ought to qualify her affection to bring that to
effect until justice be done of the offenders and surety provided for the Lords. Shewed them that he was sent to comfort
the Queen in her calamity and to procure her liberty, and
that in case they refused him access to her he minded to
address himself to the Hamiltons.—Ware, 2 July 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¼.
Printed in Wright's Queen Elizabeth, Vol. I., p. 250.


July 3.

1390. The Queen to Charles IX.




Has received his letter and messages from the bearer,
M. De Villeroy, to whom she refers him for news of Scotland.
Copy. Fr. P. 1.


July 3.

1391. The Queen to Catherine De Medicis.




Has done all she could to forward the journey of the bearer,
M. De Villeroy, to whom she refers her for news.
Copy. Endd. Fr. P. ½.

[Page 271]

July 3.

1392. Sir Henry Norris to the Earl of Leicester.




Has moved the Queen Mother to understand the occasion
of her mislike with Mr. Barnaby, who answered that the
mislike was because he ever made sharp and used bitter
words in all his negotiations, and made things worse than
either were spoken or meant. They leave nothing unattempted to bring the Prince of Scotland hither. They are
marvellously perplexed.—Poissy, 3 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1½.


July 3.

1393. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Finds contrariety concerning certain Scotch noblemen and
marvels that others change their tackle. It were well to
order the three Wardens on the Borders to make general
musters in their wardenries to be ready on a day's warning,
not naming any enterprise. Hereby the Hamiltons would be
afraid and become calm; the Lords would yield to better
conditions; Bothwell's favourers fall from him; and the Queen
of Scots become more conformable, and it is a matter of no
charge.—Stilton, 3 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


July 3.

1394. Advertisements from Germany.




News from Vienna of the 3rd, and Posen of the 2nd July
1567. The Emperor is ill of the gout. The ambassadors
left yesterday for Constantinople with presents for the Grand
Turk, consisting of a silver table and 30,000 florins. News
of the movements of the Turks and Hungarians.
Endd. Fr. P. 1.


July 4.

1395. Money taken up by Gresham.




The total amounts to 4,630l., which seems to have been
taken up chiefly at the rate of 162/3 per cent. interest.
Endd., by Cecil P. 1.


July 4.

1396. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Sends a packet which was given him to deliver to M. De
la Forrest.—Grantham, 4 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


July 5.

1397. The Earl of Sussex to Cecil.




Refers him to his letter to the Queen for intelligences.
Will write him from Augsburg.—Antwerp, 5 July 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.


July 5.

1398. Advices from Antwerp.




1. The Duke of Alva is on this side Mount Cenis.




2. Some think the building a castle in this city will decay
it and put strangers from the traffic, but perceives by divers
strangers and natives, that they will more boldly traffic, and
[Page 272]
will not mislike when they shall be in surety from popular
tumults, if the Inquisition be not offered nor they oppressed
with Spaniards. The Regent stays persecution except against
ministers or notorious offenders in breaking of churches. In
Velenciennes there suffered only five, and in Ghent ten or
twelve, and a few here. There be here 3,000 soldiers, and
many of the inhabitants with great riches be withdrawn.
The bruits of the joining of certain Princes with the Pope
for religion and of the besieging of Geneva do die here. The
Duke of Savoy has committed the hearing of his claim to
Geneva to three cantons of the Switzers.—5 July 1567.
Endd.: Advices from the Earl of Sussex at Antwerp.
Pp. 1½.


July 5.

1399. The Earl of Sussex to the Queen.




On his arrival on the 3rd M. De Symary, Maitre d'Hostel
to the Regent and Governor of Mechlin, came to him from
her, and this day she sent the Count Mansfield to conduct
him to the Court. After the Regent had expressed her goodwill and affection to the Queen, she said that she besought her
to suspend crediting such bruits as may come to her ears of
extremity and cruelty meant to be used, as she doubted not
but that the King at his coming would use such clemency
as (his surety once provided for) no person shall have cause
to accuse him of cruelty, and in the meantime it was not
meant there should be any execution done, but upon certain
ministers and other principal attempters of breaking of
churches and procuring of open rebellion under the pretence
of religion. They also had long talk of matters of Scotland.
She earnestly pressed him to show the Queen's picture, which
he did.—Antwerp, 5 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 3.


July 5.

1400. N. Stopio to —.




Encloses advices from Madrid, 8 June 1567; Turin,
17 June; Messina, 10, Rome 28, and Vienna, 27 June.—
Venice, 5 July 1567. Signed.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 5.


July 6.

1401. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends news from Rome, 28 June 1567; and from Posen,
25 June.—Venice, 6 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. Pp. 3.


July 6.

1402. Henry Cobham to Cecil.




Of the French doings at Calais he supposes he is certified.
King Philip has made a fort of earth but five paces from the
turnpike which is the uttermost ground of the French. The
citadel of Ghent is the strongest piece in these countries;
about the town many have been miserably hanged of the
Gueux as by the fruits of the trees on the highway side is
[Page 273]
seen, but none of quality or reputation. At Antwerp they
found a ward armed upon the water in boats. The soldiers
were everywhere intermingled among the merchants, and
in four places certain companies watch and ward ever armed.
Count Mansfeldt is chief governor of the town. The Count
of Egmont is not so surely trusted, yet he has deeply taken
his oath. The Prince of Orange is in Germany; his doings
be not well construed by the Regent. At the Earl of Sussex's
being at the Court there was small appearance of nobility.
On the south side of the town it is decreed that a citadel
shall be made. The new churches of the Martinists and
Calvinists be given to certain soldiers, who make sale of them
by piecemeal. As the Protestants had a device so the
Regent's (party) wear a little medal, on the one side a face
graven for Christ and written "fide," on the other side our
Lady and Child and written "et caritate." These medals the
lords and ladies of the Court wear. The coming of the Duke
of Alva is not very pleasant to the Regent or to such as have
served in these affairs.—Antwerp, 6 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 2½.


July 6.

1403. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Bothwell is in better case than he is glad of. Is assured
that the Hamiltons, Huntly, Argyll, Fleming, Seton, Boyd,
and the Castle of Dumbarton are at his devotion. Has more
cause to be careful for his safe passage from Berwick to
Edinburgh.—Ferrybridge, 6 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


July 6.

1404. The Earl of Morton to Sir John Forster.




Desires him to write to Lord Scrope to stop the Master
of Maxwell from joining their adversaries, which may easily
be done as he believes him not to be earnest in their contrary,
nor yet the country willing to serve against them. They are
provided for the worst. Has some merlins to send him, but by
reason of the weakness of their feathers they cannot be carried
at present. Desires to know the Master's answer.—Edinburgh,
6 July 1567. Signed. Enclosed in Bedford's letter to Leicester
of July 13.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


July 6.

1405. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




Desires that those who have matters of debt in hand of
their own may not henceforth come hither about the Queen's
affairs. Thought it not for the Queen's honour that this
bearer [Percival] should be detained prisoner, wherefore he
delivered him out, but his company is dearer than he desires.
Has conferred with Mr. Stewart according to Cecil's letter
of 11th June wishing them to awake in the defence of religion,
advertising that no mercy is to be hoped at the Papists' hands.
Stewart was joyful of that he said, and required to know if
the Queen would assist them, but only with 100,000 crowns,
[Page 274]
which if she would, they having plenty of men mistrusted
not but to do well. He desired Cecil only to be made privy
to it. Wishes he would help them if possible. Prays to be
advertised what to say if they come again. The Earl of
Murray to-morrow takes his leave, and will shortly be with
Cecil with whom he will confer at length. Barnaby is still
very sick of the black jaundice, so makes suit for some one
to assist him in Her Majesty's affairs.—Poissy, 6 July 1567.
Signed: Stewart's name in cipher.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1¾.


July 6.

1406. Sir Henry Norris to the Earl of Leicester.




Has had slack answer to the Queen's letters. Imprisonment of the bearer for debt. Mr. Barnaby is sick of the
black jaundice and requests that he may return into England
for his health. The nobility daily assemble at St. Germains
where the Court is. Begs him to stand a good lord to
Barnaby.—Poissy, 6 July. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1¼.


July 6.

1407. Advices from Antwerp.




News to the same effect as that dated July 5.
Endd. Ital. P. 1.


July 7.

1408. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Perceives that matters frame better for the Lords than
appeared by his last. Prays him not to keep matters long
in suspense. Lethington is not at Edinburgh and therefore
it will be the longer ere he leaves Berwick, as he thinks it
not good to confer with the Lords in his absence.—Newcastle,
7 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


July 7.

1409. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Cormac O'Connor has come hither. Sends the names of
certain who were at the slaughter of the King who are sent
unto to render themselves. The Lords mustered such persons
as are sent from the burghs and from Edinburgh, which place
only made 500 shot. Black John Spence has promise of
his life because he has uttered his knowledge of the Duke
and the rest, and delivered two of the Duke's coffers wherein
is not the least part of his wealth. Balfour has delivered
sundry arms out of the castle.—Berwick, 7 July 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¼.


[July 7.]

1410. Murder of Darnley.




The names of those summoned for Darnley's murder.
P. 1.


July 8.

1411. Mr. Heneage to Cecil.




This afternoon came one out of France from the Earl of
Murray, with whom after the Queen had talked an hour she
[Page 275]
commanded the writer to tell Cecil that the Earl had sent
a messenger with letters to the Queen of Scots, straightly
charging him to deliver them to her own hands and by no
means that the Lords should see them, telling him that he
did not a little mislike that they kept their mistress in
durance, and that he would be her true servant in all fortunes.
The Queen bade him tell Cecil with all haste to write a letter
the effect whereof should be to deny the three charges against
Murray contained in Leicester's letter of the 7th.—From the
Court, 8 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2¾.


July 8.

1412. Robert Melville to Cecil.




1. The bearer is directed to the Earl of Murray, who is
earnestly wished to make speedy return by all the Lords
here. The most part of the realm could agree that he
should bear greatest charge under their Sovereign and the
Prince. If the Queen will assist him the country will be at
her devotion.




2. Has spoken to the Queen at Lochleven, where he delivered the Queen of England's letter.—Cairney, 8 July.
Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


July 8.

1413. James Melville to Sir William Drury.




The Lords who were at Hamilton have separated themselves, every man to his own house. Argyll has been with
Lethington four days past, and they have agreed very well
together. The confederacy in the West have subscribed to
three heads, the punishment of the murder, the maintenance
of the Prince in security, and the delivery of the Queen out
of custody. Gives the names of those who subscribed.
Upon Thursday a meeting is appointed betwixt some that
are to be deputed from the Lords gathered in Hamilton and
those in this town. Desires him to forward a packet.—
Edinburgh, 8 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


July 8.

1414. The Earl of Leicester to Throckmorton.




Is advertised by the Earl of Murray that he is informed
that the Queen of Scots is advertised that at his being here
he treated with the Queen against his Sovereign in these
three points: first, to practise maintenance against her by
the Queen's aid; secondly, to burden her to the Queen,
Leicester, and others with the death of her husband; thirdly,
to offer to the Queen the delivery of the Prince out of her
hands. Desires him to let the Queen of Scots understand
that as he bears faith to God and his Prince he never directly
or indirectly heard any such kind of irreverent word pass
Murray's mouth.—Richmond, 8 July. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.

[Page 276]

July 8.

1415. The Earl of Leicester to Throckmorton.




The Queen remains doubtful and not satisfied touching the
Queen of Scots' imprisonment. Her hope is that his travail
shall do some good to have due regard to her safety. (Sic.)
She is somewhat offended that he makes no more haste thitherwards, and last night made the reckoning of every day's
journey. Hopes he may cause things to remain in good stay
till Murray comes. The Queen marvels that she has never
been advertised of the Lords' intents. Notwithstanding
Throckmorton's being there it were not amiss to have some
sufficient man here. There is no possibility of the Queen
being won to do as she should except there were appearance
of that Queen's surety. Wishes Lethington to deal at large
when he writes next, and also that he had either been here
or with Murray.—8 July. Signed.
Pp. 2.


July 8.

1416. Maitland of Lethington to Throckmorton.




Will meet him on Friday near Coldingham and lead him
to Fast Castle, where he will be welcome. The next day he
may easily be conveyed to Edinburgh.—Edinburgh, 8 July
1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.




1417. Copy of the above.
Endd. P. ¾.


July 8.

1418. Mundt to Cecil.




1. Since the 17th of June many foot soldiers have gone
into the Duchy of Luxemburg, whither the Spaniards are
about to come, and also the German soldiers which were in
Flanders. These forces are collected either to go into France
against the Huguenots (for the French King has raised 6,000
men in the Papist cantons of Switzerland) or against the
Count Palatine. Afterwards they will act against all those
who profess the Confession of Augsburg. The Pope and King
of Spain with their associates have resolved to establish the
decrees of the Council of Trent by force. It is to be feared
that the young King of France will join the league at the
instigation of his mother and the Cardinal. There is news
of a five years' truce with the Turk. The Estates of the
Empire assemble at Erfurt on the 1st of August.—Strasbourg,
8 July 1567.




2. P.S.—The action which Knollys and he treated with
the Princes Protestant in '62, and did not obtain a resolute
answer, would now take better success as he is informed. It
was then hindered by Duke Augustus. The trust and hope
of the other Princes is much diminished because of his
obdurate mind in papisty and immoderate devotion towards
foreign Princes and the Bishop of Rome, and suffering these
[Page 277]
cruel persecutions against the poor Christians in the Low
Countries. Prays that this paper be burnt.
Written in Mundt's writing in English on a separate leaf.
Add. Endd. Lat. Pp. 2.


July 9.

1419. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




This day met Lord Herries, whom he finds fully minded to
take part with the Hamiltons. Herries told him that there
was a motion of agreement between the Lords of both parties;
that if the Lords at Edinburgh will consent to set the Queen
at liberty, and deliver the Prince to certain noblemen to be
agreed upon, and that the realm may be governed by some
of the greatest estates to be chosen indifferently, then the
Lords of the other party will join them for the punishment
of the murderers, and their own surety. There has been a
raid of certain of the borderers in the Lord Herries'
wardenry.—Carlisle, 9 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


July 9.

1420. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




The Lords convened at Dumbarton have separated after
agreeing to the punishment of the murder, the maintenance of
the Prince, and the delivery of the Queen. On the 10th is
appointed a meeting at Stirling of some deputed from both
parties. The Earl of Argyll came to Stirling and confirmed
his speech to the Earl of Marr. The Queen has discharged
the Laird of Skirling of his office of controller. Has arranged
for the convoy of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton from Berwick
to Edinburgh.—Berwick, 9 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¾.


July 9.

1421. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Sir Nicholas Throckmorton arrived this day. Understands
not a little to his comfort that the Queen and Cecil take his
doings in good part.—Berwick, 9 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


July 9.

1422. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Sends him Lethington's letter to him. Refers him to other
letters for news. Has had conference with Sir John Forster
and finds by him the state of the Borders very "tickle."—
Berwick, 9 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


July 9.

1423. Sir John Forster to the Earl of Bedford.




Desires that letters may be directed to the Queen's Ambassador in Scotland to deal and talk with the Lords for some
good order for the continuance of Days of March upon the
Borders.—Alnwick, 9 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¼.

[Page 278]

July 10.

1424. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




Hoped to have had some perfect understanding of the
Queen's inclination towards these Scottish matters, and
instructions to deal therein accordingly. Earnestly prays
him to continue his friend.—Durham, 10 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¼.


July 10.

1425. The Earl of Bedford to the Privy Council.




Desires to be advertised of the Queen's pleasure for his
further proceeding, as he does not know whether she takes
the Lords of Scotland's doings in good part. He therefore
desires to have some perfect instructions from the Queen and
Council, in order to direct himself in a prescribed order.—
Durham, 10 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


July 10.

1426. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




The sending of Sir Nicholas Throckmorton into Scotland
is nothing liked. There is nothing at present that they
more fear than their proceedings in Scotland. The Prince of
Conde went miscontented from the Court, so it is thought
that they will shortly be in arms for their defence. Renews
his suit for some one to assist him in the Queen's service.—
Poissy, 10 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1¼.


July 10.

1427. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




The Earl of Murray has been stayed here. The occasion
has been to bring to pass that he might not come into
England or confer with the Queen or Council.—Poissy, 10
July. Signed: partly in cipher.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. ½.


July 10.

1428. Guillaume Acquenan to Cecil.




Has received the packet for the Earl of Murray. Forwards
letters from Captain Cockburn. The Earl of Murray tells
him he will be at Dieppe some day soon to pass quickly into
England. Intends to accompany him. — Dieppe, 10 July
1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Fr. P. ½.


July 10.

1429. Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to Cecil.




Is sorry to see the Queen's disposition alters not towards
the Lords, for when all is done it is they who must stand
her in more stead than the Queen her cousin. This day he
takes his journey towards Fast Castle accompanied with Mr.
Marshal and 200 horse to the Bound Rood. The Borders
begin to grow far out of order, and spoils and thefts be committed by the Scots; the best way to remedy it is to procure
the Lords at Edinburgh (at whose devotion these prickers be)
to restrain the head men and their followers in good order.—
Berwick, 11 July 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.







      

  


  

  
    
      PreviousTable of contentsNext
  


      
      

    

  

  
      
      
        
              
  
    
      
            
      
  

    
                      
    Footer menu
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Help
              
          
        About the project
              
          
        Terms of use
              
          
        Privacy and Cookies
              
          
        Accessibility
              
        
  


  


  
    
      
            Version 6.0. © 2024, University of London
      
  


        
      
    
  

  









