


  








    Elizabeth: April 1568 | British History Online
    


      




    
    
    
    
    



  Skip to main content



  
    





  
    
          
  
    
  
      
      BHO | British History Online
    
      
  


    
                      
    Main navigation
    
  
  
        

  
    
      
    
    
                    
              
                  Browse Catalogue
                      
          
                  Subject guides
                      
          
                  Using BHO
                      
          
                  About
                      
          
                  Subscribe
                      
          
                  News
                      
        
  
    
  


  


    
                      
    Login
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Login
              
          
        Register
              
        
  


  



    
  

  
  

  

  

  

  

    

      
      
      
            
  
    
        ';" aria-label="breadcrumb">
    Breadcrumb
    
          
                  Home
              
          
                  Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth
              
        
  

  


  
    
      
  Elizabeth: April 1568



  

  
    
      

  
    Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. 

    
    Originally published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1871.

    
  

    This free content was digitised by double rekeying. All rights reserved. 
    

  
    
      Citation:
        
          BHO
          Chicago
          MLA		
        
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: April 1568', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568, ed.  Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp437-448 [accessed 21 September 2026].
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: April 1568', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Edited by   Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online,  accessed September 21, 2026,
 https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp437-448.
    
    
      
"Elizabeth: April 1568". Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Ed.  Allan James Crosby (London, 1871), British History Online. Web. 21 September 2026. https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp437-448.
    
  
  
    
  

  
    
      
        
          
            
          
        
        
          
            This volume has gold page scans.Access these scans with a gold subscription. 
          
        
      
    

  

            
        Keyword Highlight
        
        Search
        
      
     
    
            
  



April 1568




April 1.

2104. Sir Francis Englefield to Cecil.




If any go about to defame him of importunity or any other
error in that the King of Spain writes now the third time
in his favour, he excuses himself by the justness of his suit.
Rests upon Cecil, who will not cast away his benefits upon
an ungrateful man.—Madrid, 1 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. ¾.


April 1.

2105. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




Upon receipt of his letter he wrote to the Regent for the
placing of a warden opposite. Has intelligence of an agreement between Lord Herries and the Laird of Drumlanrig
now in hand to be compounded by double marriages. Thinks
Herries will be officer again.—Carlisle, 1 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.


April 2.

2106. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




The Hamiltons hold out still, and Dumbarton will not be
rendered. The Regent's contraries have long been fed with
the coming of a power out of France. Argyll is fairer
spoken unto than trusted. The Queen has declared unto
George Douglas's mother of her having moved and broken
with the Regent for to marry with him, and of his unwillingness unto the same, with these words and such like, "You may
see what a kind brother he hath of him." Notwithstanding he
was forbidden to remain there, yet it is thought that he has
disguisedly secret recourse thither, and the affection great.
[Page 438]
The Queen's liberty, by favour, force, or stealth, is shortly
looked for. Certain Scotchmen now come from France affirm
that they were dealt with by the Duke of Chatelherault to
take wages of him, and show some cause. For his proportion
of stone from hence Cecil need have no further care.—Berwick,
2 April 1567. Signed.
Endd. Pp. 1½.


April 3.

2107. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




The Queen perceiving how the Commissioners for the Prince
had to heart their indirect dealing and minding by all means
to appease the matter, at the Duke Montmorency's earnest
request the next day the Cardinal Chatillon and Counts
Rochefoucault and Bouchevannes were appointed to stay at a
monastery of Observants in the suburbs, whither the King and
Queen went to them, and gave them all the good entertainment that might be wished, and had talk with them for the
space of three hours, which done they returned again to Longjumeau. This delay has been to the great advantage of the
religion.—Paris, 3 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.




2108. Copy of the first portion of the above.
Endd.: 1 April. P. 1.


April 4.

2109. Dr. Man to the Queen.




Has received her letter of the 24th February, but has not yet
been able to procure audience. After five days the King sent
him word that he should first talk with Ruy Gomez, who dealt
very cunningly with him. Refused to open to him the charge
given to him to say to the King. Is credibly informed that the
King will in no case hear of her request touching her ambassador's privilege in liberty of religion. A very great councillor
said that he marvelled that she was not content with the order
which her predecessors have been contented with, and that she
meant thereby to introduce schism into Spain; and further,
that the King cannot grant her request if he would, for that
he is subject, as the rest of Spain, to the Holy Inquisition, and
sticks not to say that she seeks hereby to break off the amity
with the King. The matter is so bruited in the Court, and
written to divers parts, that it now touches her in honour not
to pass it over, but rather to reduce the service of her ambassador to that place whereunto it was first meant, it being
of few years continuance that there has been any English
Ambassador resident in the Court of Spain, most of them
residing in the territories of the House of Burgundy.—
Madrid, 4 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 3.


April 4.

2110. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends news from Rome of the 27th March 1568, creation of
four Cardinals. From Vienna 25th March, affairs of Poland
and Turkey.—Venice, 4 April 1568. Signed.
Orig. Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. Pp. 3.

[Page 439]

April 5.

2111. Captain Cockburn to Cecil.




Steven Lesley was taken in Scotland, and not in England,
and the Regent may perceive by his letters all that is prepared here in his contrary. There is at present some new
enterprise moved at the Court and to be sent by sea. The
Papists are so offended with the King and Queen that he
hopes they will come to the true religion.—Dieppe, 5 April.
Signed: Gorg Bemont.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


April 6.

2112. Philip II. to the Queen.




Hears from his ambassador at her Court that Man has sent
certain letters, which if he had confined himself to his duty
he would not have written. Refers her to his ambassador
and to a gentleman of his Court, whom he will shortly send
for an explanation.—Madrid, 6 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Lat. Broadside.


April 6.

2113. The Queen to Man.




Commands him to protest against the King of Spain's intention to bring and straiten the places of the trade of the
English merchants in Galicia to certain private ports and
towns there.
Draft. Endd. Pp. 2¼.


April 6.

2114. The Duke of Alva to the Queen.




Desires justice for certain of the King of Spain's subjects
who have been plundered by English pirates.—Brussels, 6
April 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd.: 1568. With seal. Fr. Broadside.


April 8.

2115. Sir Henry Norris to the Queen.




1. Informs her of the intent to break off the peace. On the
5th was the Edict of Pacification published and put forth in
print, which he sends herewith. There are great diversities
of humour about the same. Is informed that France
eschewing one danger is ready to be threatened with a
greater, viz., the King having given his brother all the
authority that he possibly might, and having no degree
whereunto he might aspire but the highest, has shown some
tokens of an ambitious heart; for of late suspected Protestant
he has now become a sworn Catholic, and is drawn by them
in all his proceedings, disdaining all things his brother does.
And the King very courteously entertaining the Cardinal
Chatillon and the Count Rochefoucault at their late being
here, and talked very gently with Brocarde, the governor of
Orleans during these troubles for the Prince of Conde, he
seemed marvellously to stomach the matter, saying that they
had deserved no such favour at the King's hands, which
words have already bred some jealously between the brethren.
The Queen it is suspected animates M. D'Anjou, hoping if the
[Page 440]
one fails her to stay upon the other. She has of late shown
great signs of grief, which have arisen upon a certain letter
written by the King Catholic to the King wherein he declares
that he is glad that he has appeased these civil wars, and
counsels him hereafter to take the government in his own
hands.




2. Has been required by the Cardinal of Chatillon to give
the Queen in all their companions' behalf their most humble
thanks for her aid and favour shown to them in the last
troubles afore this; desiring her not to take it in ill part
that they had not made her privy to these proceedings, the
occasion being that they were so suddenly taken. He was
further required to advertise her that the storm which of late
was here is likely to fall in Flanders; and also that there
were secret articles sworn between the King and his council
and the Prince of Conde and his company. The King sending
the Edict of Pacification to be proclaimed in Rouen, the
magistrates were assailed with a furious multitude and forced
to fly; which done they spoiled divers whom they esteemed
to be of the religion and slew also of them; the like has
happened at Bourges, where the Catholics have slain divers
Protestants that were kept in prison. The country is so full
of soldiers that it is more perilous travelling now than during
the wars.—Paris, 8 April 1568. Signed.




3. P.S.—There is great preparation of ships at St. Malo,
whither soldiers repair daily to pass into Scotland.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 3½.


April 8.

2116. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




Gives information about the King and his brother, tumults
on the proclamation of peace, &c., the same as in his letter of
this date to the Queen.—Paris, 8 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 2.


April 9.

2117. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Complains that he is driven to charges which cannot be
avoided and so forced to take up money upon dear interest,
and therefore requests Cecil's advice herein. On Monday will
send him the stones for two chimneys.—Berwick, 9 April
1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


[April 9.]

2118. Captain Cockburn to Cecil.




Has received this from Paris, and other letters that mention
that the Prince of Spain has headed a great mutiny in Spain.
Desires him to send this to the Regent.
Add. On the same sheet of paper as the following. With
seal.
Ramsay to Cockburn.
On the 7th the "Jussion" was subscribed by the King, but
is now written over again. They slay daily at the ports of
[Page 441]
this town both women and others who retire themselves home
again to their houses. Their camp "scales" not, but the
Prince's does, wherewith many are not content. Captain
Charles commends him right heartily to Cockburn, and would
fain have him here and so would all the archers, who say that
if he had been here perchance the other side had not been
broken. Charles swears, par la mort et par le chair, if he
were at home again and there be no minister near him, he
will rather send to Geneva for one to preach in his barony, and
if wars chance again he will be the greatest Huguenot that
ever was.—Paris, 9 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2½.




2119. The Queen to the [King of Navarre].


[April]

Congratulates him on the pacification of all divisions and
scandals in his kingdom, and desires him to give credence to
the bearer, Mr. Thomas Smyth, one of her Council, and one of
the Masters of Requests.
Copy. Endd.: Au Roy de Narre, not sent. Fr. P. 1.


April 9.

2120. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




On the 7th was kept a Day of March, where he received
delivery for five bills. If the Earl of Murray had not played
his part he would have missed this much justice. Hereafter
he minds not to write to them, but to make a visitation. Has
caused certain of their cattle feeding on English ground to be
impounded. Has received copy of the letter sent by the
Queen to the King of Denmark, which shall be sent to the
Earl of Murray.—Berwick, 9 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¼.


April 10.

2121. Advices.




News from Rome of the 10th April 1568; from Vienna,
8 April.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 3.


April 11.

2122. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends news from Rome of 3rd April.—Venice, 11 April
1568. Signed.
Orig. Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. Pp. 3.


April.

2123. Advices from different Places.




News from Adrianople of the 13th March; Vienna, 1st
April, and Rome of the 3rd April.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 5.


April 11.

2124. Pietro Volseki to Phayre.




Sends news about the Court of Spain.—Madrid, 11 April
1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Ital. Pp. 3.

[Page 442]

April 11.

2125. Dr. Man to Cecil.




1. Because he cannot by his mute letters comprehend all
the particularities passed since and about the Prince's imprisonment, he sends his secretary, who can also inform him
what answers and delays he has had. Sees that the King
is earnestly incensed by his ambassador's letters, not only
touching the liberty which the Queen requires for Man and
his household servants in like sort as his ambassador has permitted to him there; but also that of late the Queen has used
more extremity and so continues daily against such as they
call here Catholics. The ambassador also signified to the
King that the Queen was in very great heats with him about
this inequality, and had said that in case her ambassador
should not have granted to him this request her commandment was that he should come home; whereunto the King
said that he meant never to deal with him in it, much less to
grant it, and that in case he would be gone he might go.




2. What the Count De Feria said herein Harrington can
inform him if he promises him fair. Is informed that he has
commandment to comfort all Papists, and to command all
the King's servants or pensioners to return. The young
gentleman has many good parts, and therefore Cecil might do
a good deal to persuade him from the return into this service.
Prays for his revocation; but beseeches him to consider the
danger he will be in if the Spanish Ambassador be dismissed
before his departure.




3. Sir Francis Englefield has bought a house in this town,
and as void of hope to obtain his suit purposes to give himself entirely to the service of the King. The King has in
making at Biscay 12 strong ships, and has also commanded
to take up 30,000 "hamecks" of wheat there. There is
levying 4,000 men for Flanders. Sir Francis Englefield
opened to him secretly that he perceived by the Duke of
Feria's talk unto him, that he found himself much aggrieved,
having been so great a servant to the Queen and the only
friend of Englishmen and their causes in this Court, that
the Queen has not advanced in honour his wife's kinsfolk.
On the 4th inst. seeking audience of the King he was
answered that he was pained with the gout in his right hand,
and could not conveniently give audience; notwithstanding
which the Ambassador of Venice had audience the same day.
—Madrid, 11 April 1568. Signed.




4. P.S.—Here is publicly sold by the King's privilege a
history in Spanish, wherein among other lies are written
heinous slanders touching the Queen, and her father and
mother. Some of the words he has written out and sends. As
he is kept from the King he will deal herein with Ruy Gomez.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 4.


April 11.

2126. Sir Francis Englefield to Cecil.




It very much confounds him to see that the King of Spain
should need in so simple a suit as his so often to move and
[Page 443]
press the Queen. By the delay he rests oppressed with as
hard a choice as any man can be put to; either to entangle
himself with the bondage of some foreign service, or else to
want necessary maintenance to sustain the vocation whereunto he was born. As for his returning there is a danger to
his life by an unjust taxing him with adhering to rebels and
the Queen's enemies; besides whilst his conscience remains
persuaded as it is there is no possible way to live there without the plain condemnation thereof inwardly, and the public
offence of his Sovereign by being scandalous to her subjects,
and a breaker of her laws. Seeks but a small part of what is
his own. Offers to make his wife such allowance as the
Queen would that she should have, so that she may not be
encouraged to defame her husband and dissolve his ordinances.
—Madrid, 11 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2½.


April 11.

2127. English Ambassador in Spain.




A note of the different excuses made to Man in order to
prevent his having audience with the King of Spain from
21 March to 11 April.
Endd. Pp. 2½.


April 12.

2128. [Sir Henry Norris] to Mr. Man.




These troubles are to outward appearance fully appeased,
the King having published his Edict of Pacification. Soldiers
on both sides return home. The Court is presently very
great. In England all things remain in their wonted
quietness.
Rough copy. Endd.: 12 April 1568. Pp. 1½.


April 12.

2129. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




Whereas certain process has been directed against his
deputy Warden and Constable forth of the Court of Star
Chamber for their appearance there this Easter term, and as
he must needs leave them with this charge, he desires that
their answers may be taken by commission. The Johnstones
of Annandale have burnt five or six large steadings near
Moffat.—Carlisle, 12 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. P.1.


April 13.

2130. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Writes in favour of Mr. Lovel, who desires the room of
gentlemen porter. The place has been unfurnished almost
three years. Lethington has prayed his consent for the
carrying of a couple of geldings out of England. But it
touching too much the breach of law and order he has denied
it. Would be content to satisfy him if he had the Queen's
warrant, which he desires Cecil to move her to grant. Wishes
this the rather to do them lawfully courtesy to the end they
may the more incline themselves to do him justice.—Berwick,
13 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.

[Page 444]

April 3.

2131. Maitland of Lethington to Cecil.




Several of his horses having been stolen by the Liddesdale
thieves, he desires his license to buy two geldings within the
bounds of England.—Edinburgh, 3 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1. Enclosure.


April 13.

2132. Valentine Browne to Cecil.




Where he moved him for license to transport yearly two or
three geldings into Scotland to bestow in gifts there, thereby
to have avoided some loss he has hitherto sustained by the
Scots who usually rob him of sheep, oxen, and horses, he now
stands in hope to have recompense by order. At the Day
of March there was great redress and delivery such as has
not been these seven years seen. The Marshall being thus
forced to travel unto the Borders and lie there, which he
cannot do without great expense, Browne has imprested to
him to the value of 200l., for which he desires a warrant.
Returns a ship laden with stones for him to London.—
Berwick, 13 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1¼.


April 16.

2133. Remembrance for the East Borders.




1. A special license to keep a Warden Court for the
observing of the laws and customs of the Borders.




2. All Scots to be expelled out of any habitation within
the March.




3. Cattle pasturing in English ground to be taken.




4. Black-rents to be restrained by proclamation.
Endd. P. 1.


April 18.

2134. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends news from Rome of 10 April, and from Vienna of the
8th.—Venice, 18 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. Pp. 3.


April 18.

2135. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




Since the proclaiming of the Edict in Paris there have been
sundry outrages committed; divers of the religion entering
into the city from Orleans have been by the soldiers cruelly
murdered at the gates, without any execution as yet done
upon the offenders. The Scottish captains who were with the
Prince are cassed altogether contrary to the Edict. It is
likewise said that the King means to put out of his household as many as are suspected to be of the religion. Commotions and slaughters in Languedoc. The King's reiters being
6,500 and the Prince's 7,800, have received in part payment
of their wages 400,000 francs, the remanet which is 700,000
francs to be answered in two several times at Frankfort.
There are sixteen or twenty ships rigged towards Muscovy as
they say, but he fears lest it be to colour the other enterprise.
Has received his schedule concerning depredations done by the
[Page 445]
French, but none of the plainants come to take out commissions and find out such as robbed them.—Paris, 18 April
1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 2¼.


April 20.

2136. The Regent Murray to Cecil.




Cecil has been a good and happy instrument in giving the
Queen advice to the continuance of the godly amity betwixt
the realms. Has commanded the bearer, Nichol Elphinstone,
to impart his causes to him.—Glasgow, 20 April 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. ½.


April 21.

2137. Dr. Man to Cecil.




Being in doubt whether his letters and his secretary have
been stayed by the way he sends this. Desires him to have
respect to secret practises which he fears pass at present.
Count Feria's practises be now in hand here.—Madrid, 21
April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd.; with seal. Partly in cipher, deciphered.
P.½.


April 22.

2138. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Mr. Beaumont arrived here yesterday, whom he received
with such courtesy as he was able. Nicholas Elphinstone has
arrived, making his repair up to the Court. There has been
executed one of the Stewards of the chiefest of that house.
Lesley has yielded to confess much more than at first he
would.—Berwick, 22 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


April 23.

2139. Dr. Man to Cecil.




1. This day there came to his lodgings two of the King's
secretaries, who declared that they had a message from the
King whereof they were very sorry: That whereas the King
had forborne to give him audience it proceeded not of lack
of goodwill towards the Queen, but that whereas at Man's
first coming he caused it to be intimated to him once by the
Duke of Feria and twice by the Duke of Alva that he should
content himself to live in this Court in like sort and manner
as other English Ambassadors have done heretofore, the
King was informed to his great grief that he had contrary to
that order used himself more largely in matters of religion
and against the order of the Holy House so plainly that he
could not bear withal, nor deal with him any more, and so
had determined not to hear him or suffer him to come into
his presence; and that he had already written to the Queen
to call him home as one not meet to live in this Court.
And further the King's pleasure was that he should sequester
himself out of the Court and town where he should be appointed.

[Page 446]



2. Man said that he was sorry that the King had been so
sinisterly informed of his case; and perceived that it proceeded not of His Majesty's good nature, but from whence
he knew right well; and touching any dealing to the misliking of the Holy Office, he told them that the Duke of
Alva at his first repair to this Court (the matter being
enforced upon him by the Count De Feria to follow the orders
of religion used in Spain as his predecessors did) assured him
in the King's name that for his own person he should take
himself privileged and not bound to repair to the churches
and ceremonies, but might without impeachment of the
Inquisition use any divine service within his house according
to the laws of England, and also might with security say,
speak, or do what he thought good within his own house,
saving always that his servants and family could not enjoy
the same liberty, but must be content to repair to the
churches and ceremonies used in Spain.




3. They marvelled that the Duke of Alva should say so,
but that it was possible that he mistook his saying, for the
King was determined not to suffer any innovation in his
realm; but as for the liberty that the Queen of England's
Ambassadors had heretofore living after the Catholic sort, the
King was well content to continue it and no further. That
his ambassador claimed no larger privilege than had been
always granted to all his predecessors; and semblably Man
ought to be contented with the same that his predecessors
had and to have gone no further. They told him that the
King found no other fault but this. Desires his speedy
revocation.—Madrid, 23 April 1569 (sic). Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 3.


April 23.

2140. Sir Walter Kerr of Cessford to Drury.




Has travailed with the gentlemen whose servants are filed
in the bills that they are next to enter upon, but cannot be
provided against the appointed day. Therefore desires him
to continue that meeting to that day twenty days after.
Prays him to take this excuse in best part, and not to think
he does it for delay of justice.—Hallidon, 23 April 1568.
Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


April 24.

2141. The Regent Murray to Sir John Forster.




Has received his letter showing the disorders of Liddesdale
and what scaith the Queen's subjects have sustained, and requiring that some reformation may be put to them. Declares
his goodwill thereto and desire for peace betwixt the realms.
Trusts that his proceedings here will cause his evil neighbours
to contain themselves within their bounds, and as he may he
will visit them.—Glasgow, 24 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.

[Page 447]

April 24.

2142. The Regent Murray to Sir John Forster.




Thanks him for his goodwill and his conduct in his charge.
Continues forward in holding general justice through the
country, and minds to return by the Borders.—Glasgow, 24
April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


April 24.

2143. M. du Pont to Cecil.




The peace is not to the taste of either party. The principal
towns which have taken arms continue their mischief. The
news from Languedoc has troubled them of Paris. It is
thought that the war will turn towards England. Before
leaving Orleans the noblemen and most of the captains
celebrated the communion. All the French companies of the
Prince's party have returned home without demanding money,
but those of the other side demand payment, and will not quit
the towns and villages but continue to pillage.—24 April.
Signed.
Add. Endd. Fr. In cipher, deciphered. P. 1.


April 25.

2144. Fraternity of the Holy Ghost.




Reasons and objects for the founding of a society for the
defence of Catholic doctrines against the Reformers at Chalons.
—25 April 1568.
Printed pamphlet. Fr. Pp. 6.


April 26.

2145. James Persall to Sir Henry Norris.




Sixteen or twenty large ships are preparing about Dieppe
for Muscovy.—Rouen, 26 April 1568. Signed.
P. 1.


April 26.

2146. Rowland Johnson to Cecil.




Trusts that when his poor suit comes before Cecil and the
rest of the Lords of the Council it will be granted. Encloses
his petition.—Berwick, 26 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


April 26.

2147. Rowland Johnson to the Privy Council.




The unfinished state of the fortifications at Berwick makes
the town lie very bare and unguardable. The meanest of
his predecessors who served in this charge (Surveyor of the
Works) had never less than 6s. 8d. a day, and some 10s., and
his poor entertainment was never more than 4s. 2d. Understands that the same is appointed to cease. Prays that he may
continue to be allowed the same in consideration of his twenty
years' service. Has been offered greater entertainment to
serve the Emperor. Desires license to travel this summer for
the service of the Queen. Would be glad to attend upon any
nobleman, and by these means see some of the best pieces of
fortifications.—Berwick, 26 April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2. Enclosure.

[Page 448]

April 26.

2148. News from the Low Countries.




Account of military operations in the Low Countries by
Don Sancho De Londono, Maestro del Campo.—26 April 1568.
Endd. by Cecil: Spanish letter of news. Span. Pp. 4½.


April 28.

2149. Captain Cockburn to Cecil.




There is appearance of greater trouble than before. Yesterday there was a proclamation by sound of trumpet, that
if any preachings be made in Paris or the fauxbourgs, that
they be cruelly put to death and the houses razed. Soldiers
are sent to Orleans, Rochelle, and other towns that hold for
them of the religion.—Paris, 28 April.
Hol. Add. Endd. P. 1.


April 28.

2150. Captain Cockburn to Cecil.




Another letter to the same effect as the above.—Paris, 28
April 1568. Signed with initials.
Endd. P. 1.


April 30.

2151. Sir John Forster to Cecil.




The Borders are all out of order. Found all the soldiers
returned from Harbottle. Desires that some may remain
there until the Regent comes to the Borders. Encloses a
copy of his letter to the Queen. It is said that the Frenchman who has come into Scotland has to move a marriage
between the Queen and the Abbot of Arbroath. Desires a
license for the giving of two geldings into Scotland to
pleasure them whom he has his intelligence from.—Alnwick,
last of April 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


April 30.

2152. Sir John Forster to the Queen.




According to her commandment has travailed to understand
whether the Queen of Scots either has made or offered any
out-scape, and is credibly informed that there was no such
matter.—Alnwick, last of April 1568.
Copy. Endd. P. 1. Enclosure.


April.

2153. Accounts.




Value of certain merchandise belonging to Juan De Jaen
and others.
Span. P. 1.







      

  


  

  
    
      PreviousTable of contentsNext
  


      
      

    

  

  
      
      
        
              
  
    
      
            
      
  

    
                      
    Footer menu
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Help
              
          
        About the project
              
          
        Terms of use
              
          
        Privacy and Cookies
              
          
        Accessibility
              
        
  


  


  
    
      
            Version 6.0. © 2024, University of London
      
  


        
      
    
  

  









