


  








    Elizabeth: June 1567, 1-15 | British History Online
    


      




    
    
    
    
    



  Skip to main content



  
    





  
    
          
  
    
  
      
      BHO | British History Online
    
      
  


    
                      
    Main navigation
    
  
  
        

  
    
      
    
    
                    
              
                  Browse Catalogue
                      
          
                  Subject guides
                      
          
                  Using BHO
                      
          
                  About
                      
          
                  Subscribe
                      
          
                  News
                      
        
  
    
  


  


    
                      
    Login
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Login
              
          
        Register
              
        
  


  



    
  

  
  

  

  

  

  

    

      
      
      
            
  
    
        ';" aria-label="breadcrumb">
    Breadcrumb
    
          
                  Home
              
          
                  Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth
              
        
  

  


  
    
      
  Elizabeth: June 1567, 1-15



  

  
    
      

  
    Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. 

    
    Originally published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1871.

    
  

    This free content was digitised by double rekeying. All rights reserved. 
    

  
    
      Citation:
        
          BHO
          Chicago
          MLA		
        
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: June 1567, 1-15', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568, ed.  Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp241-252 [accessed 21 September 2026].
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: June 1567, 1-15', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Edited by   Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online,  accessed September 21, 2026,
 https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp241-252.
    
    
      
"Elizabeth: June 1567, 1-15". Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Ed.  Allan James Crosby (London, 1871), British History Online. Web. 21 September 2026. https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp241-252.
    
  
  
    
  

  
    
      
        
          
            
          
        
        
          
            This volume has gold page scans.Access these scans with a gold subscription. 
          
        
      
    

  

            
        Keyword Highlight
        
        Search
        
      
     
    
            
  
Footnotes



June 1567, 1-15




[June.]

1249. Exhortation to the Confederate Lords of Scotland.




Ballad commencing, My Lordis gif ye be wyse, &c. Exhorts
them to take care of the Queen; punish Bothwell; to provide
for the ministry; not to harm any man, and to bring up the
Prince virtuously.
Blackletter. Broadside. Printed at Edinburgh by Robert
Lekpreuik. Endd. P. 1.


[June.]

1250. Mary Queen of Scots and Bothwell.




Coloured drawing representing the Queen as a mermaid,
and Bothwell as a hare surrounded with swords.
Endd.




1251. Pen and ink sketch of the above, with Latin mottoes.


June 1.

1252. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends news from Rome, 24 May 1567; and Vienna, 22 May.
—Venice, 1 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. Pp. 2½.


June 1.

1253. Charles IX. to the Queen.




Letter of credence for M. De Villeroy, who is directed to
visit her on his way to Scotland.—Paris, 1 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. Royal letter. Fr.


June 1.

1254. Catherine De Medicis to the Queen.




Letter of credence for M. De Villeroy.—Paris, 1 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. Royal letter. Fr.

[Page 242]

June 1.

1255. Maitland of Lethington to Cecil.




Thanks him for his great courtesy offered to his brother
passing through England. For occurrences refers him to the
bearer.—Edinburgh, 1 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


June 1.

1256. The Earl of Bothwell to Cecil.




Being called to this place where he must be careful of the
preservation of the good amity betwixt the two Queens, he
desires Cecil also to persevere in so doing. The bearer, Melville,
is instructed as well by the Queen as by himself.—Edinburgh,
1 June 1567. Signed: James D.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


June 1.

1257. The Earl of Bothwell to the Queen.




Takes the boldness to write to her, knowing that she has
through misreports of his unfriends at some times been
offended with him. Being called to this place thinks ever
to bestow his study to the entertainment of the good amity
and intellegence betwixt their Highnesses. Has opened his
mind to the bearer, Robert Melville, and willed him to make
true report thereof to her.—Edinburgh, 1 June 1567. Signed:
James D.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


June 1.

1258. Mary Queen of Scots to Cecil.




Sends Robert Melville to the Queen of England instructed
with her mind in certain matters. Desires him to continue
a minister to the entertainment of the amity and mutual
intelligence betwixt her and the Queen of England.—
Edinburgh, 1 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


June 2.

1259. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Has received advertisements from O'Connor in Scotland
about Ireland. He minds in a few days to repair hither.—
Berwick, 2 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¼.


[June 2.]

1260. A Scottish Spy to Sir William Drury.




Has been in Fife where he spoke with [the Laird of
Grange]. The Queen has sent for the Lords, but they will
not come. Will come and speak with him at more length.
Name carefully erased. Add. P. 1.


June 2.

1261. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




On the 30th May there was proclamation in Edinburgh for
all persons near the Court to be ready within six hours'
warning in warlike manner and six days' victual. The Earl
of Mar refuses to deliver up the Prince; sends letters.—
Berwick, 2 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.

[Page 243]

June 2.

1262. Advices from Antwerp.




Reports current at Antwerp about different countries.—
2 June 1567.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 1½.


June 4.

1263. Instructions for the Count of Stolberg and the
Baron of Maldeghen.




They are to inform the Queen of the causes and progress
of the war with the Turk, and to desire her to aid the
Emperor with some subsidy.
Endd. by Cecil. Lat. Pp. 14¼.


June 4.

1264. Sir Henry Norris to the Queen.




The occasion of Villeroy's coming is to advertise hither
what preparation she makes either into Scotland or to the
seas, and how things stand and what he can learn of the
Scottish affairs. It is a common bruit here that Edinburgh
has been besieged, Bothwell executed, and the Queen committed to perpetual prison, whereunto they say Her Majesty
has given great aid with such straight keeping the passages
as no certain advertisement can be had. Requires her to
let them understand of their most ungentle dealing in intercepting her letters and imprisoning him who was sent with
them.—Paris, 4 June. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.


June 4.

1265. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




The staying of the letters was from their greedy desire to
understand what answer was made or preparation intended
by the Queen upon Smith's return with answer for Calais, or
else fearing there had been letters to the Prince of Conde
and the Admiral, as L'Aubespine has declared to his very
friend. That whereof he advertised him the 2nd February
is most earnestly in hand, to be performed as he is informed
"by La Fevue, general of Champagne and Brie, that the
King of Spain, the Emperor, with the Duke of Savoy intend
to overthrow the Protestants of France, Flanders, and
England," whereof his earnest request is that the Queen may
be advertised. He (La Fevue) has been with Cecil by the
name of "Dunmartige," and is very desirous to serve the
Queen in any thing.—Paris, 4 June 1567. Signed.
Partly in cipher. Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.


June 4.

1266. Sir John Forster to the Earl of Bedford.




The Queen of Scots has caused proclamation to be made
through all her borough towns, that all noblemen, knights,
esquires, gentlemen, and yeomen shall meet at Muirhouse
Abbey the 12th inst. with six days' victual, and every man to
come in warlike manner, and so minds to come to the
Borders. Has sent to his brother Rowland to have good
regard to Wark. Desires that speedy order may be taken
[Page 244]
for the wants there of munition, and that fifty soldiers may be
sent thither. The Lord Home desires that he may have thirty
or forty calivers and some serpentine powder for the defence of
his house at Home.—Bamborough, 4 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¾.


June 4.

1267. Munition at Berwick.




A note made by John Bennet of the munitions wanted for
Berwick.—Berwick, 4 June 1567. Signed.
Endd. P. ½.


June 5.

1268. Captain Cockburn to Cecil.




Desires him to read the other letter and send it to Melville
in Scotland. If he writes to him or the ambassador, requests
him to direct to a certain address in Dieppe.—Paris, 5 June.
Signed.
Add. Almost illegible. P. ½.


June 5.

1269. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




Sends herewith the articles of his answer to the Laird of
Grange's letter. Besides these articles he wrote his own
private letter to Grange to further encourage him to proceed
with the Lords as he had begun; and has requested him as
of himself to have understanding of the Lords' intentions
whether they can be content that the Prince be delivered to
the keeping of his grandmother here in England. Thanks
him for his friendly travail for his stay at home.—Belvoir,
5 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


June.

1270. The Earl of Bedford to the Laird of Grange.




Gives the effect of the Queen's answer [May 17] to his
letter of the 8th May 1567, touching the three heads of the
delivery of the Queen of Scots forth of bondage; the safety
of the Prince; and the pursuit of the murderers of the King.
Signed.
Copy. Pp. 3.


[June] 6.

1271. Sir Thomas Gresham to Cecil.




1. Desires to know the Queen's pleasure for the payment
of her debts. Has given order for the taking up of the
8,500l. due on the 20th.




2. P.S.—The sword set with diamonds which the Queen
commanded him to buy was sent to Frankfort by reason of
the great brawling in Antwerp; it is now returned.—Gresham
House, 6 May 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1.


June 6.

1272. Conditions between the Duke of Savoy and the
Swiss Cantons.




The three bailliages of Perny Gestz and Tournon with
their appanages to be given to the Duke with liberty of
[Page 245]
conscience for the inhabitants. Those who have bought the
goods of the Church to retain them. The question as to the
right to Geneva to be referred to the thirteen cantons.
Eddd., by Cecil. Fr. Pp. 1¼.


June 6.

1273. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




Met the Lord Herries at a day of March on Tuesday last.
Could not get one bill answered by reason that the Laird of
Drumlanrig refused to come according to the summons. Has
told Herries that he will not meet him until he receive justice
for the said bill.—Carlisle, 7 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


June 6.

1274. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




Encloses Sir John Forster's letter [June 4]. Will not send
the fifty soldiers to Wark, or aid Lord Home with the calivers
without the Queen's warrant. Sends Rowland Forster's certificate of the wants of the munition at Wark. Has written
to him if the Queen of Scots come to have in readiness a
number of the countrymen.—Belvoir, 6 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


June 7.

1275. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. Lethington yesternight left without leave-taking the
Court. The Lords mind immediately upon the Queen's departure from Edinburgh to repair thither. The Laird of
Grange has got license to leave Scotland for seven years.
There have been two or three devices for the stamp for the
coin.




2. The Duke used some choler towards Lethington before
his departure, wherewith the Queen was somewhat offended.




3. It is thought that Edinburgh will be charged with the
making of a number of men and the same already moved to
them.—Berwick, 7 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


June 7.

1276. N. Stopio to—




Sends news from Vienna of the 29th May; and Constantinople of the 12th May.—Venice, 7 June 1567. Signed.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 2.


June 7.

1277. The Earl of Lennox to the Queen.




Having a great desire to speak with her he took his voyage
by sea to Portsmouth, but was by great storm of weather
driven upon the coast of Britanny, where he has been stayed
after a sort, but being released has now come to Southampton.
Submits himself wholly into her hands. Trusts she will
remember the most cruel murder of him who was her poor
kinsman till upright justice may be had for the same.—
Southampton, 7 June. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. ¾.

[Page 246]

June 8.

1278. Advices from Antwerp.




News from Antwerp, 8 June 1567.
Ital. P. ½.


June 9.

1279. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. This morning arrived Mons. Clarenok from Scotland
despatched into France. Lethington went first after his
departure to Calendar, the Laird of Livingston's house, but is
now at Lord Fleming's. Is advertised that Bothwell went
from Borthwick in the night with as many friends as he
could assemble and fifty harquebusiers. In Court there is of
the nobility but the Duke, the Earl of Huntly, Lord Oliphant,
and the Bishop of St. Andrew's.




2. There is of the Duke's friends that for this journey who
have sent men, whom they have charged that if the Duke
will ride against any not being thieves to leave him.—
Berwick, 9 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


June 9.

1280. Captain Cockburn to Cecil.




1. Either the Queen of Scots and Bothwell or the Lords
have promised to send the young Prince into France. The
Duke of Alva was in Turin, and the Swiss have desired 800
men at arms of the French King.




2. There has come a great packet of letters from Scotland
and England which was brought to the Queen Mother, who
seeing it was directed to him delivered it to him saying "I
bear you with my goodwill more (than) some of your countrymen does, therefore inquire not who gave me this packet,
always I give you it unopened, nor no letters that are directed
to you shall be opened." She has a very evil opinion of the
Earl of Murray, and says he is England's for his life. Desires
news of Scotland. The Pope, the Emperor, the King of
Spain, and Queen of Scotland and other Princes are all to do
what they can to set up Roman religion. The King of Spain
gives entertainment to 100 English Papists in Flanders and
the King of France entertains fifty.—Rouen, 9 June. Signed:
Gorge [Lennox].
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 3.


June 9.

1281. Thomas Jenye to Cecil.




Sir Henry Norris his master having intelligence that
certain Scotch ships were stayed at Havre, and also certain
of the King of France's ships commanded to be put in order,
sent him forthwith into Normandy to discover their enterprise.
The King has commanded on the 3rd instant certain ships of
his port towns to be appointed with munition and victual.
Cannot learn what number they be or whither they are to
be employed, but is informed that they are rigged towards
Scotland. The King has sent for certain the chief officers of
his port towns here adjoining to devise thereon. The Scottish
[Page 247]
ships that were stayed are dismissed. The King holds in
order all his coasts and has mustered his gentlemen of war
and gensdarmes in these parts on the 3rd, 4th, and 5th inst.—
Dieppe, 9 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1¾.


June 10.

1282. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




Is glad to understand how he has charged the French
Ambassador for the stay and imprisonment of Percival. They
who will live in quiet with these must leave no injury
unreopened. There is some pique betwixt King Philip and
his brother-in-law for that he was not favoured in aiding him
as was agreed upon at Bayonne, when it was accorded that
as soon as the confederates showed themselves, the French
King should have joined with them. The Duke of Alva
refused the victuals sent to refresh his galleys, saying it was
not that which had been promised to his master; so the great
talk of besieging Geneva is now well calmed. Mr. Steward
not hanging cloths out of his window on Procession Day, they
assailed his house, but he being well accompanied both of
pistolet and courier shot, offered them such a breakfast as
they had small liking of. There has been a great enterprise
discovered at Montpellier to overthrow the Protestants. Sends
news of the proceedings of the Emperor and the Turk, and
of the war in Transylvania. There is a Cardinal coming
hither to give the French King his oath.—Paris, 10 June
1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2¼.


June 10.

1283. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




The Borders on both sides stand in good quiet. Finds the
Lord Herries very comformable, but the Lairds of Johnstone
and Drumlanrig refuse to be in service at his commandment,
whereof he alleges that he can have no reformation, for that
(by countenance of the Duke of Orkney) (fn. 1) they have as great
maintenance of the Queen as he has. The Queen has commanded the Earl Morton either to depart the realm or to
cease his travail amongst her unfriends. She and the Lords
levy friends and numbers on both sides.—Carlisle, 10 June
1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


June 11.

1284. The Queen to Sir Henry Norris.




Commands him at his next audience with the French King
to require the liberty of eighteen of her subjects who were
taken passing over to Newhaven during the late war, and are
now prisoners in the galleys at Marseilles.
Copy. Endd. Pp. 3.

[Page 248]

June 11.

1285. Proclamation of the Nobility of Scotland.




Declares the effect of their assembly in armour, and charges
all subjects to assist them in delivering the Queen, preserving
the Prince, and purging the commonwealth of the most
cruel and abominable murder of his umquhile father. The
Lords of the session are to minister justice according to law,
notwithstanding any bruit which may arise in the meantime
of this enterprise.—Cannongate, 11 June 1567. Signed.
Blackletter. Broadside. Printed by Robert Lekpreuik.
Endd.




1286. Another copy.
Printed by Anderson, Vol. I., p. 128, from the Records of
the Privy Council.


June 12.

1287. Act of the Secret Council of Scotland.




Declares Bothwell to be the principal author and murderer
of the King's Grace of good memory and ravishing of the
Queen's Majesty, and orders officers of arms to pass to the
market crosses of the principal towns and command all lieges
to be in readiness upon three hours' warning to pass forwards
with the said Lords to bring Bothwell and his complices
under the laws of the land. All that will not assist to the
revenge with all partakers with Bothwell are within four
hours after the publication of this Act to void themselves forth
of Edinburgh, failing which they will be held as enemies.—
Edinburgh, 12 June 1567.
Blackletter. Broadside. Printed at Edinburgh by Robert
Lekpreuik. Endd.




1288. Another copy.
Endd. Printed by Anderson, Vol. I., p. 131, from the
Records of the Privy Council.


June 12.

1289. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. The Duke returned to Borthwick without having done
anything. On Tuesday night the Lords came to Borthwick.
The first of their company cried out for succour, saying that
they were chased by the rebels, thinking thereby to have
been let in, which the Duke suspecting, prevented. Presently
understanding the weakness of the place, he escaped accompanied with the Laird of Crookstone's son, and got to
Haddington. They perceiving some of the Lord Home's men
to come towards them, sundered. Their chance was to light
upon the Laird of Crookstone's son. The Duke was within
less than an arrow shot of them; and it is said that Crookstone
told them which way he took, but they believed him not. The
Lords finding he was escaped, cried out of him, bidding him
come out, traitor, murderer, and butcher, and maintain his
challenge (with divers undutiful and unseemly speeches used
against their Queen and Sovereign, too evil and unseemly to
[Page 249]
be told, which poor Princess she did with her speech defend,
wanting other means for her revenge). (fn. 2) 




2. The Lords departed to Edinburgh, and finding the gates
shut and denied to enter, went over the wall and broke open
the lock and gate, they then went to the market cross, making
proclamation that their coming was to no other end than to
pursue the revenge for the death of the King. The Earl of
Huntly, the Bishops of St.Andrew's and Ross, and the Abbot
of Kilwinning repaired to the castle and were received.




3. The Duke knowing the Lords' departure repaired to the
Queen and fetched her to Dunbar, where they both are,
and have charged all thereabouts to make their repair to
them. The soldiers are at Murous (Melrose), environed by
Ferniehurst and others to keep them from coming to the
Queen. Gives the names of the Lords who went to Borthwick.
Lethington remains about Stirling. On Saturday night Sir
James Home slew the Laird of Lauder, and lies secretly
within three miles of this town sore hurt and three men with
him. It is judged that the Lords will march towards Dunbar.
If there were no other quarrel or cause of choler than the evil
and undutiful speech that passed at Borthwick, it is like
enough to breed shedding of blood.—Berwick, 12 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 3.


June 12.

1290. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Mr. Treasurer this day takes his departure southward.
Writes in behalf of certain necessary men who for want of
entertainment will leave this place. Advertises him of letters
which he has forwarded. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


June 14.

1291. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




The Queen and the Duke are still in Dunbar commanding
more to come to them. The Lords have caused a banner to
be made wherein are two trees and two dead men lying under
them, and a young child kneeling with certain words for his
request. They keep ward with their people at the gates of
Edinburgh, and have been at the abbey and the mint, and
have taken as is said the font, which has been three or four
times in the fire.—Berwick, 14 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1.


June 14.

1292. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Yesterday the Laird Home and others to the number of
1,000 horse rode to bring the Prince to the castle of Edinburgh,
which shall upon his arrival be delivered to him. The Earl
of Huntly and others are escaped over the water. Yesterday
went the drums in Edinburgh to levy soldiers in the King's
[Page 250]
and Lords' name, offering twenty shillings stirling a month.
The townsmen are at the devotion of the Lords. The Queen
was fain to pass unknown at her coming from Borthwick, in
man's apparel as was generally bruited. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


June 14.

1293. Advices from Italy.




Intelligence from Naples, 8 June 1567. Capture of a
Turkish galley by two belonging to the Order. Rome, 14
June; Vienna, 13 June.
Orig. Endd. Ital. Pp. 5½.




1294. Another copy.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 3¼.


June 14.

1295. Advices from Rome.




Letter from Stopio with advices from Vienna of 5 June.—
Dated from Venice, 14 June 1567.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 4¼.


June 14.

1296. Warrant for Sir Gilbert Dethick.




Authorises the payment to Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter
King-at-Arms of an allowance of 20s. per diem during his
attendance on the Earl of Sussex sent to the Emperor.
Copy. P. 1.


June.

1297. The Queen's Answer to the Emperor's Ambassadors.




1. Recapitulates the declaration of the Count of Stolberg
and the Lord of Maldeghen touching the great wars waged
against the Empire by the late Grand Turk and the large
preparations made by his successor Selim for the invasion of
Christendom, and the request of the Emperor and the Princes
of the Empire for aid to withstand him. Her Majesty conceiveth that the success of the Turk and the decay of the
strength of the Christian Princes is a punishment for the
afflicting the consciences of Christian men wherein are seen
unnecessary expenses of treasure and waste of people by
shedding their blood for ceremonies and quarrels about
religion, which heretofore have been quietly accorded without
war. Is sorry to behold such losses as are reported to the
detriment of Christendom, and to see the successor of the
Turk come so peaceably to his Empire and to hear of his
new preparations.




2. As for the request made for aid, she says that there are
few monarchies besides England who are not either wholly
or partly feodaries of the Empire or else so situate as to be
subject to the malice of the Turk, so that an answer cannot
be so conveniently looked for from her as from them. Complains that she has been put to great expenses almost yearly
by undue foreign practises of persons of no small force.
Some parts of Christendom near her being inclinable to
[Page 251]
dangerous civil trouble, she must forsee how to withstand it,
also some persons having the greatest titles of holiness stir
up Princes to shed blood of Christian people only for dissenting from them in forms of religion, and so move them to
convert their power and treasure to make civil bloody wars,
which were meeter to be employed in such aids acquired by
the Emperor against the sworn enemy to the faith. Wishes
that the Emperor would use his authority for some universal
accord amongst the people of Christendom, and that by
teaching rather than by killing, and by doctrine and example
rather than blood shedding, souls might be recovered to
salvation.




3. Trusts that they will not find it strange if she does not
at this present give any resolute answer to their demands.
Endd. Pp. 11½.




1298. Another copy.
Endd. Pp. 11.




1299. Copy of the above.—Richmond, 15 June 1567.
Note by Cecil. Endd. Lat. Pp. 14½.


June 15.

1300. Banner of the Confederate Lords of Scotland.




Coloured drawing of the banner used by the Confederate
Lords at Carberry Hill, representing the dead body of
Darnley as found after his murder, and the infant Prince
kneeling down with a scroll on which is written "Judge and
revenge my caus O Lord."
Enclosed in Drury's letter of the 18th.


June 15.

1301. Meeting of the Queen of Scots with the Lords.




Coloured drawing representing the surrender of Mary
Queen of Scots to the Lords at Carberry Hill and showing
the position of the different forces.


June 15.

1302. Bond of the Confederate Lords of Scotland.




Recapitulates all the events which happened after Darnley's
murder and declares Bothwell's acquittal not to be according
to justice, and bind themselves not to leave off till the authors
of the cruel murder and the ravishing be condignly punished,
the unlawful marriage between the Queen and Bothwell
annulled, and she delivered from the thraldom and ignominy
which she has sustained, the innocent Prince reposed in
security, and justice restored and uprightly ministered to all
the subjects of the realm.—Edinburgh, 15 June 1567.
Copy. Endd. P. 1.




1303. Another copy.
Printed in Anderson, Vol. I., P. 134, from the Records of
the Privy Council, dated June 16. Keith II., p. 648, from
the same source. Broadside.

[Page 252]

June 15.

1304. The Earl of Bedford to the Earl of Leicester.




The Lords have been severally talked with and seem to
agree that they could be content that their Prince remain
in their custody under the Queen of England's protection,
but they cannot consent to have him delivered into England
until they have all met together. The Prince is in greater
danger than before by reason their Queen is with child.
They pretend to do their Queen no harm, but to bend all their
forces against Bothwell, who is known now himself to have
been at the murder. The French Ambassador has offered
them large pensions and good aid to commit the Prince to
the protection of his master.—Garendon, 15 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.






Footnotes


1.   Erased.
2.   Erased.





      

  


  

  
    
      PreviousTable of contentsNext
  


      
      

    

  

  
      
      
        
              
  
    
      
            
      
  

    
                      
    Footer menu
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Help
              
          
        About the project
              
          
        Terms of use
              
          
        Privacy and Cookies
              
          
        Accessibility
              
        
  


  


  
    
      
            Version 6.0. © 2024, University of London
      
  


        
      
    
  

  









