


  








    Elizabeth: June 1567, 16-30 | British History Online
    


      




    
    
    
    
    



  Skip to main content



  
    





  
    
          
  
    
  
      
      BHO | British History Online
    
      
  


    
                      
    Main navigation
    
  
  
        

  
    
      
    
    
                    
              
                  Browse Catalogue
                      
          
                  Subject guides
                      
          
                  Using BHO
                      
          
                  About
                      
          
                  Subscribe
                      
          
                  News
                      
        
  
    
  


  


    
                      
    Login
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Login
              
          
        Register
              
        
  


  



    
  

  
  

  

  

  

  

    

      
      
      
            
  
    
        ';" aria-label="breadcrumb">
    Breadcrumb
    
          
                  Home
              
          
                  Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth
              
        
  

  


  
    
      
  Elizabeth: June 1567, 16-30



  

  
    
      

  
    Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. 

    
    Originally published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1871.

    
  

    This free content was digitised by double rekeying. All rights reserved. 
    

  
    
      Citation:
        
          BHO
          Chicago
          MLA		
        
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: June 1567, 16-30', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568, ed.  Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp252-267 [accessed 21 September 2026].
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: June 1567, 16-30', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Edited by   Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online,  accessed September 21, 2026,
 https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp252-267.
    
    
      
"Elizabeth: June 1567, 16-30". Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Ed.  Allan James Crosby (London, 1871), British History Online. Web. 21 September 2026. https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp252-267.
    
  
  
    
  

  
    
      
        
          
            
          
        
        
          
            This volume has gold page scans.Access these scans with a gold subscription. 
          
        
      
    

  

            
        Keyword Highlight
        
        Search
        
      
     
    
            
  



June 1567, 16-30




June 16.

1305. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Commends the bearer, Anthony Standen, whom according
to Cecil's letter he has set at liberty.—Berwick, 16 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


June [16].

1306. — to [Sir William Drury].




Came to Edinburgh on Monday, where the Lords were.
The Queen is conveyed to Lochleven. The manner of the
field was this: When the armies were near, the Earl Bothwell
offered to fight with Morton, March, or Lindsay; the Lord
Lindsay offered to do him that honour and made ready for
it; and Bothwell not intending to fight made ready to convey
himself away to Dunbar. The Queen afterwards came to
the Lords with as great a stomach as ever. They be in mind
to besiege Dunbar. Has declared his good mind to the
nobility and told them he would have sent 200 hackbutters
to Home and further if they had pleased. Captain Blacater
and Bastien are taken.
Copy. Endd.: June 1567. Pp. 2¼.


June 16.

1307. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




The Queen with the Duke of Orkney is at Dumblane, from
whence she will come into the field. The Lords have taken
Captain Cullen, who after some strict dealing has revealed
the murder of the King with the whole matter thereof. The
Lords have secretly travailed with Balfour for the delivery
of the Castle into their hands. The quiet order of the
Borders stands in some peril, for the borderers think that under
friendship and protection of the one party they have good
colour to ride for the spoil of the other.—Carlisle, 16 June
1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


June 17.

1308. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




Has received intelligence that the Earl of Morton met the
Queen on Sunday, whose people fled upon the first approach
[Page 253]
without bloodshed. The Queen is in Edinburgh.—Carlisle,
17 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


June 17.

1309. Christopher Mundt to Cecil.




Divers of the German Princes have been assembled at
Heidelburg. They intend to prohibit controversial writings
on the Lord's Supper, and to endeavour to persuade the
Emperor to set John Frederic at liberty. Duke John Frederic
is ill at Augsburg. The Protestants are suspicious at the
raising of so many forces. The King of France had lately
an envoy with the Landgrave.—Strasbourg, 17 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Lat. Pp. 1¼.


June 17.

1310. The Earl of Huntly and Others to the Bishop of
Glasgow.




The Confederate Lords having joined themselves together
assailed Edinburgh, where they and others of the Queen's
Council were, and found such favour with the inhabitants
that they were constrained to retire to the castle. Afterwards they went to Linlithgow, where were assembled a good
company of the Duke of Chatelherault's friends to pass
forward for the relief of the Queen, who made journey with
all possible haste, but were advertised that the Queen was
taken and was now at Lochleven. This enterprise has been
attempted by a few in number, yet has been so secretly
"convoyed" that the same could not have been "prevenit."
They will with the concurrence of the nobility who remain
faithful assemble for her relief. Desire him to advertise the
King of France hereof, and of their goodwill to persevere in
the old friendship and to desire him to show his good favour
to their Sovereign.—17 June 1567. Signed by Huntly and
seven other noblemen.
Copy. Endd. Pp. 1½.




1311. Another copy.
Much injured. Endd. Pp. 1¾.


June 18.

1312. Replication of the Emperor's Ambassadors.




Warn her that if Germany or Italy be overcome the Turks
might easily invade her Kingdom. The commotions that
happened lately in the Empire were for the punishment of
traitors. Has not heard any rumours of approaching wars,
and do not doubt but that she will not be led to refuse
assistance against a certain enemy by account of uncertain
rumours. Signed.
Endd. by Cecil. Lat. Pp. 8.


June 18.

1313. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. The sending of the Queen of Scots to Lochleven is
confirmed. The Lords have caused Signor Francois and
[Page 254]
Bastien to be apprehended. Sends a similitude of the Lords'
banner [see June 15]. Captain Blacater and his brother have
been apprehended in a bark minding to have gone before
Dunbar. It was yesterday determined by the Lords that the
Lady Buccleugh should be sent for and apprehended. —
Berwick, 18 June 1567.




2. P.S.—The Queen's apparel in the field was after the
fashion of the women of Edinburgh, in a red petticoat, sleeves
tied with points a "partlyte," a velvet hat and muffler. She
used great persuasions and encouragements to her people to
have tried it by battle. For welcome the Lords showed her
the banner with the dead body, which seeing they say that
she wished she had never seen him. The banner was hanged
out before her window at the Provost's house, wherewith she
seemed much offended. Though her body be restrained, yet
her heart is not dismayed; she has given to divers very bitter
words. She cannot be dissuaded from her affection to the
Duke, but seems rather to offer sooner to receive harm herself
than that he should.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2¼.


June 18.

1314. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




They so often fail in their reports that it causes him to
forbear sending to him of their proceedings until the return
of one of this garrison whom he sent into Scotland. The
Laird of Lethington and Mr. James Macgill were in the field
the day of the meeting with the Lords. The Laird of
Langton was the first who fled from the Queen.—Berwick,
18 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


June [18].

1315. Advertisement from Scotland.




The Lords have got the castle of Edinburgh, and the Earl
of Marr shall have the keeping of it and the Prince. The
Lords have discharged all the coiners until the Prince be
crowned, and the coin to be struck in his name.
Add. to Drury. P. ½.


June 19.

1316. Sir John Forster to Cecil.




Understands that certain good friends have reported that
there are great spoils committed in his office. Hears of none
robbed or spoiled passing through his country, and if there
be any will himself restore what has been taken from him.
Sends the news of the Queen of Scots' surrender to the Lords.
At this present there is never a Warden in Scotland at whose
hand he can require justice. — Alnwick, 19 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2½.


June 19.

1317. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Captain Read's ensign bearer whom he sent into Scotland
with letters to the Queen is returned. He overtook her upon
[Page 255]
Sunday as she was marching towards the Lords, and left her
not all day. He saw all and confirms all Drury's advertisements. He finds great fault with the companies who left
her, being rather more in number than their enemies, and
seeing her so willing by battle to have it tried. The Duke
at first showed great courage, but towards the end not so,
which Drury gathers to be for that he saw in the most no
great desire to fight. The Duke took the sea from Dunbar,
it is thought to land in Fife. The Earl of Argyll and the
Hamiltons have no liking that the King should be crowned.
Upon Monday the Lords caused it to be proclaimed in
Edinburgh to forbid all frays upon pain of death. The same
procured by the fighting between one of the old soldiers of
the Queen and one of the new of the Lords, which ere it was
ended brought all the town into arms. Desires to know the
Queen's pleasure if any shall this way fly or desire succour.
—Berwick, 19 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


June 15.

1318. Intelligence from Scotland.




Names of the Lords who were present at Carberry Hill, and
also an account of the challenge to Bothwell.—15 June 1567.
P. 1. Enclosure.


June 19.

1319. The Earl of Morton to Sir William Drury.




Having occasion to send the bearer to Sir John Forster, he
desires his license and passport for post horses. Thinks it
more meet to let him understand the state of this country by
him than to write it.—Edinburgh, 19 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¼.


June 20.

1320. Sir John Forster to Cecil.




The Lords of Scotland have sent and requested him to
desire Cecil to be a means with the Queen to understand
whether it would please her to aid them according to their
petition.—Alnwick, 20 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.


June.

1321. Instruction to the Messenger sent by the Lords of Scotland to Sir John Forster.




1. First, the proclamation made by the Lords of their
intents.




2. Item, that the Queen having plainly said that she
would never agree to the punishment of Bothwell, they have
sent her to Lochleven until they may have justice against
him.




3. Item, they desire that the Queen of England should
aid them in case any strangers should assist Bothwell.




4. Item, that the Queen would assist them with 3,000l. or
4,000l. to hire soldiers. Bothwell has the Queen's whole
jewels.
Endd.: June 1567. Pp. 1¼. Enclosure.

[Page 256]



1322. Another copy.
Endd. P. 1. Enclosure.


June 20.

1323. Sir John Forster to the Earl of Bedford.




Sends the proclamation of the Lords of Scotland. They
desire him to be a means with the Queen for granting their
petition.—Alnwick, 20 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


June 20.

1324. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. The Lords have obtained their desire for having the
castle of Edinburgh. Gathers by John Read, a Scotchman
who has not least credit with the Earl of Morton, that the
Lords mind to remain in Edinburgh, and not attempt any
other enterprise until they hear how this that they have
already done be liked of the Queen, at whose devotion they
desire to be.




2. The Lords at their searching of the mint found but six
pounds weight of the font; all the rest as also the Queen's
jewels and plate the Duke caused to be brought to Dunbar.
The people of Edinburgh, who are wholly at the devotion of
the Lords, are marvellously bent against them that are apprehended for the murder. Blacater after he was taken escaped
hardly with his life by the women and boys with the
throwing of stones. The people cry for punishment without
respect of persons. The crowning of the Prince stays until
they may understand how the Queen of England likes of the
past.—Berwick, 20 June 1567. Signed.




3. P.S.—The Queen of Scots made a vow that she would
eat no flesh till she saw the Duke again, which till her coming
to Lochleven she kept. The cause why she took her journey
so late in the night was to avoid the crying out of the people
with many reproachful words, "burn her, burn her, she is
not worthy to live, kill her, drown her," with such like.
After her coming to the Lords in the field, the Earl of Athol's
company and the Laird of Tullibardine's and others of the
North parts with one voice cried "burn the whore," which
much amazed her and bred her tears.
Add. Endd. Pp. 3.


June 20.

1325. The Lords of the Secret Council of Scotland to
the Earl of Bedford.




Being assembled in Edinburgh for certain purposes, the
bearer will expone the matter to him at greater length than
they need to write.—Edinburgh, 20 June 1567. Signed by
Morton, Athol, and the other Confederate Lords, and also by
Lethington.
Add. Endd. P. ¼.


June 20.

1326. Kirkcaldy Of Grange to the Earl Of Bedford.




Has travailed with some of his acquaintance concerning the
Prince, but they dare not meddle therewith presently, for fear
[Page 257]
it shall open up a greater matter to their enemies, for the
Hamiltons begin to suspect that they will crown the Prince,
which he assures him was never yet spoken amongst them.
Seeing he is burdened with the affairs belonging to the fields,
he has left the handling of the others to the [Lords] and
Robert Melville.—Edinburgh, 20 June. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


June 20.

1327. Instructions for the Earl of Sussex.




1. He is to deliver his letters of credit to the Emperor and
to say that he is sent with the Order of the Garter and to
declare what the ceremonies are and afterwards to present
his commission. If they resort to the church in the afternoon
he may attend the Emperor at the same, but if it be in the
forenoon that which is called the private Mass he is without
offence to withdraw himself.




2. He is afterwards to declare the second cause of his
coming, which is for the marriage of the Archduke Charles,
and after going through the different negotiations is to say
that the Queen cannot allow the exercise of any other religion
in her realm but that established by law, but as there is a
general toleration therein used to divers subjects living otherwise quietly he will therein enjoy as much liberty as any
other.




3. The Archduke is to be content to employ his patrimony
in England upon himself and his train, and any service done
by him for the realm will be honourably considered.




4. The Archduke shall not be denied to have the like styles
and title that King Philip had, but shall not be crowned
King. He is to procure occasion that the Archduke may
come and to well consider his person and other qualities. He
is also to learn by secret persuasions whether he means resolutely to persist in the demand for the outward exercise of
the Roman religion, and may give his oath not to utter his
intention to any creature save the Queen or else to send some
trusty person with his mind, which she will keep as secretly
as he shall desire. In conversation with any of the Princes of
the Confession of Augsburg he is to let them know that she
intends to continue in the same confession. He may also
testify that her answer to the Emperor's demand for aid has
been such as the necessity of the time and not her disposition
has moved her to. He is to assure the poor Protestants of
Germany that she is not careless of the dangerous counsels
of those of Rome for their subjection. Is also to inform the
Emperor of her right to Calais.
Endd. and corrected by Cecil. Pp. 23¼.




1328. Copy of portion of the above corrected by Cecil.
Pp. 5½.

[Page 258]

June 21.

1329. M. De Croc to Charles IX.




Gives the names of the party who keep the Queen of Scots
in Lochleven Castle. Balfour, the Captain of Edinburgh Castle,
is a true traitor. They have all the artillery in this kingdom
except a little at Dunbar. The Duke of Orkney embarked
three days ago. Received a letter signed by eight or ten of
the Hamiltons and hopes to have another tomorrow from the
Earls of Argyll and Huntly. They say they are ready to
die to release the Queen from her captivity. They are the
strongest in the field, but the others have the Queen, the
Prince, horses, and artillery. They desire aid, by which he
thinks all is lost. Monsieur Villeroy has arrived at Berwick.
If the Lords refuse to let them see the Queen, he will go to
the Hamiltons, who are twelve leagues from hence.—Edinburgh, 21 June 1567.
Copy. Endd.: Deciphered 29 June. Fr. Pp. 1½.


June 21.

1330. Maitland of Lethington to Cecil.




1. The reverence and affection he has ever born to the Queen
of Scots stayed him so long in company with the Earl
Bothwell as his life has every day been in danger, besides the
hazard of his reputation in the sight of all men of honour.
At length finding the best part of the nobility resolved to
look narrowly to his doings and being by them required, he
joined them.




2. Begs that they may be comforted by the Queen of
England's support for the further execution of justice against
such as shall be found guilty of an abominable murder of one
who was of her own blood. A small sum of money for the
levying of harquebussiers would make a short end of that
enterprise.—Edinburgh, 21 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


June 21.

1331. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




Forwards letters from the North. Understands that lewd
reports breed him some obliquy for his absence from his
wardenry, wherein is thought to be made greater spoils than
he trusts there are. Such busy times as these will find a
number of fit instruments which cannot be kept from doing
hurt though man be never so careful. The Lords' good
success in Scotland he trusts may be a furtherance for his
discharge from the Borders.—Garendon, 21 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


June 21.

1332. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




The Earls of Huntly and Argyll and all the Hamiltons
mean to join their power against Morton and the Lords and
to release the Queen, with whom the Lord Herries will join.
If the Lord Herries shall be discharged of his office of Warden
[Page 259]
and another by the Lords be placed, he desires to know with
which he shall deal for the Marches. The Borders are yet
quiet, but is out of hope so to continue them, for that the
borderers are needful and so great causes offered for their
gain, as they think he does them wrong in not suffering
them to intermeddle therewith. — Carlisle, 21 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


June 21.

1333. The Queen to Sir John Forster.




Warrant authorising him to retain the fifty horsemen and
fifty footmen at Harbottle Castle for another month.
Draft, corrected by Cecil. P. ¾.


June 22.

1334. Advices from Antwerp.




News from Antwerp of 22 June 1567.
Endd. Ital. P. 1.


June 22.

1335. Second Reply of the Queen to the Emperor's Ambassadors.




The Queen fully acknowledges that the cause of asking
for the subsidy was fair and necessary. Has however been
informed of a secret design of the Pope and his Cardinals to
cause the Emperor and other great monachs of Christendom
to form a league to make war on the Protestants, amongst
whom she is designated as the head during this present summer.
Has directed that the particulars of this plan shall be shown
to them. Also there are large bodies of men where there
are no enemies to resist. If these hindrances were removed
she would contribute according to her condition against the
common enemy.
Endd. and corrected by Cecil. Lat. Pp. 5.


June 22.

1336. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




News from Rome, 14 June 1567, chiefly transactions in
the Papal Court. News from Vienna, 12 June.—Venice,
22 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. Pp. 2½.


June 23.

1337. The Queen to the Archduke Charles.




Thanks him for his letter sent by Thomas Dannet.
Draft in Cecil's writing. Endd. Lat. P. 1.


June 23.

1338. The Queen to Mary Queen of Scots.




1. Has understood by Melville concerning her estate, and
especially of as much as could be said for the allowance of
her marriage. To be plain with her, her grief has not been
small that in this so slender consideration has been had that
no good friend can like thereof; for how could a worse
choice be made for her honour than in great haste to marry
[Page 260]
such a subject, who besides other notorious lacks, public
fame charged with the murder of her late husband, besides
the touching of herself in some part. Besides neither by
God's law or man's can she be his lawful wife or any children
betwixt them legitimate. Is earnestly bent to procure due
punishment of the murder against any subject she has how
dear soever she holds him, and next to be careful how her
son the Prince may be preserved,




2. Now for her comfort assures her that whatsoever she
can imagine meet for her honour and safety that shall lie
in her power she will perform the same. Is determined to
send with all speed one of her trusty servants.—Richmond,
23 June 1567.
Rough draft in Cecil's writing. Endd. Pp. 2¾.
Printed by Froude, Vol. IX., p. 107.


June 23.

1339. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




Forwards a copy of the articles and the proclamation of the
Lords of Scotland. Has received certain ciphers out of
Scotland, which he has sent to Mr. Randolph to be deciphered,
and if there is any matter of weight to make him privy
thereto. Desires that another may be appointed in his room.
—Garendon, 23 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¼.


June 23.

1340. The Earl of Bedford to Cecil.




Sends letters which he has received from the Lords of
Scotland and the Laird of Grange. The effect of the bearer's
credit to him is that the Lords mean not nor at any time
did to crown the Prince, as he may see confirmed in Grange's
letter. The cause of his coming is to request Lady Lennox
to borrow money of the Queen for the furtherance of this
action. The punishment of the murder being had they mean
not to detain their Queen any longer, but are to be ordered
as the Queen of England shall appoint.—Dingley, 23 June
1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


June 23.

1341. Passport.




Passport for certain Frenchmen journeying towards France.
—Edinburgh, 23 June 1567. Signed: Morton, Errol, Glencairn,
and others.
Broadside.


June [24].

1342. Robert Melville to Cecil.




Prays him to move the Queen that some commissioners
may be appointed to make some end of the Master Marshall's
ransom. Has spoken to Master Bishop if he will go with
the Earl of Lennox into Scotland. He is one that may serve
to good purpose.—Tuesday, London. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ½.

[Page 261]

June 24.

1343. Occurrences in Scotland.




Surrender of the Queen of Scots and flight of Bothwell.
The Queen will not agree to have anything done whereby
Bothwell should be in any danger. Bothwell has joined with
the Hamiltons. 24th June Blacater was hanged for the
murder. Bothwell was present at the murder. Sundry others
confess that Bothwell was at the murder, with some other very
strange things. Some other noblemen were privy that the
King should be rid out of his life, but not of the manner.
Draft corrected by Cecil. P. 1.


June 24.

1344. The Count of Stolberg to Cecil.




His host John Dymock has asked him to intercede for him
and to obtain for him a delay for the payment of his debts.
—London, 24 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Lat. P. 1.


June 25.

1345. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. The Lords levy certain footmen and mind to draw
towards Dunbar to see if they can get the castle. James
Balfour has subscribed to the Lords and sits in council
amongst them. On the 23rd M. Villeroy went from here to
Edinburgh. The Hamiltons and that faction have twice
convened. James Balfour has delivered to the Lords out of
the castle three field pieces. Captain Blacater was yesterday
executed. The Duke is in the castle of the Bishop of
Murray. Complains that he occupies the chief place, having
less entertainment than other Marshals have had.—Berwick,
25 June 1567.




2. P.S.—Gives a list of letters sent by him to Cecil. The
Lords could be content that the Hamiltons' interest to the
crown of Scotland should go to the late King's brother. The
Queen has had a box wherein are the practises between her
and France, and in the same such matter as if it were known
to the Queen of England would increase little goodwill and
affection towards her. It is promised Drury to have his part
of it. There is no money here of the Queen's to answer
any event that may arise. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 3½.


June 26.

1346. Count John of Emden to Cecil.




Thanks him for the goodwill shown towards him, which he
desires he will continue.—Gretsyhl, 26 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Lat. P. 1.


June 26.

1347. The Queen to Maximilian II.




Has been asked by Count Rocandolf to write and desire
him to grant the said Count a safe-conduct in order that he
may come and answer the charges brought against him by
his enemies.—Richmond, 26 June 1567.
Draft. Endd. Lat. P. 1.

[Page 262]

June 26.

1348. David Robertson to Robert Melville.




Has made request for silver unto him; their answer is if
they get any that he takes his part, and prays him beware
that none come into the Earl of Lennox's hands. Melville
has done ill to declare himself so, and so openly in the Lords'
affairs, for somewhat has come to the knowledge of the French
Ambassador. — wants him to bring home a hackney.—
26 June 1567. Signed.
Partly in cipher. Endd. P. ½.




1349. The cipher in the above deciphered on a slip of paper.
P. ¼.


June 26.

1350. The Lords of the Secret Council of Scotland to
the Queen.




The heavy burden, slander, and ignominy which this whole
realm, but chiefly the nobility, sustained among all nations for
the horrible murder of the King without any manner of
punishment, at last constrained them to take arms for trying
the same by order of justice. Are glad to understand that
she has accepted their proceeding favourably, offering to
support them.—Edinburgh, 26 June 1567. Signed by Athole,
Morton, and the rest.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


June 27.

1351. Sir Thomas Gresham to Cecil.




Sends a letter from Clough and the note of certain moneys
which he has taken up.—Gresham House, 27 June 1567.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.


June 27.

1352. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




Accident by gunpowder in Carlisle Castle.—Carlisle,
27 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


June 27.

1353. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




The Duke of Orkney has returned again to Dunbar and
lay within these three nights at Ormiston's. Captain Blacater
would not confess that he was at the murdering of the King
or consenting thereunto. He was hanged, headed, his arms
and legs cut off. There is a man of the Duke's taken who
confess the Duke to be in person at the murder with seven in
his company. It is said that since his retreat by his consent
a French page whom he had who knew of his proceedings is
drowned. The Hamiltons have sent to the Duke of Chatelherault to return. The Lords and the ministers have
convened in Edinburgh and agreed that on the 20th of next
month all the Protestants shall assemble. The Duke says
that there were earls, barons, bishops, gentlemen, and burgesses acquainted with the death of the King.—Berwick,
27 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.

[Page 263]

June 28.

1354. Maitland of Lethington to Cecil.




Understands from Melville his acceptation of their quarrel
and of the gentle answer he has by his means received from
the Queen, whereof he most heartily thanks him. Upon the
good success hereof depends the lives and lands of all who
have taken the enterprise in hand. Desires him to credit
Melville.—Edinburgh, 28 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¾.


June 28.

1355. N. Stopio to —




News from Madrid, 31 May 1567; Turin, 12 June; Genoa,
13 June; Rome, 22 June; and Vienna, 19 June.—Venice,
28 June 1567. Signed.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 6.




1356. Copy of the above.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 3.


June 28.

1357. Robert Melville to Cecil.




Desires him to return a packet of letters sent by the Lords.
Their ambassador and the Earl of Lennox should be here
shortly, for he hears that the Hamiltons seem to do somewhat.
—Berwick, 28 June. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. ¼.


June 29.

1358. Bond of the Loyal Lords of Scotland.




Forasmuch as the Queen is detained in Lochleven in
captivity, they the subscribed promise to use all reasonable
means to put her to liberty upon such honest conditions as may
stand with her honour, the common weal of the realm, and
the security of the noblemen who presently have her in
keeping. If they refuse to put her to liberty before such
reasonable conditions, they engage to employ themselves and
friends, their bodies and lives for that purpose, and also to
concur to the punishment of the murder of the King and the
preservation of the person of the Prince. — Dumbarton,
penult day of June 1567. Signed by the Archbishop of
St. Andrew's, the Earls of Argyll and Huntly, and eight
others.
Copy. Endd. P. ¾.


June 29.

1359. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends news from Rome of 21 June 1567; and Vienna,
of the 20 June.—Venice, 29 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. P. 1.


June 29.

1360. Advices from Antwerp.




News from Antwerp of the 29 June 1567.
Endd. Ital. P. 1.


June 29.

1361. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. The Lords do their best to procure further interest in
the Castle, which by no means yet will be yielded unto them
[Page 264]
by the captain, who judges the possession of it his surety, for
he was consenting to the murder though not at it. He is the
man who after the death of David understood most of the
secrets and proceedings between France and the Queen, which
if they were known (as for the same he has laid a bait with
a golden hook) there will appear hard dealing of some against
the Queen of England and her country. They are kept in a
box, part in cipher deciphered. The Hamiltons make themselves as strong as they can by allowing of friends. The
hope that the Queen had in the coming of Arbroath with
the rest out of the March was the cause why she left Dunbar
and took the field.




2. Lethington stands the Lords in great stead, and seems
very careful to have the Queen of England contented with
their proceedings, and has to utter either to her or to Cecil
such matter as may concern the weal of both realms.




3. His extremity was great at his departure, for the Duke
was minded to have had him slain. All the great towns of
Scotland are at the devotion of the Lords. The Hamiltons
can in no way digest that the Prince should be at the
devotion of England. There is a want of all things needful
save corn and flesh. The garrison is as able a company as
any Prince has. Sends painted and printed stuff.—Berwick,
29 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 3.


June.

1362. Munition at Wark.




Rowland Forster's certificate of the number of the artillery
and remembrance of the lack of munitions at Wark.
Endd. P. 1.


June 30.

1363. The Queen to Mary Queen of Scots.




Sends the bearer Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to understand
truly her state and thereupon to impart her meaning at more
length than she could to Melville, who although he used much
earnest speech to move her to think well and allow of her
doings, yet such is the general report of her to the contrary
that she could not be by him satisfied. — Richmond, last of
June 1567.
Draft in Cecil's writing. Endd. P. 1.


June 30.

1364. Instructions for Sir Nicholas Throckmorton sent
to the Queen of Scots.




1. Is to declare how she has been troubled such evil
accidents as of late have happened to her, wherein her fame
and honour have been in all parts of Christendom much
impaired and decayed, especially that on the death of her
husband nothing effectual was done for the search of the
malefactors, and also her favouring Bothwell and his associates,
and rashly taking such a defamed person to her husband.
In all which she has felt her sorrows mixed with displeasure
[Page 265]
to her in such sort as she thought never more to have dealt
with her by way of advice, taking her by her acts to be a
person desperate to recover her honour, as other Princes her
near kinsmen were of like judgment. Nevertheless finding
that she is restrained by her nobility and subjects from her
liberty, her stomach was so provoked that she has changed her
former intention of forbearing to deal in her causes, first to
an inward commiseration of her for this last calamity; and
next to a determination to aid her by all possible means for
the recovering of her liberty.




2. He is to say that he is sent to understand her state
and the whole manner the same has happened; and to declare
unto her wherewith her nobility and subjects charge her,
to the end her subjects may be corrected for things unduly
laid to her charge, and in other things wherein her fault and
oversight cannot be avoided, the dealing therein may be with
policy so used as her honour may be stayed from utter ruin.
He shall say that he has commission to reprove her subjects
with this their restraining of her, and to procure her liberty
or to assure them that she shall not lack her aid to compel
them thereto. He is to move ner to use wisdom and not
passion in this her adversity, and to pardon such things as
by rigour of law she may extend against her subjects, and
to yield to them such requests as may seem convenient
for the security of their lives and lands living hereafter
obediently.




3. He must remember to her that she has determined on
these three heads, first, to recover her to liberty; next to
procure a due punishment of the murder of her husband;
and the third to have the Prince preserved from danger.




4. Wishes that the Prince might be brought into England
to be in the custody of his grandmother.
Draft, with corrections by Cecil. Endd. Pp. 6.
Printed in Keith, II., p. 667.


June 30.

1365. The Queen to the Lords of the Secret Council of
Scotland.




Sends Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to declare certain things
to them and to the Queen of Scots, and desires that they will
suffer him to resort to her for that end.
Draft. Endd. P. 1.




1366. Another copy, dated Richmond, ulto. Junii 1567.
Endd. P. ¾.


June 30.

1367. Instructions for Throckmorton sent to the Lords of
Scotland.




1. Is to require them to allow him to resort to the Queen.
Is to assure them that there is no reasonable demand that
can be made by them to further the prosecution of the
murderers of the King and the preservation of the Prince but
she will further the same.

[Page 266]



2. Is to declare what she thinks of the Queen's imprisonment, and how incredible she took it at first. Means not to
allow such faults as are imputed to her, but has given him
charge to reprove her in her name for the same.




3. He shall also with some other such as he shall choose
point out the perils which may fall to them by putting themselves and the realm into the governance of France.
Draft, corrected by Cecil. Endd. Pp. 4¼.
Printed in Keith, Vol. II., p. 671.


June 30.

1368. Proclamation against the Earl of Bothwell.




Recapitulates all his offences and makes exception to his
former trial and acquittal.—Edinburgh, 30 June.
Endd. Broadside.


June 30.

1369. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




1. Is prosecuting the Count Rocandolf's business with the
King and the Queen Mother. On the 24th there was a fray
betwixt English and French gentlemen. Mr. Clinton, who
was in the company, is so prosecuted that he is forced to bring
him to his house, and wishes that his father would send for
him speedily. What the Duke of Alva's attempt will be is
not yet known.




2. Sends a chart of Paris.—Paris, 30 June 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


[June.]

1370. Arrest of Robert Percival.




A relation of the circumstances of his arrest by the captain
of the castle at Dieppe in my last part, and the taking away
of his letters and detention for six days.
Endd. Fr. Pp. 1½. Enclosure.




1371. Translation of the above.
Endd. Pp. 1¼.


[June.]

1372. Count Rocandolf.




Denies the crimes of which he is accused and desires Cecil
to direct Sir Henry Norris to request a safe-conduct from the
French King for forty days in order that he may return and
justify himself.
Endd. Fr. Pp. 1½. Enclosure.


June 30.

1373. The Earl of Sussex to Cecil.




Embarked at Dover on the 29th, and was by contrary
winds forced the same night to land at Calais. Departed
early the next morning and saw the new fortifications and
200 labourers working at one place. If they finish as they
begin Calais without the walls will be stronger than the town
was before. Saw at Gravelines the like fortifications in hand.
—Dunkirk, 30 June. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1½.

[Page 267]

[June.]

1374. Reply to Sir Henry Norris.




As it is a question of justice the King cannot extend the
time that the Count Rocandolf asks for in order to clear
himself. As to what Stafford pretends to be owing to him,
as it is a gift, it must be put off till such time as the King
has more finances. The King will do all he can to please the
Queen of England in the matter of the English prisoners in
the galleys. L'Estrille's promise to pay a ransom of 5,000
crowns was extorted from him by torture, and he is not worth
the sixth part of that sum; nevertheless he shall be searched
for and sent over.
Endd. Fr. Pp. 1½.




1375. Another copy of the above.
Endd. Fr. P. 1.


June and July.

1376. Advices.




News from Turin of the 26th June of the march of the Duke
of Alva's army towards the Low Countries. From Rome
5th July of affairs in the Papal Court, and other parts of Italy.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 3¼.


June and July.

1377. Advices.




News of the same dates and about the same subjects as
the above.
Ital. Pp. 4.







      

  


  

  
    
      PreviousTable of contentsNext
  


      
      

    

  

  
      
      
        
              
  
    
      
            
      
  

    
                      
    Footer menu
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Help
              
          
        About the project
              
          
        Terms of use
              
          
        Privacy and Cookies
              
          
        Accessibility
              
        
  


  


  
    
      
            Version 6.0. © 2024, University of London
      
  


        
      
    
  

  









