


  








    Elizabeth: March 1568 | British History Online
    


      




    
    
    
    
    



  Skip to main content



  
    





  
    
          
  
    
  
      
      BHO | British History Online
    
      
  


    
                      
    Main navigation
    
  
  
        

  
    
      
    
    
                    
              
                  Browse Catalogue
                      
          
                  Subject guides
                      
          
                  Using BHO
                      
          
                  About
                      
          
                  Subscribe
                      
          
                  News
                      
        
  
    
  


  


    
                      
    Login
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Login
              
          
        Register
              
        
  


  



    
  

  
  

  

  

  

  

    

      
      
      
            
  
    
        ';" aria-label="breadcrumb">
    Breadcrumb
    
          
                  Home
              
          
                  Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth
              
        
  

  


  
    
      
  Elizabeth: March 1568



  

  
    
      

  
    Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. 

    
    Originally published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London, 1871.

    
  

    This free content was digitised by double rekeying. All rights reserved. 
    

  
    
      Citation:
        
          BHO
          Chicago
          MLA		
        
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: March 1568', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568, ed.  Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp421-437 [accessed 21 September 2026].
    
    
      
'Elizabeth: March 1568', in Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Edited by   Allan James Crosby (London,  1871), British History Online,  accessed September 21, 2026,
 https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp421-437.
    
    
      
"Elizabeth: March 1568". Calendar of State Papers Foreign: Elizabeth, Volume 8, 1566-1568. Ed.  Allan James Crosby (London, 1871), British History Online. Web. 21 September 2026. https://www.british-history.ac.uk/cal-state-papers/foreign/vol8/pp421-437.
    
  
  
    
  

  
    
      
        
          
            
          
        
        
          
            This volume has gold page scans.Access these scans with a gold subscription. 
          
        
      
    

  

            
        Keyword Highlight
        
        Search
        
      
     
    
            
  



March 1568




March.

2037. Advices.




News from Vienna of 18 March; Rome 20th; and Mantua
21st.
Ital. Pp. 4.


March.

2038. The Regent Murray to Cecil.




Has sent a herald to the King of Denmark, requiring that
Bothwell may be sent into Scotland, but cannot get the same
condescended to unless the Queen of England sends her letter
to the King therefor. Prays him to extend this goodwill
thereto, and that she may require the Ambassadors of France
and Spain to procure their sovereigns' like letters to be sent
into Denmark.—Edinburgh, March 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.


March 1.

2039. Lord Scrope to Cecil.




Has kept no day of March these twenty weeks. Being
moved for redress of certain special bills, he wrote to Lord
Herries to advertise him whether as yet the Regent Murray
[Page 422]
was resolved of any to that wardenry or not, who has
answered that notwithstanding he by his letters to the
Regent has discharged himself, he can [not] receive from him
any direct answer. Desires him to be a means with the Queen
to address her special letters to Murray in this behalf.—Carlisle,
1 March 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1¼.


March 1.Sir Henry Norris to the Queen.

2040. Sir Henry Norris to the Queen.




1. All the Prince's forces except those in Picardy are now
joined together. On the 24th February letters were brought
from the Prince to their Majesties here, wherein he greatly
lamented the calamity and division this realm was fallen into
by reason of this war, instantly desiring the speedy remedy;
he and the rest not demanding aught else than the surety of
their lives and goods, with permission to live according to
the liberty of their consciences, protesting that which they
have done was constrained by such as meant to have sought
their lives, and therewith utterly to exterminate the gospel
and the professors of the same. Lastly, in most humble wise
they request at the King's hands confirmation of that which
was meant to have been taken away, and that it would please
the King to send some noble personages to treat thereof. The
Cardinal of Bourbon being present, said to the Queen Mother
that seeing how desirous they were of peace if it were not
accepted he must needs put great fault in her, as well for the
present let as for that which is passed. On the next day was
Courbault returned again with the King's letters to the
Prince of Condé. The Prince from the beginning of these
troubles demands that all the articles, agreements, and capitulations as shall be agreed between them may be confirmed by
all the Courts of Parliament throughout the realm as good and
lawful. Those for the King reply that it should suffice the
Prince, being a subject, to "affie" only upon the King's
promise, without requiring towns or aught else for his assurance, and upon this aforesaid promise he should by all means
possible assure the King never to take arms again; neither
thinking it meet to grant the Prince the perpetuation of the
Edict of January, nor yet the liberty of preaching, communicating, or calling synods or assemblies together, affirming that
if they have still their liberties they may at all times gather
together in arms in more readiness than the King, by reason
of the secret intelligence they have one with another. Insomuch as this liberty remaining the King shall never be
assured in his realm, the gatherings of money still continuing,
and the practising with princes strangers never ceasing. All
which are in no case to be granted, being better rather by
this war to determine the matter than longer to live in
suspense and doubt of another third war thrice worse than
the two former, by reason of the allies and associates whom
the Prince of Condé will draw unto him, in constraining the
[Page 423]
King to agree to a peace which will be greatly to his advantage, and nothing to the King's honour.




The King sent the 28th February towards the Prince the
Marshal Montmorency, Monsr. Morvilliers, the Bishop of
Limoges, and D'Alluy, one of his secretaries, who were appointed to meet the commissioners for the Prince, the Cardinal Chatillon, the Bishop of Arles, the Sires De Tergne and
Teligny at Long-jumeau. If these differences be agreed
upon it will be for some respects some time concealed. The
greatest hope they conceive here is of the persons who are
travaillers in these affairs, who have a very large commission
granted to them, besides the unsupportable charges of these
wars, and the accident of Spain, which does not a little
astonish this Court.




3. The Queen walking the other day in her garden discoursing of the peace with divers noblemen and counsellors,
called unto her Messire Nonio, an Italian entertained here
for his knowledge in astrology, of whom she asked, what he
found by the stars touching this peace; whereunto he
answered, that the heavens did not promise it, nor the
earth was not yet ready to receive it; forasmuch as the
effect of the eclipse of the sun is now in its greatest force,
and likewise the virtue of the conjunction of Saturn and
Mars which was in Aries last year; with some other reasons,
but concluded that the heavens did not constrain the inferior
powers, but only disposed them.




4. The Queen Mother grows in great mistrust of the
Parisians, insomuch as she has not only augmented her guard,
but caused the inner gates at the Court to be made with
drawbridges. There are come to Meaux 1,200 reiters, levied
in Luxembourg and Lorraine for the King, having in their
coming spoiled priests and plucked down images, and done
many injuries to the people in their passing through the
country. John George the Palatine, the King's pensioner,
has refused to serve against the religion.




5. The King Catholic has commanded to shut his son in a
much stronger prison than he was at first. It is said that he
is charged with the commotion in Flanders, having secret
intelligence with the Counts Egmont and Horn, and the other
authors of this tumult.—Paris, 1 March 1568. Signed.




5. P. S.—The Prince demands a frontier town, as Boulogne
or Rochelle, for their assurance, which is thought will be the
occasion that these matters shall grow to no pacification.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 6.


March 1.

2041. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




Complains that there are many "ante ambassadors" [sic]
of his countrymen about Dieppe and Rouen, who are glad
if they may deface his doings. The reiters levied for the
King dismember priests finding them at their Mass, and burn
and break images, and the best and most of value they take
[Page 424]
prisoners, which causes them to be in such mislike with the
Parisians that as rather they had the Prince of Condé's people
should approach Paris as they.—Paris, 1 March. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.


March 2.

2042. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. Regarding the abatement of the posts wages he minds
not to charge them above once in sixteen days, except great
and very urgent cause be ministered to the contrary. Sends
a scheme of small money for the relief of the poor, and the
avoiding the receipt of so much base coin of Scotland. The
silver that the Scots get from England they carry to their
mint, and there for every five shillings gain they six. It is
secretly bruited that the Bishop of St. Andrew's has conveyed
himself into Dumbarton.—Berwick, 2 March 1567. Signed.




2. P.S.—Lesley has been apprehended and conveyed to
Home Castle, finding with many letters, they say twenty or
twenty-four packets.
Add. Endd. Pp. 3.


March 2.

2043. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




So much of Cecil's letter as concerned his good disposition towards the Earl of Murray and his government he
sent Scudamore to impart to him, for which he expresses
his thanks and goodwill in return. Understands that six
persons are confederated for the keeping of Dumbarton.—
Berwick, 2 March 1567. Signed: W. D.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


March 2.

2044. Sigismond II. to the Queen.




Where she complains of those of Dantzic, he assures her
they are not to blame, as he has himself interdicted all commerce with his enemy of Muscovy, and placed vessels to seize
all ships doing so, which he has commanded to be impounded
together with their cargoes.—Crusini [Kruswik], 3 March
1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Lat. Pp. 2½.


March 4.

2045. [The Prince of Orange] to—.




Complains of the bad return he has received for his services,
and also that at present the most innocent may be rendered
suspected and odious, by merely being reputed as heretics,
whereby they are liable to be accused of rebellion and sedition. Denies the right of the Duke of Alva to be judge in
his case, and claims the privileges of the Order. Offers to
clear himself before the Emperor and the Electors.—
Dillembourg, 4 March 1568.
Copy. Endd. Fr. Pp. 4.


March 4.

2046. The Regent Murray to Drury.




Has received his letter and report touching the difficulties
of the affairs of the Borders, for amendment of which he has
[Page 425]
spared no travail. Minds shortly to visit the bounds of the
West Marches, which being settled and brought to conformity
he has good hope to bring the order in practise over all.—
Edinburgh, 4 March 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


March 4.

2047. Peace of Longjumeau.




Articles delivered on 4th March 1568 by the Commissioners
of the Prince of Condé for the purpose of treating about the
pacification, to which they require the King's express answer;
for providing more commodious places for preaching, the
better observance of the Edict by the King officers, the keeping of schools, and other matters.
Side notes signifying the King's acceptance of most of the
articles.
Endd.: Approbatur Edm. London. Fr. Pp. 3.


March [4].

2048. Peace of Longjumeau.




Requests of the Commissioners of the Prince of Condé and
his party to the King for the better observance of the Edict
of Pacification of March 7, 1562, more especially in Provence,
to which the King gives his assent.
Endd. Fr. Pp. 9.


March 6.

2049. Advices.




1. From Rome, 6 March 1868. Contributions of men and
money by different Italian Princes for the suppression of
heresy. Depredations by the Turks. Heretics sent to Rome.
Arrest of the Prince of Spain.




2. From Vienna, 4 March. Marriage at the Court. Movements of the Turk.
Endd. Ital. Pp. 4½.


March 6.

2050. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. Sends herewith a book of the pensioners at Berwick.
The Earl of Murray and the Council of Scotland have
straightly enjoined the Laird of Cessford plainly and sincerely
to proceed to the amending of wrongs on the Borders, whereupon is appointed a meeting to be holden on the 16th inst.,
whereat all matters now in controversy shall be satisfactorily
finished.




2. The Earl of Murray this day has gone to visit the Queen
to give her some comfort. Understands that Mr. Lesley
though he was found with many letters, yet they did not
purport any great consequence, further than that it appeared
he had been very well treated at the Court of France and
dealt in matters of weight. If there is anything yet lying
covert which he brought, they purpose to use him with some
extremity till the same be by him confessed.—Berwick, 6 March
1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.

[Page 426]

March 6.

2051. Pensioners at Berwick.




List of the pensioners at Berwick. Total present and absent,
fifty-seven.
Very much injured by the damp. Endd. Pp. 12. Enclosure.


March 6.

2052. Letters sent to Cecil.




A list of letters sent by post by Drury to Cecil from Oct.
27, 1567, till March 6, 1568.
Endd. Pp. 1½. Enclosure.


March 8.

2053. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. Forwards letters from Murray. Writes in behalf of a
couple of the pensioners that they may not be discharged
or sent into Ireland, as they hold offices in the garrison of
Berwick.—Berwick, 8 March 1567. Signed.




2. P.S.—There is by proclamation in Edinburgh a straight
charge upon confiscation of his or their goods that shall during
this Lent season eat any flesh without the especial licence of
the Earl of Murray.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


March 9.

2054. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




Thinks that peace is concluded, though to put their soldiers
in hope of war they outwardly manifest some appearance of hostility, besides there has been some prisoners who have been of
long time in durance executed, as is thought to the same end.
Upon M. Montmorency's first return from the treaty holden
at Longjumeau the King despatched four gentlemen, viz., to
the Pope, the Emperor, the King Catholic, and the Swiss.
They keep their determination secret till the soldiers are out
of the town. There is some stay for the payment of the
reiters the sum of 800,000 francs, the King has accorded to
give in ready money 500,000, and the Cardinal of Bourbon
and the Dukes Montmorency and Longueville are caution for
the rest. Thinks if peace be concluded some attempt will be
[made] into Scotland for the delivery of the Queen. The King
has sent his letters to Marseilles for the delivery of the poor
men in the galleys there.—Paris, 9 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 2.


March.

2055. Treaty of Longjumeau.




The Commissioners of the Prince of Condé beg that the
King will define more fully certain articles relating to the free
exercise of the reformed religion.
Fr. Pp. 1½. Enclosure.


March 9.

2056. Sir Henry Norris to the Earl of Leicester.




Gives his reasons for judging that this peace is already
made. L'Aubespine has said that Montagina has returned
into England. If peace be concluded this great number of
strangers now here will rather desire this summer to be
[Page 427]
entertained than to return to live idly at home; which
considered the Cardinal of Lorraine said lately that he
wished peace, whereby these strangers hired might rid the
Queen of Scots out of thraldom.—Paris, 9 March 1568.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.


March 10.

2057. The Captain of Rochelle to the Queen.




Having been appointed captain of this town by the Prince
of Condé he has cut to pieces a number of the enemy who
have taken the field; the remainder having taken refuge in
certain towns he intends to besiege them. Desires that she
will give his agents license to purchase saltpetre and other
necessaries for carrying on war. Signed.
Add. Endd. by Cecil: 10 March 1567. Fr. Pp. 1½.


March 11.

2058. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




The peace is still dissimuled, partly because they think it
perilous upon a sudden to dismiss their armies, and again
they think it not convenient to unarm till the reiters were
departed the realm. Upon the return of Monsr. Montmorency
Courbault was despatched to the Prince to the concluding of
the peace, being then some articles that were "sticked" upon,
whereat the Cardinal of Lorraine did marvellously storm
that the King would condescend to any peace with his
subjects; the King said that he should agree thereto "maugre
luy." Whilst this peace is treated the reiters cease not to
spoil the country and cruelly handle the "poverty," who being
everywhere environed both with their own or foreign enemies
dare not approach town or village, all being replenished with
reiters, or those who entreat them as ill, whereby they
miserably die in the fields. Young Mr. Poyntz having had a
quartian and in the night going to the rampart, took such
a cold as shortly afterwards he died.—Paris, 11 March 1568.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 2.


March 11.

2059. Sir Henry Norris to the Earl of Pembroke.




To the same effect as his letter to Cecil of the same date.
Rough draft. Endd. Pp. 2.


March 11.

2060. Sir Henry Norris to the Earl of Leicester.




The same as his letter to Cecil of this date.—Paris,
11 March 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 2.




2061. Draft of the above.
Endd. Pp. 3.


March 12.

2062. Captain Cockburn to Cecil.




1. On the 6th inst. twenty-five Scots men-at-arms of the
King's guard, who had served with the Prince, were broken,
and the Bishop of Glasgow has put all Papists in their places.

[Page 428]



2. Report of the King of Spain's death, and that the Lords
had rebelled against him.—Dieppe, 12 March.
Add. Endd., with a request to forward the letter to the
Regent Murray. P. 1.


March 12.

2063. Treaty of Longjumeau.




News of the pacification of France by the treaty of Longjumeau.
Endd.: To Mr. Man, Ambassador in Spain, the 12th March
1568. P. 1.


March 13.

2064. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




1. By Cecil's letter he understands of some report of the
discords between him and Cessford penned to his disadvantage. When, after two meetings, he saw no promise of redress
performed, but rather delays and shifting answers, he complained to the Earl of Murray, and he promised that he should
have better justice, to which end at the next meeting he
would send an express man, as well to hear what was in his
part demanded, as to move Cessford to do justice according
to duty; whereat Cessford and other maintainers of wrong
were much displeased, and thereupon either to beard him, or
to have attempted some violence upon his body, assembled by
secret warning as many as were able to use any weapon.
Drury having some intelligence to look to himself, did not go
slenderly accompanied. To be short, they seemed to rest
upon these plain terms if he would yield to thus much wrong,
that all outrages done before his time might be forgotten, and
no more called upon, he should for anything done in his time
be answered as much as could be justly demanded. At which
unhonest condition some of their own consciences were moved
and the man sent by the Regent was sorry to see the corrupt
dealing of his own side, and said that Drury required nothing
but reason and preferment of justice. As they thus communed
in vain, one Ralph Grey, a gentleman of the country, having
sworn a bill, the party charged being one Pringle a Scot.
threatened and reproached openly amongst the whole assembly
the deponent contrary to the law and truce. The English
gentleman complaining, Drury required that Pringle might
be delivered up to receive the punishment provided in that
behalf, which was denied him. Drury thereupon refused
further talk, and protested that he was once more minded to
signify their remissness therein to the authority, and so brake
off all his people, standing in strong and good order, with
great advantage of the ground. Had he not had an earnest
care to conserve the good amity of both the realms, he could
that day sore to their smart have left testimony upon them
that they overweened their strength. As to the report of
"competency" (competition) of both sides who should bring
most men into the field, he protests he did it not.




2. Complained by Mr. Selby to Murray, whereupon the
Laird of Cessford was sent for, and at Edinburgh, before the
[Page 429]
Earl and Council, Drury's demands were heard at good length,
and in effect wholly agreed unto, whereof some part shall appear
by the copy sent herewith. Has advertisement that Cessford
has apprehended four or five who shall be delivered to him.
Complains of the reports of his ill-wishers and defends his
doings.—Berwick, 13 March 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 4.


March 2.

2065. The Regent of Scotland's Answer to Drury's complaints.




The wardens on both sides are to meet on the 16th at
Ridingburn, where the English and Scotch bills shall be
delivered, and a meeting thereafter appointed for making delivery on both sides. Promises that "Jock of the long brand"
and other evil doers shall be punished.—Edinburgh, 2 March.
Copy. Enclosed in Drury's of the 13th. Pp. 1½.


March 14.

2066. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends news from Rome of the 6th of March, and from
Vienna of the 4th.—Venice, 14 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. Pp. 2¼.


March 15.

2067. Peace of Longjumeau.




Articles putting the Edict of Pacification of 8th March
1562 again in force, and arranging for the withdrawal of
foreigners from the kingdom. Also the Duke De Montmorency's commission empowering him to treat with the Prince's
party.—Paris, 15 March. Signed.
Copy. Endd. Fr. Pp. 6½.


March 15.

2068. Lord Scrope to Regent Murray.




For the space of half a year has been a continual craver
for redress to the Queen's subjects under his rule at Lord
Herries' hands, and can get none by reason that he wants
commission to deal therein. Requires him in the Queen's
name speedily to place some one in authority on that Border.
Which not being met withal, and that out of hand, he does
not see how the frontiers can be kept from utter confusion.—
Carlisle, 15 March 1567.
Copy. P. 1.


March 15.

2069. The Answer of Robert Edmunds, alias Edmund
Roberts, to Adolph Zenck.




Denies that he ever entered into any such agreement for
casting steel as Adolp Zenck falsely asserts. His agent promised him half of a piece of English cloth if he would send
over two men skilled in mining, which has been given to him.
Complains of the conduct of the men who were sent over.
Signed.
Endd. Lat. Pp. 3.

[Page 430]

March 16.

2070. Ludovicus Regius to Cecil.




Has translated the works of Plato and Aristotle concerning
government from Greek into French, which he forwards to
him, and begs him to present to the Queen.—Paris, 16 March
1568. Signed.
Add. Endd.: Sir Henry Norris's armorial seal. Lat.
Pp. 2½.


March 17.

2071. Captain Cockburn to Cecil.




Has not been at the Court for a long time. Desires him to
cause the other letter, after he has read it, to be closed and
sent with speed to the Regent of Scotland.—Dieppe, 17 March.
Signed: George Bymont.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


March 18.

2072. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




According to appointment he met the Laird of Cessford
yesterday. Cessford declared the causes of the breach of
their promises, and seemed right sorry of the chance. The
substance of that which he should then perform was the
delivery of six bills filed and sworn, whereof his offer was
that presently he could make delivery of four which were
of least value; the other two he could not that day by no
means answer, inasmuch as the Laird of Ferniehurst was not
there, by reason whereof he could not have the men conveniently apprehended, for Cessford and he were but newly
reconciled friends, and the offenders were Ferniehurst's servants. Whereunto Drury assented in sort that he that day
accepted no offer of bills. They will meet again on the 28th.
—Berwick, 18 March 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 2.


March 19.

2073. Frederick II. to the Queen.




Complains that one of her subjects, who was taken at
Elsburg and afterwards liberated on parole, has joined with
his enemies of Sweden, and is now in England preparing
vessels for them. Also that another of her subjects is doing
the same. Desires that they may be stopped.—Fredericsborg,
19 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Lat. Pp. 6.


March 19.

2074. Philip II. to the Queen.




Requests license for certain of his subjects to export corn
on account of the scarcity on his sea coasts.—Madrid,
19 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Lat. Broadside.


March 19.

2075. Captain Cockburn to Cecil.




It is called truce to the 25th, and in the meantime the
strangers to be sent all away, and then the peace to be proclaimed. Sends another bill for him to read and send through to
the Regent.—Dieppe, 19 March 1568. Signed: George Bymond.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.

[Page 431]

March 20.

2076. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




It seems that the Earl of Murray waxes weary of his office
of Regency. Wherein truly to execute the same, he can by
no means please all, such is the presumption of their nature,
that having a friend in authority to pleasure them they think
he ought not to make any scruple of conscience. Therefore,
he has the rather yielded to such a request of the Queen's, or
device of himself as breeds great comfort unto her Grace,
and yet furtherence and countenance to the Earl's side, viz.,
a husband for the Queen, the young Lord Meffeyne, a gentleman of twenty or twenty-one years of age, being a Stewart.
It is holden very secret, and about Easter it is thought that
it will be more apparent, and her Grace so set at liberty as
the Earl, by further confirmation, shall still use the office he
does till the King comes of age. Some affirm that the Earl
of Morton sought the matching with the Queen, whereunto
she could no way like. James Macgill is much countenanced
by him, which has caused great coldness in Lethington's service.—Berwick, 20 March 1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


March 20.

2077. Sir Walter Kerr of Cessford to Drury.




Has not apprehended such as are expedient to enter for the
bills, and therefore postpones their meeting till 13th April.—
Jedburgh, 20 March 1567. Signed.
Orig. Add. Endd. P. 1.


March 20.

2078. Mr. Brigantine to Cecil.




Desires him to help him to attain some diets, whereby in
advertisements or some other kind of service he might requite the Queen. The Emperor has sent a herald into France
as well to the Prince as to the King, that all Germans should
retire into their countries upon pain of his indignation. The
Turks are strong on the Borders. The Emperor's soldiers
are daily cassed.—Vienna, 20 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.


March 20.

2079. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends news from Rome of the 13th March 1568.—Venice,
20 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. Pp. 2¼.


March 21.

2080. Sir Henry Norris to the Queen.




1. Had audience on the 19th inst., where he declared to the
King and the Queen Mother the Queen's good intent and
meaning, which they thankfully accepted. He also told them
that her meaning was to send some special person of trust to
communicate with the King her opinion, counsel, and advice
in these matters, and to use such honourable means as were
not unmeet to recover universally the due obedience of his
[Page 432]
subjects unto him. The Queen Mother answered that the King
was greatly beholden to her, but that as now the peace stood
in such good terms, Her Majesty should not need to send any
to take such travail upon him. Thought it not meet to
mention anything of the latter part of her letter touching the
indifference of the parties, seeing none here doubt of the
equity in matters of religion of those who are gone to Longjumeau, so as no favourer of religion could have wished fitter
personages.




2. Gives an account of the movements of both armies since
the 2nd inst., and also the siege of Chartres by the Prince,
and of the surcease of war on both sides. The Count Palatine
has arrested passing down the Rhine two boats laden with
velvets, and found hidden therein 200,000 crowns. He has
restored the wares to certain Genoese, to whom they belong,
but holds the money as good prize.—Paris, 21 March 1568.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Injured by damp. Pp. 5.


March 21.

2081. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




At his audience the Queen Mother told him that there was
none it stood nearer to than his mistress that the disobedience
of the subject might be punished. She also asked him what
he thought of them who came to Meaux to take the King;
whereunto he answered that he was very glad if it was true
that they had well satisfied her in that behalf. Desires Cecil
to be his friend in the matter of his estate in Lord Dacre's
lands.—Paris, 21 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1½.


March 21.

2082. Advertisements out of France.




Abstract of intelligence contained in Norris's letter to the
Queen of 21st March.
Endd. Pp. 2.


March.

2083. Advertisements from France.




Albeit they generally hold opinion here that the peace
will be concluded, yet is no commodity omitted to gain one
upon the other. The Admiral's army is "volant," having
little baggage, which is charged upon mules and horses of
carriage. His whole army is horsemen, having mounted 3,000
harquebusiers.
P.1.


March 23.

2084. Instructions for Mr. Man.




Directs him to deliver certain letters to the King of Spain
touching eight English ships which have been for three
years stayed there. He is to do all he can for their
recovery.
Draft. Imperfect. Endd.: 23 March 1568. P.1.

[Page 433]

March 23.

2085. Letters Patent of Charles IX.




Forbids all notaries and others to receive any contracts for
annuities or mortgages before the sum of 1,400,000 livres
tournois has been raised for the payment of the foreign
soldiers. — Paris, 23 March 1568; published 27 March.
Signed by the King.
Pamphlet printed by Robert Etienne. Fr. Pp. 7.


March 25.

2086. Charges for Berwick.




A note of extraordinary monies disbursed by Sir William
Drury between October 27, 1567, and March 25, 1568, for
sending messages to different places, and also probably for
espial money; total, 51l. 18s. 8d. Signed by Drury.
Endd. P. 1.


March 26.

2087. Dr. Man to Cecil.




The Prince remains still in very strait case. It is supposed the King will put the matter into the determination
of his law. Finds great difficulty in speaking to the King;
the touching of this matter of liberty in religion for his
household is so odious unto him.—Madrid, 26 March 1568.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. P. 1.


March 27.

2088. Pietro Bizarri to Cecil.




Sends news current at Rome on the 20th March 1568.—
Venice, 27 March 1568. Signed.
Orig. Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. P. 1.


March 27.

2089. Advices.




News from Rome dated the 27th March 1568. Also from
Vienna of the 25th March.
Ital. Pp. 3½.




2090. Another copy of the same news, differently worded.
Endd. Pp. 2.


March 27.

2091. Stopio to Cecil.




News of an intended truce between the Emperor and the
Turk.—Venice, 27 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Ital. P. 1.


March 27.

2092. Peace of Longjumeau.




Proclamation by Charles IX. confirming the privileges
of the Edict of 19th March 1562 to those of the reformed
religion.—Given at Paris, 23 March, and published 27 March
1568.
Copy. Fr. Pp. 5½.


March 28.

2093. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




1. On the 22nd M. Montmorency came from the treaty
holden at Longjumeau to Paris, where he found the King, the
[Page 434]
Queen, and the Cardinals of Bourbon, Lorraine, and Guise at
La Rue de la Harpe, and coming out of a house where they
made some collation, each carried a rod at the end whereof was a
hand gilt, which is said to be an old token of peace. By this
it was thought that they would understand how the Parisians
would like or mislike with peace.




2. There is great diligence used for collecting money to rid
the unruly reiters out of the realm. The sum they account
upon is 1,440,000 francs.




3. On the 26th came Combault with the articles of peace
signed by the Prince and the nobility, on which day did
the King sign the same. On the 27th one Poblacius being
of the religion sent him word that it is agreed upon that
M. D'Aumale shall gather together such French footmen as
serve the King at Dieppe and Havre, and embark them into
Scotland, as well for the delivery of the Queen of Scots
as for the restoration of the Popish religion. In this
their jollity does the Cardinal of Lorraine comfort them,
having got Martigues and some others of his setting up
to condescend to take this enterprise in hand. There are two
occasions for the making of this peace, the first is reinforcements coming to the Prince of Condé, and the second is the
fear that they have of the Queen of England, whom they
understand to be in readiness with her navy.—Paris, 28 March
1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 1½.


March 29.

2094. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Understands that all the head men of the Scottish Borders
have secret warning to hold themselves in readiness at the
next call. It is judged that Murray minds to apprehend some
factious contraries to his government, or to encounter such
forces as are looked for out of France. Dumbarton is still
holden.—Berwick, 29 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. P. 1.


March 29.

2095. The Queen to Frederick II.




There is little doubt but that the Earl of Bothwell whom
he has in custody was both the author and doer of the cruel
murder of the King of Scots last year. Desires that he may
be given up to be tried in Scotland. Promises that no private
violence shall interfere with justice in his case.—Westminster,
29 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd. Lat. Pp. 1½.


March 29.

2096. Sir William Drury to Cecil.




Has done his best to answer his request for stones, but is
very sorry that he comes after the feast.—Berwick, 29 March
1567. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 1½.

[Page 435]

March 30.

2097. Robert Huggins to Cecil.




Matters stand here very "tyckely" and uncertain in friendship either towards the Queen or her country. The English
Ambassador has demanded audience for the space of ten days,
but doubts he shall have none, or if he have any it shall be
long first, his message being partly known. Of late both
the writer and others have been examined upon certain
articles against the said ambassador. Was sworn and forced
to say the truth as others before him had done. Mistrusts
that the ambassador will be in some great trouble here; his
own liberal tongue shall be the cause thereof. Is commanded
secretly to abandonate himself from him. Openly they do
not stick to say that the Queen does but mock the King and
dissemble with him in all things. He is much provoked
against England, and lately has been persuaded to make peace
with the Turk and turn all his power against the Lutherans,
which if he would do he is offered great aid both of money
and men. He has vowed that he will make a reformation in
religion or else make himself a poor Prince. Of late there
have been great councils, and oftener than there was wont.
In case the King's Ambassador in England asks leave to go
into Flanders to speak with the Duke of Alva, the writer
would wish that he should have no leave, for if he go about
any such thing Cecil will shortly hear that Man shall be in
trouble; but as long as their Ambassador is in England they
will be loath to trouble him. Humbly beseeches him to
keep this in secret that he has written. The Duke De Feria
is Man's mortal enemy, which he himself does not know.
One Anthony Vazon who was examined before the writer is
going into England. If he handle the matter circumspectly
Cecil may know much of him. He is steward to one of the
King's chaplains. Thinks he is sworn not to discover it, for
so was the writer also.—Madrid, 30 March. Signed.
Add. Endd. Pp. 3¼.


March 30.

2098. Dr. Man to Cecil.




Cannot obtain audience. The Spanish Ambassador has
informed the King of Her Majesty's request for him and his
household in religion, which he cannot be induced to hear
of. This bearer has had secret conference with the King.
The young man is very insolent, and Spanish for his life, and
therefore he wishes there were an eye had to his practises.—
Madrid, 30 March 1568. Signed.
In cipher, deciphered. Add. Endd.: By Mr. Harrington.
With seal. P. ½.


March 30.

2099. Philip II. to the Queen.




Desires her favour in behalf of Sir Francis Englefield, that
he may have the rents and profits of his estates restored to
him, and liberty to live abroad. Has given instructions herein
to William Harrington, to whom he requests her to give
credence.—Madrid, 30 March 1568. Signed.
Add. Endd., with fragment of seal. Lat. Broadside.

[Page 436]

March 30.

2100. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




1. On the 29th was great appearance of alteration, the
peace depending in very perilous terms, for the self-same night
was holden a privy council at the Louvre, where there were
none admitted but such as are sworn enemies to the religion,
wherein was conspired the surprise of Orleans, Soissons, Rochelle, and Auxerre; and to the execution of these exploits
were appointed Sansac, Martigues, Chavigny, and Brissac,
hoping that the Prince of Conde disarming, and they by
covert means entertaining the greater part of their forces,
suddenly to have seized upon these aforesaid towns, and so it
would be more easy to work their wills of the principals of
the religion, being both disarmed of their forces, and wanting
those places of strength. And in this secret convention it
was also determined to reinforce the garrison of Paris, and to
send to Monluc in Gascony, to assist the attempt of Rochelle,
assuring himself of all the ports and havens in his government. But this conspiracy was not so secretly kept as
wickedly devised, for by 10 o'clock next day the Cardinal
Chatillon had knowledge thereof. Whereupon, fearing lest
something was intended against their persons, they sent for
their horses to Longjumeau, and indeed the Count Rochefoucault rode incontinent to the camp to stay the heralds from
publishing the peace. This sudden change being declared
to M. Montmorency, he was marvellously astonished, demanding of the Cardinal if it were sufferable to proceed in this
sort after they had given their promises to the contrary, protesting that he thought the King and his Council meant to
observe all such capitulations as had passed between them;
but being made privy to the whole matter he proceeded no
further, but returned hither marvellously discontent the 29th
inst., declaring at the council table that he was greatly abused
herein; and touching partly the Queen (belike with some
remorse), caused her "to water her plants." Whilst the
Marshal was debating these matters, there arrived one named
La Caze from the Prince, who making report again of what
the Cardinal had told Montmorency, the King swore by the
faith of a Prince that if there had been any such thing it was
done wholly without his knowledge, and laying his hand on
his breast said, This is the Cardinal and Gascoigne's practice,
in spite of them I will proceed with this peace; and, commanding pen and ink to be brought, he wrote a letter to the
Prince, promising the good and sincere observation of all that
should be agreed between them.




2. This practise will provide them greater assurance and
larger conditions than are yet accorded.




3. Sends herewith such articles as are passed between the
King and the Prince. Is told by one of very good credit that
all that shall be agreed as well touching the assurance as the
payment of the reiters shall not pass by open articles, but
be sworn between them to be observed and kept secret from
the multitude. The King's camp remains in Normandy and
[Page 437]
Picardy. The suspect of the preparation of Scotland is now
ceased by reason of this accident. The Prince of Conde is
presently at Orleans. Montmorency goes about to disarm the
Parisians.—Paris, 30 March 1568.




4. P.S.—The Spanish Ambassador, at an audience on the
29th, spake very honourably of the Queen of England's upright dealing and proceeding during these troubles. 30 March.
Signed.
Add. Endd., with seal. Pp. 4½.


March 30.

2101. Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.




To the same effect as his other letter of this date.
Copy. Imperfect. Endd. Pp. 2¼.


March.

2102. Charles IX. to the Queen.




Sends the bearer, M. De Beaumont to inform her of the
pacification of the troubles in his kingdom, and to thank her
for the friendship which she has shown. Signed.
Hol. Add. Endd. Fr. P. 1.


[March.]

2103. [Sir Henry Norris to Cecil.]




Informs him of the conclusion of peace between the King
and the Prince of Conde. At the publication of the Edict of
Pacification at Rouen there was some mutiny.
Rough copy. Pp. 2.







      

  


  

  
    
      PreviousTable of contentsNext
  


      
      

    

  

  
      
      
        
              
  
    
      
            
      
  

    
                      
    Footer menu
    
  
  
        
              
              
        Help
              
          
        About the project
              
          
        Terms of use
              
          
        Privacy and Cookies
              
          
        Accessibility
              
        
  


  


  
    
      
            Version 6.0. © 2024, University of London
      
  


        
      
    
  

  









