1 
» & *X 4 


A 
NEW, CORRECT, AND MUCH-IMPROVED 


HISTORY 


ISLE OF WIGHT, Fa 


FROM THE 


Earlieſt Times of authentic Information, 


TO THE 
PRESENT PERIOD: 


Comprehending whatever is curious or worthy of Attention in 
NATURAL HISTORY, 
* 


4 a WITH ITS 


eVIL ECCLESIASTICAL, AND MILITARY STATE 
\ IN- THE VARIOUS AGES, 


 BOTH- ANCIENT, AND MODERN. 


* 


The modern hiſtory, in a more eſpecial manner, from the topographical 
arrangement under which it is related, and from the liberal communi- 
cations of gentlemen of the iſland, has peculiar claims to public notice, 
and demands, from its intereſting and important tendency, the molt 
particular regard; ſo as to render the work every way far ſuperior to 
any thing yet. publiſhed relative to this favourite ſpot. 


TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, 

A very copious index of the ſubje&s contained in it; and to the whole is 

prefixed a new and very elegant map of the iſland, dedicated, by Per- 

miſſion, to the Right Honorable THOMAS ORDE POWLETT, Governor 
of the Hand; purpoſely engraved for this work, table of contents, &c. 


NzwrorT: Printed by and for J. AL AIx, and ſold in London by Scarcuzry | 
and WaurtTAxzR, Bookſcllers, Ave Maria Lane, and all the Bookſellers. 


1795s ; «'S 


H 
# 


PREFACE. 


I: is needleſs to enlarge on a ſubject, the 
utility of which muſt be ſelf-evident. Our 
readers may be aſſured, that every exertion has 
been made to render it alſo the moſt copious 
and intelligent hiſtory yet extant on this part of 
the Britiſh dominions. To the inhabitants it 
will afford much pleaſing information on many 
intereſting and amuſing topics; and to ſtrangers, 
it will be found a moſt defirable companion in 
their progreſs through the Iſland. 

Wr ſhall not oſtentatiouſſy diſplay the cauſes 
of that ſuperiority, which this hiſtory poſſeſſes 
over every ſimilar publication; but we ſhould 
be deficient in gratitude, if we neglected to ex- 
preſs our hearty and moſt fincere thanks for the 
very liberal, candid, and generous communica- 


tions from our numerous friends, by which 
alone 


\ 


iv PREFACE. 


alone that ſuperiority has been obtained. It 
can ſcarcely be expected that, in ſome minute 
circumſtances, our utmoſt obſervation ſhould 
detect every ſmall error; but we have the con- 
ſolation to hope, that theſe will be found trivial 
and unimportant. We have farther to confide 
in the generous aſſiſtance of all our ſubſcribers 
to enable us, on ſome future occaſion, to per- 
ſect the undertaking to the utmoſt degree of 
poſlible accuracy. 


NEWPORT, Fuly 14, 1795. 


þ IL. — 


CONTENTS. 


——_—c 


| Page. 
IxrropucmON: Of the Nature and Importance 
of Hiſtory in general, and of the preſent 


Hiſtory in particular, | i. 

Chap. I. Of the Natural Hiſtory of the Iſland, 1 
Chap. II. Enquiry whether it was anciently an Ifland, 

or a Peninſula, 12 


Chap. III. Of the ancient Military Hiſtory of the Iſland, 26 
Chap. IV. Of the ancient Protection and Defence of 


the Iſland, 40 
Chap. V. Of the Caſtles and Forts of the Iſland, 87 
Cariſbrooke Caſtle, 88 
Yarmouth, 108 
Freſhwater, Sharpnore, or Carey's Sconce, 111 
Sandown or Sandham Fort, 114 
Cowes Caſllle, | 116 
Chap. VI. Of the Civil Hiſtory of the Iſland till it was 
purchaſed by the Crown, - FAG 
Chap. VII. Of the Civil Hiſtory of the Iſland after it 
belonged to the Crown, 158- 
Chap. VIII. Of the Civil Hiſtory, after it was retained 
by the Crown, 177 
Chap. IX. Of King Charles's Hiſtory, from his Ar- 
rival in the Iſland to his Execution, 227 
Chap. X. Of the Civil Hiſtory of the Iſland from 
© Ot King Charles's Death, 264 
Chap. XI. Of the Hiſtory of the ſeveral Boroughs of 
| the Iſland, 292 
Borough of Newport, 295 
Town of Newport, 315 
Borough of Newtown, 343 
Borough of Yarmouth, 352 
Chap. XII. Of the Houſe of Induſtry, 373 
Chap. XIII, Of the Privileges of the Governors, 395 
Knighten Court, 418 


Chap. XIV. Of the Religious Houſes of the Ifland, 


with an Account of their Foundations 


and Endowments, 422 
Cariſbrooke Priory, 423 
Quarr Abbey, 


Barton or Burton Oratory, 


vi © CONTENTS. 


P age. 
Chap. XIV, St. Helen's Priory, 44 
Priory of Appuldurcombe, ibi 
Priory of St. Croſs, 446 
Church Houſe, ibid 
Chap. XV. Of the Local or Topographical ary of 
the Pariſhes, 448 
Of the ancient Chapels, &c. 450 


Part I. Of the Eaſt Medine, 458 
Set. I. Of the Pariſh of Brading, ibid 
Sect. II. Of the Pariſh of Yaverland, 488 
Sect. III. Of the Pariſh of Shanklin, 490 
Sect. IV. Of the Pariſh of Bonchurch 495 
Set. V. Of the Pariſh of St. Helen's, 498 
Seft. VI Of the Pariſh of Newchurch 504 
Sect. VII. Of the Pariſh of Binſtead, 52 1 
Sect, VIII. Of the Pariſh of Wootton 524 
Sect. IX. Of the Pariſh of Whip- 

pingham, 527 
Se. X. Of the Pariſh of Arreton, 535 
Sect. XI. Of the Pariſh of Godſhill, 546 
Sedt. XII. Of the Pariſh of St. Law- 


p rence, 562 

; | Sect. XIII. Of the Pariſh of Whitwell 564 

Sea. XIV. Of the Pariſh of Niton, 570 

Part II. Of the Weſt Medine, 581 

Sect. I. Of the Pariſh of Northwood, ibid 

Sect. II. Of the Pariſh of Cariſbrooke 588 

Sect III. Of the Pariſh of St. Nicho- 

las, 599 

Se. IV. Of the Pariſh of Gatcombe, 602 

Sect. V. Ot the Pariſh of Chale, 606 

Sect. VI. Of the Pariſh of Kingſton, 614 

Sect. VII. Of the Pariſh of Shorwell, 61 6 

Sect. VIII. Of the Pariſh of Brixton, 

Sect. IX. Of the Pariſh of Calbourn, 

| Sect. X. Of the Pariſh of Motteſton, 636 

= | Sett. XI. Of the Pariſh of Brook, 638 

? Sect. XII. Of the Pariſh of Shalfleet, ho 

. j Sect. XIII. Of the Pariſh of Thorley, 646 
1 Se&. XIV. Ot the Pariſh of Yar- 

? mouth, 650 

Sekt. XV. Of the Pariſh of Freſh- 


water, | ibid 


SUBSCRIBERS 


SUBSCRIBERS NAMES. 


A. 
Acrzy F. D. Eſq. Everly, Wilts 
Arnold, W. Eſq. Cowes, I. W. 
Mr. Arnold, hite Court, I. W. 
>< Abraham, Newport, I. W. 
- - - Luke Alder, Whitechapel, London 
FINE 8 * Allen, Whitechapel, London ; 
ohn Albin, Spalding, Lancolnflire, 12 Copies 
illiam Albin, ditto . 
BET Leonard Albin, ditto 
„Thomas Albin, ditto 
- - - -R. W. Albin, Gainſbro', Lincolnſhire 
Mrs. Abbott, Newport, I. W. 


Brady, Eſq. Jamaica 
Richard, Bull, Eſg. Northcourt . I. W. 
Rev. Mr. Barwis, en I. W. 
Joſeph Betteſworth, Eſq. Ryde, I. W. 

r. Henry Bowen, Cowes, I. W. 
Richard Brown, Newport, 
Barnes, Brixton, I. 
T. Beniſon, 61, Coleman- ſtreet, London 
„„ Newport 
. 1 Littlefield Beane, Goſport 
= - - .Baker, Senr, Portſea 
—— Bennett, Spalding, Lincolnſhire 
. D. Bumſted, 184, Biſhopſgate-ſtreet, London 
Miſs Bumſted, 26, ditto A 
W. Cooke, Eſq. Newport 
Mr. B. C. Collins, Saliſbury, 12 Copies 
- - - - I, Coombes, Cowes, I. W. 14 Copies 
- - - . T, Collins, Jun. 
Gs Dean Farm, I. W. 
G. Chappel, Pinchbeck, Lincolnſhire 
Miſs Crook 
Rev. Mr. Cooley, Maidenhead 

IB. 


Rev. Mr. Digby, Brixton, I, W, 
Rev. Mr, Dinham, e Lincolnſhire 


vin | SUBSCRIBERS NAMES. 


John Delgarno, Eſq. Newport , 

Mr. Dangerfield, ditto | 
- - - Denham, Ryde, I. W. 

- - - - Thomas Day, Cowes, I. W. 

- - - . W. Donaldſon, Portſmouth, 12 Copies 
- - - . W. Dalman, Sandown, I. W. | 
- - James Dennett, Newport, I. W. 

- - J. Dinham, Spalding, Lincolnſhire 
Mrs. Dinham, ditto.ditto 

Miſs Dinham, Cambden Houſe 

S. Elſdale, Eſq. 120, Great Sloane-ſtreet, London. 
Mrs. Elliot, Newport, JI. W. 2 Copies 

| 3 1 


12 
Je 


Capt. Field, Governor of Sandown Fort, I. W. 
| Mils Fullerton, Cowes, I. W. 
; Mr. Folgham, No. „ Fleet-ſtreet, London 
11 | - - - -£0quett, Newport, I. W. | 
- - - -P. Fromow, ditto HS 


. - - Furze, Briſtol, 2 Copies 
G 


Courtenay Gidley, Eſq. Honiton, Devon 
Rev. Mr. Gill, Newchurch, I. W. 
Mr. W. Gibbs, Newport, I. W. 
- - - Grainger, Fairlee, I. W. 
- - - . Gater, Stoneham Paper Mills 
- - - - J. Gilbert, Newport, I. W. 
- - W. Gibbins, Portſmouth 
Tho. Haſkol, Eſq. Newport, I.. W. 
W. Howe, Eſq. Brook Houle, I. W. 
Rev. Mr. Hayter, Clatterford, I. W. 
Dr. Hackett, Southampton 
Mr. Harding, Goſport, 6 Copies 
- - - -B. Harding, Portſmouth, g ditto 
- - J. Haddon, Newport 
„ .. Heath, Brixton, I. W. 
Hackett, London . 
„ Harriot, London | 
- -- .-Horſey, Portſea, 6 Copies 
.... G. Hayden, Brading, I. W. 
| | I. and J. 
Mr. Immanuel, Newport, I. W. 
- -- Jackſon, 61, Coleman-ſtreet, London 


SUBSCRIBERS NAMES. 16. 


1 
Mr. Jolliffe, Newport | 
- - Jacob, Newchurch, I. W. 2 Copies 
- -- - Jacob, P reton, I. W. 
James, Leadenhall-ſtreet, London 
- - - - Johnſon, Tooley-ſtreer, London 


James Kirkpatrick, Eſq. Newport 
ohn Kirkpatrick, Efq. ditto 
Joteph Kirkpatrick, Eſq. ditto 
aſh Kemble, Eſq. 
Mr. King, Southampton 
- - - -Knott, Lombaid-ſtreet, London, 6 Copies 
L | 


Rev. Mr. Lucas, Newport, I. W. 

Mr. Lennon, Surgeon to 107th Regt. Foot 
- - - -Laverton, Rew-ſtreet. I. W. 

- - - .Langton, Giltſpur-ſtreet, London 


H. Meaſures, Eſq. Pinchbeck, Lincolnſhire 
R. Maywood, Eſq. M. D. Newport, I. W. 
- . Millikin, Eſq. Whitechapel, London 

Mr. Mottley, Portſmouth, 12 Copies 


a, 2: Newport, I. W. 
W. Mew, ditto 
= - - - J. Midlane, Brading, I. W. 


- - - -Munday, Goſport 

O. | ; 

Rt. Hon. Tho. Orde Powlett, Governor of the Ifle of Wight 

Sir Wm. Oglander, Nunwell, Houſe, I. W. 

Rev. Mr. Oglander, Fairy Hill, I. W. | 
P 


T. Palmer, Eſq. Portſmouth 
T. Palmer, Eſq. Hambledon 
John Pinhorn, Eſq. Banker, London 
Mr. John Porter, I. W. 
„ - - Pedder, ditto 
R. 

Rev. Mr. Richards, Newport, I. W. 
Mrs. Robinſon, Newport, I. W. 
Mr. Roach, Arreton, I. W. 
- -- .Robbins, Wincheſter, 6 Copies 
.S. Riley, Oxtord-ſtreet, London 

| S. 
His Grace the Biſhop of Salisſbury 
Mrs, Shuttleworth, Shanklin, I. W. 


Miſs 


Res 


w _/ SUBSCRIBERS NAMES: 


of 
. 8. 
Miſs Skidmore, Holborn, London 
Mr. Shackleford, Newtown, I. W. 
. „Sewell, Newport, I. W. 
Sime, Cowes, I. W. 
- Skelton, Southampton, 12 Copies 
John Silverlock, Newgate-ſtreet, London 


N. Smith, Knighton, I. W. 


- - - . W, Sharpe, Newport, I. W. 
Stevens, Briſtol | 

= - - - C. Scotney, Oakham 

Squire, 8 I. W. 2 Copies 
Mr. Tomkins, London 3 
James Tharle, St. Helens, I. W. 

.S. Thompſon, Newport, I. W. 2 Copies 
Taylor, Holborn, London, 12 Copies 
J. Tucker, Brading, I. W. | 
W. Tucker, ditto ditto 

Thornton, Fleet ſtreet, London 

-- - - W, Taylor, Borough, ditto 

- - J. Tyler, Oakham * 


Rev. D. Worſley, Gatcombe Houſe, I. W. 
Rev Mr. Walton, Wootton, I. W. | 
Rev. Mr. F. Worſley, Chale, I. W, 
Rev. Mr. James Worſley, Stenbury, I. W. 
Miſs Wiſe, Newport, I. W. 
Mr. John Ward, Cowes, IW. 
W. Webb, Newport, I. W. 
»White wood, Portſea, 12 Copies 
- - - - Way, Churchills, I. W. 
I. Watts, Goſport, 12 Copies 
J. G. Wilkinſon, Attorney, Goſport 
-- - W. Williams, Cowes, 6 Copies 
- - - -R. B Wilkins, Newport, I. W. 
-- - . Weſtmore, Governor of Houſe Induſtry, I. W. 
-- - - Weſtmore, Brading, I. W. 
. VW. Wooldridge, Portſmouth 
IJ. Wythers, Oakham 

Mrs. Waſs, Swainſton, I. W. 
V. 


Mr. Loung, Ramſden, I. W. 


INTRODUCTION, 


enen e 


———m— 


2 2 ä p ů ů —A—— — 


—— —: —— 


OBO UMU———————Z——— ooo 


r id 


£245 
a 


A 

, 
Zh 

6 
VN 
WAN 
2 A\ 


* 

7 1 

- #1 
- 


”- Pa 


BAN 2 
. | "4, * Fg , 
WL, 2 * 
, Debourn |! 
- SL — — * 
14 — > HS |; 
0 4 —_— = 
— 1 
N „ Ty 
2 2 vv; 
$4\* !: 
-.4 


6 
* 
; 


W - 


Lymin gton © | 8 


I 


' S Bnokelte 
N "Ve bel 


> 
o 


1 
2332 
- 


* \ dJ 
We 22 ns 
= * i y bl od 
\ 'b — % "* ye 2 0 
43 7 4 / N 2 5 if: 4 H * e 
| jj (CS: „ee Hain Mod N 
57 J! Dias. q 4 Fr. * P 
4 Hy! Hillis ' A J. — 
Wu 22: rode Rem 72 
— - * Pd 


— — - 
220 


Yo k ' 4 
, ,, | L x 14 4 os, 
a Vun. WAN | 
WI 0 C ** 'V | 
12 | . 3 > J — 
, O 5 
A W- or iin gt Ni, &# JR 
Haven dr - JV > 4 { ocks + \ N "a, : 
. 5 as 75 arm * VAN 
— Mh N RB ORO Cen Mars 7 M 7 N 9 A * va! a! 
if 2 \ . ie 
RR =; — orchhield d. \ 11 
e . _—_ « ; — oo 0 5 
_ , n 3 „ 4H „„ x oe 
- L - d 4 tn 5 — TT 822 We > —— — =) Vp 8 1 „ . % 'N ne 141 
GEL La — CASES : „ 4 ne 2 8 
ICH Nu r — 5 fil Ele 5 . dy 51 7 FE OC Dt 
2 * 422 Y 4; IQ N — == = * ö 1 11 Ga by 8 7 
77 $ WY 5 ö - 4 3 
8 = | | 4 non oven; 
Y h, | . 7 „ % „ OF Num 
Q 3 ' , ” 237 - 
V 74 13 i Watrhingn rulæ & 1 7 2 2 4 ngton 
WL, 1 7 vu 7 * 
. HEE 175 ne Mill 
= ä ä tis 44 11 4 4 8 * ” * — 
= = —— === 77 / 4, r l 
B — 7 " 8 „ N arisbrooke, 
—= 6% , Gr hart i | / 
8 0 F 0 bleme add for 
. 4 ts 7 : 'Y = * - 


-j . ce Dh. 

is p — W 
or 22 .* 2 CS, 4 [4 bp 
n, Swaihi, 73 A FM 


3 —— 
e WW; rr i 4 vo Aan 


Nets . 4 


WE 
4 
* 
* 


7 | 4 . # T 
. Colrall | $0 2 . e * 


Wi 


5 Vn 
l, Wood 
/ Calbourne 


gun 
2 N. 222 


> i, 


* Ky N j > w d / * — p ar 
” WW. 22 65 Mad |, name 
L* 9 4 allet in * ern Mnthaort ag Pain 


Ee 
of Yang W Wl Nt wh; 
2 WF 


ooo onn SSH 


—ů— 
— 
— 


2 h 10 h vie ö 1 $ 
ron, Down” 2 Rs — 


eee . aeg 


- y , 
4 - 
2 fs 2 Rk 
i - _—- — * d * n N 
n 4 R 
. = eacon xl.“ S WV. * . 
4 — a * / == K RY — - ol 
my 2 1 — — — — * - * 
( 2 — x 22 
* ö : 4 


esa TIEN 


* 
N 
N 
* 
* 
2 — © 


Gateom 
"Im 


Pg 
oooen pd 


ON 


Ws, 


"rl 


22 


Ul. {19 it TOUR I 
n l 


N 6, ee whe "al RJ. 
1 1 ry . . EE 
1 = 11 
TEST X 4 A1 7 ö 7 


. Brock * * Wye 


” 


155 , 6. 5 5 | 
" a, 75 Dos > "oY U 6 

hy. DIL. — : 1 * is * bh 

Pars onage . "=. if, 


= 
— 


- 


e . — s kenn l. 4 


A PLAN of the TOWN F of NEWPO 
' Many” 
Ml. ROT. bats 1 1222 
HEEL, e 
EI 2 f 


27 


JG —IDSS 25 
— —— 
— 


4 2 _ 


a 


A. Scale / Furlongs a4 Miles. 3 1 


21 Fl 


1 T e Aan Nee ; : 


ee ee ee eee HG 


Pubtirhed pri 8 1798, biber, 


West Longitude from London 12/ 


— 
- 

22222252 

27297 —— 


2 — — 


| = 
: To 
* \ — dT ' 
TT; - T , 
= Oy I; 
—V — N. 
ö 'S / 4 T 1 
1 + T l 
—— 2222 * N ' 
8 17 S. 
. "* So 
wy * 
1 N ' 


SD. 
* a » we 


re p 


tht, 


ty er 
Nt wn hn 


: tl : 
inn.. 
K t 


-- 
1 
— — 


* 


hv 
11414, ITO 


Ae e 


ur a . 1 | 8 
N be oof 3 2 £ — a , * — N j * "4 4 h 
F - —— — 2 ” : * / ——— * 2 j MA. a a ” iN _ oF 
| .. j/ | 3 1 | MoAd 


is SGA N 1 — 
N, nana iry : 2 5 ; # C 


* 


—— — 3 — U— — — — 2 
—ꝓZuN—N— 


— 
* — 
— 


I 9 7 28. 2 1 


e 


1 
Dorn, ö ö Fg 


—— 2 — 


—— — 
1.22222 


Adgetn 


6 


. 
n“ x Morton £ 


TC Newehurch 


— 22 


* — 
4 PR 5 „ „ 
* * 2 > 0. "ONS - FP. - 
9 


— — = 


—— 


| het 2 
”— cl WE 7 Borgwood 
Futte 


WONT 
he, 1 Vordley. 
4 , 


2 — \ 
E. Line 
A 


the e Right Honor ab 


Sl Fee Ws 25 Ahn 2 / (Oe + Hor 7 . 
= Governor of the — 
wt 


fer _ 8 LE | f W 1 8 II . 
Hi . ce, e, 7 8 VS ge, 1 


4h 7100 


— ma 


2 e e 2 Ht 2 
8 2282 2 "Dos 1111 y | 


G& 


Foley; Colts (4 


= 
>< 
PS _ 


5 5 «a 


Wo West of London iv [Minutes of Time. 


6. , 7 7 2 Se,; 9 9 e. tes, VA * 


8 , e. 


ac 
% 
— 


— — ͤ—ñ— ——— y — 


— — — 


— 22 


Albin, Veumort, Leue of Wight. 


Engraved by N Neete -s 352 Stand London . 
k E-* 


0 


N Ras 


ON THE NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF HISTORY IN 


GENERAL ;—AND OF THE PRESENT HISTORY IN 
PARTICULAR, 


Or all the acquiſitions, to which the human 


mind can aſpire, in arts or ſciences, there is, per- 


haps, none which affords to the ſtudent more real 
and ſubſtantial pleaſure than that of hiſtory. By 
this we attain to the knowledge of whatever has 


paſſed in any age or country; and diſcover what- 


ever is truly valuable on the one hand, or execra- 


ble on the other, in the various tranſactions of 


public or private life. Hence, therefore, it ſerves 


as a mirror, wherein the beauties or deformities of 
ſtates or kingdoms, in a civil and political view, 


are moſt notoriouſly manifeſt ; and becomes a rule 
or guide for the conduct of perſons in ſimilar ſitu- 
ations or circumſtances. TH 

From hence it is obvious, how greatly it muſt 
behove all thoſe, who are concerned or intereſted 
in reading or writing hiſtory, to judge impartially 


and fairly of whatever may come under their cog- 


nizance and inſpection. So far as this object is 
common to both, it muſt be of the utmoſt im- 
B portance 


ii INTRODUCTION. 


portance and utility. For the hiſtorian, more 
immediately conſidered as the writer of hiſtory, 
this qualification is ſo eſſentially neceſſary, that it 
cannot be diſpenſed with; the ſtricteſt regard 
ſhould be paid to facts, which are the leading 
features, and the utmoſt caution uſed to attribute 
theſe facts to their true principle, where that is 
_ attempted. To leave them to their natural con- 
clufion, where the principles cannot be fully aſ- 
certained from authentic documents, 1s apparently 
the great duty of an impartial hiſtorian ; 1t 1s 
well-known that a fondneſs for embelliſhments, 
and a ſtudied attention to full-ſounding phraſes 
and ſwelling periods, have often contributed to 
the perverſion of truth, and given a falſe bias to 
the moſt celebrated productions. 

Ir would be a very ſimple and eaſy taſk, to 
point out a variety of hiſtories, in our language, 
which are manifeſtly obnoxious to this remark. — 
Elegance of diction and a diſplay of ſentiment 
have, in many inſtances, which might be named, 
ſuperſeded and removed the more eſſential and 

neceſſary requiſites of truth and fidelity. Vanity, 
prejudice, and a fondneſs for innovation, have 
often contributed to this perverſion; the human 
mind has been warped and biaſſed from theſe ſe- 
veral cauſes, collectively or ſingly, in ſo many 
inſtances, that though it might ſeem invidious to 
enumerate them, the attentive reader cannot long 
be at a loſs to o diſcover the alluſion. 


ReTuRNING, 


INTRODUCTION. 111 

ReturNinG, therefore, to the general principle, 
it will be eaſy to demonſtrate, how each of theſe 
cauſes may operate, to the perverſion of truth, in 
the breaſt of the hiſtorian. On this ſubje& we 
think it our duty to make ſome obſervations, by 
which our readers will more fully comprehend our 
deſign. Though we do not pretend to infallibility, 
we truſt that ſome earneſt of our intentions may 
be formed, from the preliminary ſuggeſtions, 
which have occurred to us on the preſent occaſion. 
We ſhall naturally endeavour to avoid theſe errors 
of the mind; and our utmoſt attention ſhall be 
manifeſted, in wiſhing to eſcape the dangers. of 
ScyLLa, not to be hurled upon CHaryspis. Such 
will be the object of the ſkilful pilot in paſſing the 
formerly hazardous Strait, in which theſe formid- 
able obſtacles are met with; and ſuch will be our 
object in this attempt to elucidate the lubject we 
have now undertaken. 

Hr muſt be little acquainted with the opera- 
tions of the human mind, who is not fully, or at 
leaſt, ſufficiently appriſed of the effects of vanity. 
Every perſon of common attention and obſervation 
muſt have ſeen, that a certain portion of ſelf- 
ſatisfaction is abſolutely neceſſary for the accom- 
pliſhment of matters, which require any conſider- 
able ſhare of time or aſſiduity. It is in the exceſs 
of this principle, that vanity ſteps forward to 
poſſeſs the firſt place in the human breaſt; when 
this ſelf- ſatisfaction is permitted to paſs the limits 


which reaſon preſcribes, and a prudent emulation, 
B 2 the 


1 INTRODUCTION. 
the ſource of laudable and generous actions, is 
converted into an extreme of affectation, if not of 
arrogance. Daily obſervation muſt confirm this 
remark, and no need of inſtances can be neceſſary 
to. illuſtrate ſo notorious a truth. 
Hur if vanity, or an excels of ſelf-ſatisfaction, 
has ſuch an influence on the human mind, and ſo 
great a command in directing the pen of the hiſ- 
torian; prejudice has a ſtill greater force, and a 
mote powerful and commanding effect. The ſen- 
timents which flow-from this ſource are frequently. 
abſurd, or at beſt vague and indeciſive; to which 
determinate ideas are often aſſigned, when no 
principles of language can juſtify the uſe of ſuch a 
meaning. Falſe data are thereby aſſumed, and 
falſe maxims adopted ; and theſe, being eſtabliſhed 
as a foundation, muſt neceſſarily occaſion the ſu- 
perſtructure to be alike flimſy and inadequate to 
the purpoſes for which it is deſigned. We have 
ſeen, both in hiſtory and in the ſciences, that rea- 
ſon has often been perverted in the aſſumption of 
ideas, which themſelves required to be inveſtigated 
before admiſſion ; and that, when theſe had been 
once adopted as maxims, the ſtronger the reaſon- 
ing adduced in ſupport of deductions drawn from 
thence, the more firmly muſt thoſe errors be ri- 
veted in the mind which are thus aſſumed. This 
s alone to be attributed to prejudice as its ſource; 
\ whether it ariſes from education, cuſtom, or habit. 
It is eaſy to infer how this may operate powerfully 
on the mind of the hiſtorian ; and induce him to 


aſſign 


INTRODUCTION, = 


aſſign the actions of the paſt or preſent ages to a 
motive or principle, which may rather expreſs his 
own ideas, than convey to the reader the true 
ſtate of things. | | | 
Foxpwess for innovation is the third cauſe which 
has been mentioned for this wrong bias of writers 
in general, and particularly of the hiſtorians.— 
Perhaps this may in part be accounted for already 
from the firſt cauſe; but as it admits of much dif- 
ference in the application, it may be proper to 
conſider it diſtinctly. For this may conſiſt purely 
with a regard for truth, in which vanity, or an 
exceſs of ſelf- ſatisfaction, may have little concern; 
the motive by which the mind is directed and in- 
fluenced may be perfectly juſtifiable, but the prin- 
ciple of perverſion, which has found admiſſion into 
it, gives an improper tendency to all its operations, 

and an eccentric bias to all its concluſions. 
Havins thus far enumerated the cauſes of error 
in the writers of hiſtory, and the objects which we 
have in view on the preſent occaſion; it is ſtill” 
neceſſary to remark, that we do not mean, by theſe 
obſervations, to diſcredit in general the hiſtories 
of paſt times, but only to impreſs the minds of our 
readers with a cautious principle, not to be led 
away by flowery diction or a ſwelling rotundity of 
expreſſion. The ſtudy of hiſtory in general muſt 
not be diſcouraged; it is not our wiſh to diſ- 
courage it. We rather wiſh, on the contrary, to 
promote it; and have, therefore, in this Introduc- 
tion to a particular Hiſtory, ſignified our general 
AE fentiments, 


vi 935 INTRODUCTION. 
ſentiments, that our readers may have a clear and. 
| diſtinct view of our deſign, and of the object which 
we wiſh more immediately to accompliſh. 

For as our principal object in this undertaking 
is, to concentre and compreſs into one point of 
view, the leading features of a part of the kingdom 

which has been diſtinguiſhed from the earlieſt pe- 
riods of authentic hiſtory ; our buſineſs will prin- 
cipally conſiſt in collecting and arranging the moſt 
important facts, which have at any time been re- 
corded, and from thence diſcovering the civil and 
political influence, by which it has at any time 
been directed. | 

Is this general and comprehenſive Introduction 
to a ſubject of ſuch eſſential import and magnitude, 
it may not be improper to make ſome obſervations, 

as an intimation of what we propoſe to diſplay, 
for the information of our readers. It will be our 
endeavour, not barely to recite the Hiſtory of the 
Iſland, as a conſiderable and diſtinct part of the 
Kingdom; but to trace more particularly the ſeve- 
ral tenures in every pariſh of the Iſland, and thence 
to exhibit and compare the reſpective conditions 
of its ſeveral inhabitants, by contraſting the pre- 
ceding ages with the preſent. 

As we mean to conſider the tenures af lands in 
preceding times, it is obvious that in the hiſtory 
of particular pariſhes, our account muſt take the 
Doomſday-book for its foundation. From thence 
we deſign, as far as poſſible, to trace them to the 
preſent period. Their eccleſiaſtical hiſtory, will 
e likewiſe 


. INTRODUCTION. vii 


likewiſe be comprehended in our plan; in which 
we ſhall endeavour to lay before our readers the 
moſt authentic particulars that we have been able 
to procure. And as theſe uſually form a very 
conſiderable part of the hiſtory of remoter times, 
and are connected immediately with the lands and 
poſſeſſions of pariſhes reſpectively ; it muſt be a 
very neceſſary and eſſential object to deduce their 
preſent ſtate from their ſources. In doing this, 
ſome obſervations will naturally be produced, re- 
ſpecting the origin of impropriations, endowed 
vicarages, glebe, tithes, and other properties and 
emoluments ; which are appendages and proviſions 
of the earlieſt times, for the maintenance and ſup- 
port of the Miniſters of Religion. 
In noticing the epitaphs, cuſtoms, and peculi- 
arities of pariſhes reſpectively, they will afford 
additional aid to diſcover, in circumſtances of a 
minuter kind, their ſtate and condition. By means 
of theſe, perſons converſant in heraldry and blazon, 
have frequently been enabled to make very ſhrewd 
conjectures, and to aſcertain facts, which have 
often proved of eſſential benefit to many families. 
Defects in pedigrees have been ſometimes ſupplied 
by theſe auxiliary matters; and the acquiſition of 
eſtates, manors, and other poſſeſſions accounted 
for, by impalements, quarterings, and other armo- 
rial bearings, which are frequently met with on 
ancient inſcriptions and monuments. 
Or its military, as well as its civil government, 


it is alſo requiſite, ſome notice ſhould be taken. 
B 4 Here: 


2 


_ * - —— 
” 


„ INTRODUCTION. 


Here alſo we ſhall endeavour to give as good an 
account, as authentic records will juſtify us in 


ſeldom giving way to fancied conjectures, and 


never reſting ſatisfied with improbable ſurmiſes ; 
but, ſteady to our general principle, confining 
ourſelves to facts, and never hazarding any aſſer- 
tions, without the plaineſt intimations of the 
liberty aſſumed, and the grounds upon which thoſe 
intimations are founded. 

FroM theſe outlines, it is preſumed that we may 
now proceed to ſuch particulars of our Hiſtory, as 
may be moſt acceptable and pleaſing to the reader; 
for whoſe information and amuſement we have 
undertaken the preſent Work. Relying, therefore, 


on the candour and indulgence of the ſcientific 


and intelligent, we can only ſay, that no means in 
our power ſhall be wanting to render it worthy 


the attention of thoſe, whom it is our with to 
ſerve and oblige, 


HISTORY 


HISTORY 


ISLE OF WIGHT, &c. 


CHAPTER 1. 


OF THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE ISLAND. 


Or the iſlands which are contiguous to the 


coaſt of Great Britain, the Iſle of Wrcanr is very 
properly and deſervedly diſtinguiſhed, whether we 


conſider its extent, its population, produce, or 
commerce. The channel which ſeparates it from 
the county of Hants, of which it forms a part, is 
very variable; being in ſome places near three 
leagues in breadth, and in others ſcarcely one. It 
has a very irregular form, though, as to its gene- 
ral appearance, it approaches the neareſt to that 


of a lozenge; and is in length from Eaſt to Weſt. 


about twenty-two miles, and from North to South, 
in its broadeſt part, about thirteen. It has been 
eſtimated to contain about a hundred thouſand 
acres, | 

THERE 


Ya. . 


2 HISTORY OF THE 


 Trrrs is not, perhaps, in the whole kingdom 
of Great Britain, any ſpot of ground, of the ſame 
extent, which produces ſuch a variety of ſoil and 


ſurface. Hill and vale, the ſwelling promontory 


and the lowly glen, are the landſcapes which follow 
each other in quick ſucceſſion, and diverſify the 
aſpect at every change of poſition; ſo that you can 
ſcarce proceed half a mile in any direction, without 
ſuch a variation of the ſcene, as renders the whole 
moſt agreeably ſtriking. 

IT is this variety & LY renders the iſland ſo 
exceedingly productive in the comforts and con- 
veniences of life. The paſture which is afforded 
for ſneep on the hilly and elevated parts, which 
extend from Weſt to Eaft, through the middle of 
It, produces a fleece of fo fine and pure a ſtaple, 
as not to be inferior to any in the kingdom; moſt 
of which is ſold out of the iſland, and purchaſed 
by the manufacturers in the various towns of the 
county of Wilts, and other places in the cloathing 
trade. By this means great quantities of ſpecie 
find their way into the iſland; and thereby the 
inhabitants are enriched with the produce of the 
iſland, without the riſque or hazard of extraneous 
correſponding circumſtances. 

Or the vallies and floping declivities of the 
iſland, the foil is, in general, ſo rich and luxuriant, 
that the crops of grain, particularly wheat, are, 
beyond all compariſon with almoſt all other coun- 
tries, plentiful and abundant. In many parts, the 
| richneſs of the ground is very manifeſt and per- 

ceptible 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 3 


ceptible from the colour, and fineneſs of its ſur- 
face; and to ſtrangers, the neceſſity of ocular de- 
monſtration will be manifeſt, to form a true and 
proper judgment of its produce. Nothing ſhort 
of this kind of evidence, can poſſibly convey an 
adequate idea of its fertility. 

Bur to this general richneſs of ſoil, ſome ex- 
ceptions ought to be made. Beſides the hills 
already mentioned, marl, brick-earth, and gravel, 
are found in ſome parts of the iſland ; tobacco-pipe 
and potter*s clay, with Fuller's earth, and ſome red 
and yellow ochre, are alſo met with. There is 
likewiſe ſome good ſtone, and a peculiar kind of 
white ſand towards the South-Weſt part of the 
' iſland (Freſhwater), far ſuperior to any other in 
Great Britain. Of this great quantities are ſhipped 
off, and ſent to London, Briſtol, and Worceſter, 
for the glaſs and porcelaine manufactories. Great 
quantities of allum are alſo met with at Allum Bay, 


to the North of the Needles; from whence it takes 


its name. Of ſtone there are various quarries, 
which may be applied to different uſes ; and thoſe 
near Quarr Abbey in particular were formerly in 
high eſtimation. With theſe the Cathedral at 
Wincheſter was built ; and for a ſeries of years, it 

continued to be in the higheſt eſtimation. 
Tnovon it is not known to ſupply any minerals, 
the appearances of the ſea beach and cliffs afford 
preſumptive manifeſtations, that it is not wholly 
deſtitute. The face of the country and the general 
ſtratum, a cloſe black clay, which forms apparently 
the 


£ HISTORY OF THE 


the baſis of the iſland, are ſtrong indications in 
favour of this opinion. From ſimilarity of cir- 
cumſtances it is extremely probable, that the very 
neceſſary and eſſential article of coal might be 
found in it; and though ſome attempts have been 
made for that purpoſe, without ſufficient proofs of 
their being productive, it is not altogether certain 
that the more internal parts of the iſland might 
not afford better hopes of ſucceſs. Indeed, ſo far 
as mineraliſts can form any probable conjectures 
about theſe matters, the Weſt-end of the iſland 
ſeems to furniſh more likely proſpects of ſucceſs- 
ful attempts of this nature; for at Warden Ledge, 
near the Weſt-end of the iſland, there are ſtill 
ſtronger marks of the exiſtence of coals, and as it 
alſo appears on the fide of Arreton Down, as well 
as at the foot of Bembridge Cliff, in the neigh- 
bourhood of which the trials were made, there can 
be little doubt of its extending through the iſland. 

White ſand and Fuller's earth are alſo found on 
the North ſide of this ſtratum of coal. Red ochre 
is alſo met with on the South fide. From all 
which circumſtances it is manifeſt, that this Iſland 
contains in its bowels many uſeful and valuable 
productions of nature; which afford to the land- 
holders and the induſtrious commonalty, the re- 
ſources of wealth and opulence to the one, and of 
ſupport and maintenance to the other. 

Ws cannot diſmiſs the conſideration of this ar- 
ticle, without obſerving, that it would become 


the wealthy and opulent proprietors of lands in 
other 


ISLE OF wier. | [4 


other parts of the iſland, where the face of the 
country appears to be favourable for ſuch an un- 
dertaking, to make ſome farther efforts for the 
diſcovery of this treaſure; which, if ſucceſsful, 

muſt be productive of the greateſt advantages, 
both to themſelves and to the community, Tho? 
the proſpect of a valuable and, perhaps, conſider- 
able acquiſition of fortune, is by no means to be 
condemned ; to thoſe who can ſpare a portion of 
their preſent incomes on an object ſo laudable, 
the ſatisfaction of having endeavoured to benefit 
the public will always prove a compenſation. — 
The conviction will be no longer problematical, 
that, after ſuch experiments have been made, the 
exiſtence of a ſufficient body of this mineral can- 
not be manifeſted, to ſupport a continuance of the 
expence of working the mines; that it is does 
exiſt, in ſome degree, is abundantly evident, and, 
therefore, affords ſtrong grounds to ſuppole, that, 
in ſome part or other of the iſland, a more pro- 
ductive vein of it may yet be met with, by ſome 
public-ſpirited proprictor of the, ſoil moſt ſuitable 
for ſuch an attempr. 

From the nature of ſeveral hs Sh. are 
met with in ſeveral parts of this iſland, there can 
be no doubt of the exiſtence of other minerals.— 
Amongſt theſe we may reckon iron, ſome veins of 
which have been found, but of a very coarſe qua- 
lity ; yet are the waters which paſs through them 
ſtrongly impregnated, and properly deſerve the 


name of chalybeates. We have already mentioned 
that 


6 . HISTORY OF THE 


that allum is no ing to the inch and a ſpring 
was diſcovered in the laſt century by Dr. Fraſer, 
Phyſician to Charles the Second, which had a con- 
ſiderable tincture of it, and was uſed for ſome time 
with ſucceſs. Shanklin, where it was found, on 
the South-caſt of the ifland, was for ſome time a 
faſhionable place of reſort ; but, like all other 
faſhions, it had its day, and was afterwards neg- 
lected. At Black Gang, round the South point of 
the iſland, under Chale Cliff, is a ſtrong chaly- 
beate ſpring, which is ſuppoſed to contain more 
of the mineral than the celebrated water of Tun- 
bridge. To the Eaſtward of this laſt, in the ſame 

pariſh, is a ſpring which is ſuppoſed: to abound 
with /u/phur ; though it is purely clear and tranſ- 
parent, whilſt it lows from the ſpring. . But the 
common water of the ifland is, for the moſt part, 
extremely good, and not inferior to that of Briſtol, 
where it iſſues from the chalky hills. 

Wr cannot fay much of the 7imber of the ifland, 
which is probably not more than is neceſſary for 
its Fn conſumption; though it is not to be 
doubted that heretofore it was more plentiful, 
which has been diminiſhed by the ſupplies it has 
contributed to the Dock-yard at Portſmouth. It 
was alſo remarkably well ſtocked with game in 
preceding times, and perhaps at preſent contains 
a great quantity; it is certain, however, that it is 
not ſo abundant in general as formerly. Of the 
wild or predatory ſpecies of animals, it has been 
remarked, that neither fox, badger, or pole-cat, | 
' Were ever found in it. | Or 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 7 


Or fiſh and fowl it alſo affords plentiful ſupplies; 
not only for the conſumption of its own inhabi- 
tants, but for the deficiencies of places out of the 
iſland. The ſhipping at Spithead, and in Portſ- 
mouth Harbour, and all which take their depar- 
ture from thence, generally furniſh themſelves with 
both live and dead poultry from it ; and attention 
to the breeding, it is natural to be concluded, will 
uſually keep pace in proportion to the demand.— 
Fiſh alſo are common to the coaſt of this iſland, 
which are found on the coaſts of the main land of 
the county. It has alſo a peculiar kind of eel, 
called the ammodytes or ſand cel, from its natural 

property of burying itſelf in the ſand ; and is taken 
by turning up the ſand, immediately on the ebbing 
of the tide. They give it the name of ſand ſprat ; 
but on what account it is not perhaps ſo eaſy to 
determine. This iſland is alſo famous for its crabs 
and other ſhell-fiſh, but particularly theſe ; which 
are caught in ſuch quantities near the village of 
Niton, off the South promontory of the iſland, 
that from thence it has obtained the name of 
Crab Niton. | 
Tukxx is one thing more to be remarked, the 

wonderful and numerous aſſemblage of birds which 
reſort in the breeding months to the high Cliffs near 
Freſhwater and Bembridge, which are nearly the 
two extremities of the iſland ; where they uſually 
continue from about May to Auguſt before they 
diſappear. They are met with in great numbers 
off the Needles, which are high pinnacle rocks 

projecting 


$. HISTORY OF THR 


projecting from the Weſtern point of the iſland, 


ſwimming about upon the water, or flying about 


from rock to rock. But the ingenious manner in 


which the country people take their eggs, and de- 


ſkroy the birds, for the ſake of their feathers, is 


moſt worthy of notice, and manifeſts great dexte- 
rity ; yet it is certainly moſt awful and tremendous, 
requires much judgment and ſteadineſs, and" what 
muſt turn giddy the heads of all perſons who are 
not inured to ſimilar ſcenes, or accuſtomed from 


their occupation to hang ſuſpended in air, regard- 


teſs of the dreadful' conſequences which muſt at- 
tend a miſcarriage. After obſerving, that their 
eggs, which are nearly of the ſize of thoſe of a 
duck, are very good for culinary purpoſes, and 
that their feathers are deemed valuable by the up- 
holſterers, and that the fiſhermen alſo will give 
ſomething for their carcaſes, for baits to catch 
crabs; we will, in this place, produce ſome ac- 
count of the manner, in which this adventurous 
practice is managed. 

Tur firſt ſtep to accompliſh this romantic and 
hazardous event, 1s, to drive a large ſtake or iron 
bar-into the ground at the top of the Cliff, fo as 
to be capable of bearing any weight which can 
_ poſſibly depend upon it; and ſufficiently ſecure, 
as not to give way by any motion which the per- 
ſon, when ſuſpended, can be capable of. To this 
a cart-rope, or other rope or materials, of full 
ſtrength, and equally ſecure, is faſtened; and to 


its lower end there is put croſs-V ays a ſtick, upon 
which 


} 


( 


2 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 9 


which the daring adventurer ſeats himſelf, and by 
which he is ſupported With this ſimple appara- 


tus he deſcends down the face of this horrid pre- 


cipice, though the cliffs in ſome places are 600 
feet high from the level of the ſea. Theſe birds 
are now beſet, as they approach to, or go off from, 
their neſts, till the perſon attacking them has ſe- 
cured as many as he can; he then aſcends by the 
ſame means, and recovers the ſummit from whence 
he had began his bold and dauntleſs enterpriſe. — 


Such is the intrepidity of theſe Iſlanders, for the 
ſake of a trifling emolument. 


Wr have only to remark in general of the coaſt, 
which in part has been already referred to, that 
the land is very high, eſpecially on the South ſide. 
Except at South-Eaſt, the whole of this coaſt is 
ſo extremely elevated, as to bid defiance to every 


approach of an enemy; and this is defended by 


Sandown Fort, where alone a deſcent is practica- 
ble. Twenty pieces of cannon are here mounted 
as a defence, and as there are embraſures for others, 
there can be no impropriety in ſaying, that it muſt 
make a good defence againſt any attacks, if pro- 
perly garriſoned and well ſerved. It ſeems ſcarcely 
probable, that any attempts of invaſion on that 
ſide could be ſucceſsful. At the diſtance of two 
miles farther to the Weſt there is, indeed, another 
opening ; but as the ſhore is very flat, it prevents 
the near approach of any ſhips of ſufficient force to 


cauſe an alarm. We ſhall have occaſion to treat 
1 Ry farther 


— IC 


* be." n A 72 8 —8 — 
— F 


I 
- 
: 
4 
4 
he. 
. 
1h 
H 
25 
2 
. 
4 
$ 
3 
[ 
* 1 
x 
R 
o 
1 


Al 
52 
. 
i 
3 
2 
4 
bs 
b 
6 
0 
1 = 
q 
0 


10 HISTORY OF THE 


farther of this laſt in our parochial accounts, in its 


proper place and ſituation. 

In ſpeaking of the general ſtratum of the iſland, 
we ſhould have obſerved, that it appears very 
plainly on the coaſt near Mottiſton at low water, 
and is called plotnore, or platnore, by the inha- 
bitants; and is ſo firm that, when it has been ex- 
poſed to the air for ſome time, it is appropriated 


to the purpoſe of whetſtones. 


We ſhould be highly remiſs in the diſcharge of 


that duty to which we have pledged ourſelves in 


the public eſtimation, if we were to neglect the 


notice of the numerous plants and herbs in this 


iſland. Almoſt every ſpecies, which are to be 
found in any other part of England, are met with 
here ; a circumſtance which muſt be extremely 
agreeable to the philoſophic mind, and grateful to 
the botaniſt and man of ſcience, They abound in 


quantity, as well as in variety ; ſo that perſons are 


annually employed in the ſummer ſeaſon, to col- 


le& thoſe of a medical nature, by profeſſional and 


other gentlemen who viſit the ifland for that pur- 
poſe. The ſatyrion, or bee orchis, in particular, 
is found in the environs of Cariſbrooke Caſtle ;— 
which, in Linnæus and other recent works of bo- 


tany, is found under the name of ophrys. Dr. 


Shaw, in the Naturaliſt's Miſcellany, now pub- 
liſhing in monthly numbers, at 18. 6d. each, after 
giving the generic characters of ancient and mo- 


dern authors, has theſe obſervations; which, we 
think, 


ISLE OF WIGHT, - T1 


think, will afford information and entertainment 
to our readers. The plant is well known,” ſays 


he, © to the admirers of botany by the title of the 
bee orchis. It flowers in June and July. It is 


« found principally on hilly grounds, and near 
« woods, eſpecially on a chalky ſoil; but it is 
« never ſeen in ſuch complete perfection as when 
« jt happens to grow in the ſhade of a wood, as 
« in this ſituation it eſcapes all thoſe injuries, 
« which the leaves are fo apt to ſuffer, when grow- 
te ing in a too ſunny expoſure. So ſtriking is the 
« general reſemblance which the flowers; when 
te viewed at a little diſtance, bear to an infect, as 
*« to have uniformly impreſſed all obſervers with 
te the ſame idea; and may almoſt juſtify the ap- 
te plication of the epigrammatic deſcription : 
« Nature in doubt a beauteous flow'r 
Or inſect to diſcloſe, _ 
At length beneath her forming pow'r 

They both in union roſe.” 

Ir will be no leſs gratifying to the naturaliſt and 
the profeſſional man to be informed, that vipers 
are found in ſurpriſing quantities in this iſland ; 
as it is of much importance to medical gentlemen, 


from their known efficacy in many diſorders to 


which the human frame is incident. Truffles are 
alſo found in the iſland. About Bath, and at 
Clarendon Woods, in Wiltſhire, the bee orchis is 
met with in great abundance; and truffles alſo are 
found near the latter place, but with theſe our 
preſent Hiſtory is not farther concerned. 
C 2 CHAPTER 


% 


12 HISTORY OF THE 


CHAPTER II. 


ENQUIRY WHETHER IT WAS ANCIENTLY AN ISLAND, 
OR A PENINSULA, 


I. is certain that this part of the kingdom was 
conſidered as an iſland, more than 2,000 years 
ago, notwithſtanding the conjectures of ſome re- 
ſpectable writers, that it was formerly joined to 
the main land by an iſthmus. The Romans men- 
tion it under the name of Vectis, and ſometimes 
Vecta. Ety mologiſts have ſubmitted various ſug- 
geſtions of its derivation ; ſome deducing it from 
the Britiſh word gaith, which denotes a breach or 
diviſion, and ſuppoſed to refer to its ſeparation 
from the main land; others prefer its deduction 
from the Latin word Vectis, juſt mentioned, which 
literally ſignifies a bar or bolt, as ſufficiently ex- 
preſſive of the ſteep and projecting rocks with 
which the coaſt is for the moſt part defended. — 
The tranſition from either of theſe to We#F, With, 
or Vids, as it is in Domeſday-book and other 
more ancient records, is therefore, both natural 
and eaſy. On theſe, however, we wiſh not to lay 
any great ſtreſs; the Roman accounts of its being 
an ifland, known by the above names, is what we 
are principally to regard. Whether the conſidera- 
tion already mentioned in the preceding chapter, 
that no predatory animal has ever been known to 
inhabit 


LY wa N — 3 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 13 


inhabit this iſland, which affords ſome preſump- 
tion againſt the idea of its having ever been con- 
nected with the main land, is ſufficient to ſet aſide 
the arguments for the contrary, we ſhall leave our 
readers to conclude for themſelves. And to enable 
them to do this, it will be proper to recite ſuch of 
the arguments, as have inclined ſome very reſpect- 


able writers to favour this opinion. 


WHETHER the relation of Diodorus Siculis. who 
mentions a peninſula, under the name of Vectis, 
as the mart to which the Corniſh merchants 
brought their tin, could be meant of this iſland, 
is, probably, not an eaſy matter to determine.— 
One would ſcarcely ſuppoſe, that any change of 
ſuch a nature ſhould have taken place, if it had 
heretofore been eſtabliſhed in the Scilly iſles, as is 
generally admitted ; which was certainly much 


more convenient for the purpoſes of the Phoenician 


commerce, than this diſtant coaſt, beſides the ap- 
parently unneceſſary trouble to the natives, of 
bringing it ſo far by land. Mr. Borlaſe, in his 
Natural Hiſtory of Cornwall, has urged ſome very 
probable arguments, why this iſland could not 
have been the Ictis or Vectis of the ancients ; that 
the ancient hiſtorian, already mentioned, who was 
ſpeaking of the Britons of Cornwall, and appa- 
rently of thoſe of the more weſtern parts of it, 
could not, with any probability, mean the inhabi . 
tants of this Hand, nearly two hundred miles diſ- 
tant; that it is ſaid of thoſe, even of Belerium, or 
the Land” s End, that they find, dreſs, melt, carry, 

CT and 


3 
724 
1 
the | 
. 


bes 
. 
>< 
4 * 
38 
4 8 N 
5 
: 
th 1 
0 
1 
4 


14 | HISTORY OF THE 


and fell their tin, without any int imat ion of any 


great diſtance, or their employing any other in- 


ſtruments or means of conveyance. The goodneſs 
of the ports on their own ſhore, which were cer- 


tainly as good or better than any they could find 
on the South of this iſland, where the ancient 
emporium is contended to have been fixed, ſeems 
alſo to militate againſt ſuch a concluſion. It to 


this alſo we add, that the hiſtorian ſpeaks of the 


inhabitants of thoſe parts as more civilized and 


affable than thoſe of the other parts of the iſland ; 


and that theſe advantages and improvements were 
to be accounted for by, and attributed to, their 
connexion, and converſation with ſtrangers and 
merchants, which muſt, therefore, have been well 
known in Cornwall; and that this civilization 
would naturally be effected by their reſidence 
there, by their buying and exporting from thence 


their tin, which alone could be the buſineſs of 
that reſidence; all theſe circumſtances increaſe 


the difficulty of accounting for, or referring the an- 
cient Ictis or Vectis to this iſland. Had the place 
of exportation been in this iſland, or indeed in any 
part of Hampſhire, the merchants or agents would 
certainly have reſided there; in which caſe it is 
not likely, that their more poliſhed manners could 
have affected the manners of a people who lived 
at ſuch a diftance, which the ancient hiſtorian 
poſitively aſſerts. Hence Mr. Borla/e is of opi- 
nion, and he was well acquainted with the ancient 
language of Cornwall, that this ancient Itis was 
{omew here 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 15 


ſomewhere on that coaſt; that 7k is a common 
Corniſh word for a cove, creek, or port of traffick, 
and was either a general name for any peninſula 
or creek, or the name of ſome particular one on 
this coaſt. He adds farther, that probably either 
the iſthmus may have been loſt, or perhaps diſ- 
appeared wholly, from ſome great alteration on the 
Tea ſhore of that country. | 

Sucn is the nature of the arguments produced 
againſt the idea of an emporium for tin in this 
iſland ; and certainly much deference ought to be 
paid to the authority of an hiſtorian, who was 
eminently diſtinguiſhed as an antiquarian, ſpent a 
long life in the very ſeat of the country of the 
matters which he relates, and had the greateſt op- 
portunities of coming at the beſt ſources of infor- 
mation poſſible on the ſubject. And as he parti- 
cularly exerciſed his talents in this kind of re- 
ſearches, it is not likely that he could be unac- 
quainted with them. 

Bur as ſome very reſpectable writers have en- 
tered the liſts on the other ſide of the queſtion, 
and contended for the antiquity of this iſland as 
the port or emporium, from whence the tin of 
thoſe weſtern counties of Cornwall and perhaps 
Devon was ſhipped ; and as theſe contrary opinions 
appear to be as ſtrongly ſupported as the former, 
fo as to render the determination a matter of ex- 
treme difficulty; it ſeems to be our duty to lay. 
the arguments in ſupport of theſe alſo before our 
readers, and leave them to judge between the parties. 

C 4 . Ax 


16 HISTORY OF THE 


A hiſtorical writer, who has favoured the world 
with a celebrated account of the commercial town 
of Mancheſter, has incorporated this ſubject as a 
part of his Work, in tracing the progreſs of com- 
merce and manufactures. We cannot conveniently 
come at the authorities which he produces in ſup- 
port of his aſſertions, and thereſore muſt content 
ourſelves with giving the ſubſtance of his argu- 
ments. He ſays that the Phoenicians had continued 
the tin trade to the coaſts of Scilly for near three 
hundred years; that the Greeks of Marſeilles firft 
followed the track of the Phoenician voyagers ; and 
that about two hundred years before Chrift, and 
before the days of Polybius, the latter began to 
thare with the former in the trade of tin. Such 
was the effect of this innovation, that, as he ſays, 
in the reign of Auguſtus the whole current of the 
Britiſh traffic k had been gradually diverted into 
this channel. He tells us, that the great ſtaple of 
tin was no longer ſettled in a diftant corner of the 
Hand, that it was removed from Scilly, and 
fixed in the ifle of Wight, a central part of the coaſt, 
and betwixt two roads which had been laid acrofs 
the country, from Carnarvon to Sandwich, and from 
' Dorfetſhire to Suffolk. This fituation, he adds, 
was better adapted to the new arrangement of the 
trade; to which the Belge carried their tin, and 
to which the foreign merchants brought their 
merchandize. From which it appears, according 
to this account, that a great revolution in com- 
merce had taken place, and that every thing was 
conducted in a channel entirely new. 


ISL? OF WIGHT. ; 17 


Hz takes notice of this iſland farther, and ſays, 
« That the iſle of Wight, which, as late as the 
« eighth century, was ſeparated from the re- 
c mainder of Hampſhire by a channel no leſs 
« than three miles in breadth, was now actually 
« a part of the greater iſland, disjoined from it 
« only by the tide, and united to it always at the 
« ebb. And during the receſs of the waters, the 
« Britons conſtantly paſſed over the low iſthmus 
« of land, and carried their loaded carts of tin 
cc acroſs it.” | 
On the ſame fide of the queſtion, a learned an- 
tiquarian, Sir Robert Colton, about the year 1609, 
in a very curious tract relative to the Kings of 
England, obſerves, that Henry VI. in the thirty- 
firſt year of his reign, ſeized a large quantity of 
tin at the town of Southampton, which he ſold to 
his own preſent uſe, to ſupply his neceſſary de- 
mands in a caſe of emergency. This, in the Par- 
liamentary Rolls, is ſaid expreſsly to have been 
the property of Genoeſe merchants, and to the 
amount of 8, oool.; and to palliate this outrage 
upon private property, though to anſwer ſome 
public purpoſe, he procured an Act of Parliament 
ro be made in their favour, authorizing them to 
ſhip all Kinds of wool, tin, and other merchandize 
in veſſels to paſs the Straits of Marrok, and to 
land all merchandizes to them belonging, coming 
into the ſaid port of Southampton from foreign 
parts. They were, moreover, to retain the duties 
and cuſtoms thereupon ariſing in their own hands 
towards 


18 HISTORY OF THE 


towards the payment of the ſaid ſum of 8, oool. 
and to take and receive all cuſtoms and ſubſidies 
of the ſaid port, from a certain day therein men- 
tioned, of all merchandize which ſhould be ſhip- 
ped at that port, till the ſaid ſum ſhould be fully 
ſatisfied. 2 2 
Tux remarks of a gentleman, a reſident of the 
iſland, are alſo in favour of Mr. Whitaker's opi- 
nion; but whether they are to be conſidered as 
ingenious conjectures, or as founded on probable 
grounds from hiſtory, we are not fully ſatisfied. — 
In ſubſtance, his obſervations are to the following 
purport. At the two extremities of the channel 
between this iſland and the coaſt of Hampſhire, 
he ſignifies, that the tide ruſhes in and out with 
ſuch impetuoſity as to render them deep and dan- 
gerous; but the tides. meet each other near the 
midway, and make very rough water, accorging 
to the ſtate of the wind, but without any rapidity _ 
of current to carry away the ſoil, and deepen the 
bottom. A hard gravelly ſoil is; therefore, found 
in that part, extending eonſiderably acroſs the 
channel, which is not met with in any other part. 
On the oppoſite ſide is a ſmall ſcattering village 
of a few houſes, called Leap, which he conceives 
might poſſibly receive its name from the narrow- 
| nels of the paſſage there; oppolite to which in the 
iſland is a Street called Rew Street, or Rue, from 
the French probably, of two miles in length in a 
ſtrait line from the Weſt fide of Gurnet creek. — 
From thence, it paſſes, having croſſed the foreſt 
of 


/ 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 19 


of Parkhurſt, or Alvington, from St. Auſtin's gate 


to the Weſt of Cariſbrooke Caſtle, and ſo on by 


Sheat to the South of the iſland. Obſerving that 
many parts of this road are at preſent of little or 
no uſe, though he admits that an attentive eye 1s 
neceſſary alſo to diſcover ſome parts of the track ; 
he ſays, it is hard to conjecture what purpoſe it 
could have to anſwer, unleſs it was heretofore uſed 
for the conveyance of tin. x 

Brrokk we offer our remarks on theſe ſeveral 
authorities, it may be proper to add, that the 
ſtannaries were certainly held at Southampton for- 
merly ; 'the circumſtances already related, of the 
ſeizure of the tin and merchandize at Southamp- 
ton, and the Act of Parliament paſſed to reimburſe 
the ſufferers, afford abundant proof of it. A large 
cellar near the quay at Southampton has alſo had 


the name of the tin cellar, if it does not at preſent _ 


retain it ; and a houſe which was purchaſed by the 
celebrated Dr. Speed, who wrote a tract to prove 
the ſtrength and quality of the ſea-water at South- 
ampton, is traditionally reported to have been the 
office for conducting the buſineſs of this trade. It 
was removed from thence in the ſifteenth century, 
and, probably, in conſequence of the arbitrary 
meaſures of King Henry VI. and the turbulent 
condition of public and civil mattcrs in that reign. 
Whether the merchants did afterwards venture 
their property, in the confidence of the Act of 
Parliament made in their favour, we are not ſuf- 
ficiently enabled to affirm, 


ON 


[ 
—— ͤͤ— 


20 | HISTORY or THE 


Ox theſe different relations we ſhall offer ſome 
remarks, without deſigning to decide the queſtion, 
upon which theſe reſpectable authorities ſo widely 
differ. And it is certain, that the rivalſhip of 
the Marſeilleſe, to the detriment of the Phoenict- 
ans, in this trade, could not be a ſufficient reaſon 
for changing the accuſtomed port; unleſs, which 
is extremely improbable, the latter had ſome ex- 
cluſive treaty, and that ſome other port was abſo- 
lutely neceſſary for theſe new traders to reſort to. 
Admitting this, for the ſake of argument, but not 
as ſufficient proof, it ſtill remains to be accounted 
for, why they ſhould remove to ſuch a diſtance for 
a port, when fo many convenient harbours and 
ports lay betwixt them, at a much leſs diſtance; 
eſpecially if the Marſeilleſe tranſported their mer- 
chandize along the coaſts of France and Spain, by 
the Straits of Gibraltar (allowing the uſe of modern 
names) into the Mediterrancan, as well as the 
Pheœnicians. 

Bur, ſuppoſing the Greeks to have Fs the 
tin immediately into Gaul, and that this rival 
trade was carried on by means entirely different; 
the account given by Diodorus Siculus comes in 
aid of the opinion, that this iſland was the great 
emporium of their trade, even as it is related by 
Mr. Borlaſe himſelf. He ſays, © that from this 
« iſland the merchants buy the tin of the natives, 
* and export it into Gaul, and finally through 
«© Gaul, by a journey of thirty days, they bring 
e jt down on horſes to the mouth of the Rhone,“ 
or, 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 21 


or, according to Strabo, to Marſeilles. The 
Pheœnicians might threaten them by ſea, to make 
a capture of their ſhips, if they ventured out of 
the channel; which might alſo be a reaſon why 
they preferred to export 1t from this part, rather 
than from their ancient port, even if they were at 
liberty ſo to do. From hence the probability of 
this change may receive ſome additional ſupport, 
and operate as an argument in favour of the eſta- 
bliſhment of the market in this iſland ; but it ſtill 
remains to be conſidered, how the Greeks could 
afford ſo vaſt an expence of land carriage, and at 
the ſame time be enabled to offer ſuch terms to 
the Britons, as to ſecure the trade in their favour. 
It is alſo ſaid, that the Greeks purchaſed it of the 
natives; which ſurely could not mean the inhabi- 
tants of this iſland, unleſs we take the name ge- 
nerally for the inhabitants of the country, how- 
ever diſtant. If it was poſſible for the Marſeilleſe 
to procure tin by any other means than this, it 
does not ſeem very probable that they ſhould put 
themſelves to ſuch an accumulated expence to 
procure it; but this we ſubmit to the opinion of 
our readers. | 

Wnar has been obſerved from Sir Robert Cotton 
and the Rolls of Parliament, ſeems to be more 
poſitive for the removal of this emporium into 
Hampſhire. As a matter of fact, there ſeems to 
be no doubt of its authenticity ; how it became 
the ſtaple place for this commerce is another con- 


{ideration, which, ſo far as relates to the ſubject 
in 


| 
* 


22 HISTORY OT TIE 


in queſtion, may admit of a very probable and 


natural ſolution. Admitting, as we have before 
done, for the ſake of argument, that the conjec- 
tural reaſons, which have juſt been given, are 
well founded ; and ſuppoſing that, by the violence 
of the waves, the iſthmus of this peninſula was 
broken through, and converted into an iſland; to, 
which we may add the probable conſequence of 
this change of market, that the Phoenicians might 
ſoon find it uſeleſs to attempt to intercept the 
veſſels and cargoes of the Marſcilleſe, and be 
thereby compelled to leave theſe ſeas; all theſe 
circumſtances taken together, would ſoon point 
out the neceſſity and expediency of a better fitua- 


tion, ſuch as the port of Southampton evidently 


afforded. | 
Taz next thing to be remarked, is the recited : 


opinion of a gentleman of the iſland ; the force of 


whoſe remarks, we confeſs, we do not immediately 
comprehend, though we cannot doubt that he 
conſidered his conjectures to be founded on mat- 
ters of fact. We may alſo obſerve, that the road, 
called Rue Street, might be an uſual boundary 
in ancient times; which has been diverted and 
changed, from time to time, to ſuit the pleaſure 


or convenience of the proprietors, reſidents in the 


Hand, or to remove ſome diſagreeable conſe- 
quences of a road in that particular direction. It 
is far from improbable, that ſuch changes muſt 


have happened in many inſtances, if no ſuch pub- 


lic road had ever croſſed the iſland ; we, therefore, 
| think 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 23 


think that this argument, ſingly conſidered, has 
little weight, and the conjecture, though it muſt 
be allowed to be ingenious, to be in that reſpect 
unſubſtantiated. _ | 

A the circumſtance deduced from the tides, 
and the depth of water in different parts of the 
channel, we mult alſo preſent ſome remarks. That 
the tides ruſh in at the weſtern part of the iſland 
with much impetuoſity, is readily admitted, and 
retire, in like manner, with conſiderable velocity; 
but the different charts, which we have had an 
opportunity of examining, do not convey to us the 
idea, which 1s there ſtated, at the extremities of 
the channel between the iſland and the county at 
large, unleſs we conſider the narrow part to the 
South-eaſt of Hurſt Caſtle Point, where we 'find 
more than thirty fathoms water, and the entrance 
into Spithead road from the Eaſt and South-Eaſt, 
between the horſe buoy, and no man's land buoy, 
where there are from fifteen to ſeventeen fathoms 
water, we cannot conſider them as deep or dan- 
gerous. Theſe, however, might be the extremities 
deſigned to be meant; in which the ſeaman will 
act diſcreetly, but without the ſmalleſt apprehen- 
ſion of danger. Almoſt immediately within the 
paſſage of Hurſt Caſtle Point, towards the ifland 
fide, we find no more than ten and twelve fathoms 
water, and continues variable from this depth to 
ſeven and fix a half; this laſt is the leaſt depth 
which is marked in any of our charts, which can- 


not be conſidered as very ſhallow water, or a part 
where 


24 HISTORY OF THE 


where much of the ſoil has not been carried away, 

if it ever formed an iſthmus, -or peninſula. 5 
THrar the current of the waters of the tide is loſt 
at midway, is more than we can with certainty aver. 
We have paſſed through this channel, on many oc- 
caſions, in veſſels of different ſizes, but never found 
any ſuch ſtoppage of current, as is here intimated; 
though we remember an inſtance, when, from a fail- 
ure of wind and an ebb tide coming on, we were 
obliged to caſt anchor in Gurnet bay. We can in- 
deed conceive it poſſible, in one particular ſituati- 
on, near the union of the two tides, or rather the 
two branches of the ſame tide, which are ſeparated 
by the iſland, from each end of it into Southamp- 
ton water; becauſe we know, from obſervation, 
that the inhabitants of the ſhores within that 
water have two tides, about forty or fifty minutes 
after each other. This can only be accounted for 
from the difference of time, in which the currents 
of theſe two branches begin and end; and perhaps 
in the eddy between them, ſome ſuch phœnomenon 
as this may occur for a ſhort time. We can readily 
conjecture where to look for this temporary ſtag- 
nation of water, were it any way neceſſary ; but 
ſuch is the ſtate of our charts, as to afford little 
room for the general argument we have been con- 

ſidering. 1 5 
IxpEED, we will not abſolutely fay, on which 
fide of the queſtion the truth of the matter reſts ; 
but from what has been advanced, and the remarks 
which have occurred to us on comparing theſe nar- 
rations 


ISLE OT WIGHT, | 25 


rations with one another, we think we may be juſ- 
tified in concluding, that if this ever was a penin- 
ſula with an iſthmus, it muſt have been more than 
2,000 years ago. It is certain that the ancient Ro- 
mans conſidered this part of our country as an 
iſland, becauſe their hiſtorians and geographers 
take notice of it under the name of Vectis or Vecta; 
and as ſuch it was laid down both in Pliny's and 
Ptolemy's geography, though the former of theſe 
miſplaced it between Britain and Ireland. 


D CHAPTER 


* HISTORY OF THE 


CHAPTER III. 


OF THE ANCIENT MILITARY HISTORY OF THE 
| ISLAND. \ 


330 trace the condition and ſtate of this iſland 
to the utmoſt ſources of authentic hiſtory, we muſt 
content ourſelves with quoting the authority of 
Suetonius, in his life of Veſpaſian, one of the 
Cæſars ſo called; of whom it is ſaid, that he three 
times engaged his enemies in Great-Britain, ſub- 
dued two powerful nations, took twenty towns, 
with the iſle of Wight, on the confines of the 
country. It is added immediately, that he per- 
formed one part of theſe exploits under the con- 
ſular Lieutenant, Aulus Plautius, and the other 
under the direction and command of the Emperor 
Claudius. Veſpaſian was ſoon after honoured 
with triumphal ornaments, and two ſacerdotal 
dignities were ſhortly conferred upon him; beſides 
which he obtained the conſulſhip, which office he 
exerciſed*fot the two laſt months of the year, but 
afterwards retired till his appointment to be go- 
vernor of Africa, It does not appear that his 
conqueſt of this iſland was productive of much 
ad vantage; for in reſpect to opulence, we find, 
that his circumſtances were ſomewhat deranged. 
Had this iſland been at that time the ſtaple for tin 
and other merchandize, which was of the higheſt 

: eſtimation 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 27 


eſtimation in all the Mediterranean countries, his 
booty, it is probable, muſt have been very con- 
ſiderable; ſome doubt may, therefore, ariſe from 
this conſideration, as to the identity of this iſland 
being the emporium of this traffic. 
Ir does not appear, that the Romans continued 
in this ifland, as we find no traces of encamp- 
ments, which are met with in every other part of. 
the kingdom, whither they extended their arms 
and effected a conqueſt. During their ſtay, there- 
fore, which probably was but ſhort, they muſt 
either have lived in the towns, or remained on 
the ground without their uſual precautions of ſe- 
curity, without fear or apprehenſion from the in- 
habitants ; ſo that we cannot make any concluſion, 
that they remained here, but that the inhabitants 
rather ſubmitted at diſcretion, without any efforts 
to oppoſe the landing of the Romans. TY 
For more than four hundred and fifty years from 
this time, we meet with no particular accounts, 
relative to the inhabitants of this iſland, as diſtin- 
guiſhed from thoſe of the main land. But in the 
year of Chriſt four hundred and ninety-five, the 
Saxon Chief, Cerdic, with his ſon Kenric, invaded 
Britain, where they met with much oppoſition, 
and ſuffered great loſſes, before they could effect 
a ſettlement ; and though they ſucceeded at laſt 
in ſubduing the native Britons, yet were they for 
many years greatly harafſed by them.. The coun- 
ties of Wilts, Berks, Dorfet, and Hants, with the 
iſle of Wight, were the ſcene of their conqueſts ; 
D 2 moſt 


* HISTORY OF THY 


moſt of the inhabitants of this iſland being ſlain, 
Cerdic replaced them with a great number of Jutes 
and Saxons, whom he folicited to come over, and 
beſtowed the iſland on his two nephews, Stuff and 
Withgar. We hear no more of this iſland for 
above a century, during which time, probably, it 
might remain without farther diſturbance. Hiſ- 
torians tell us, that from Cerdic, in the male line, 
the Kings of England as far as Edward the Con- 
feſfor, are deſcended; and in the female line, down 
to the prefent time. It was afterwards conquered 
and. laid wafte by Wulfer, King of Mercia, about 
the year ſix hundred and fixty-one;; who beſtowed 
it upon Adelwach, King of Suſſex, whom before 
he had vanquiſhed and taken captive. Ceadwalla, 
who was lineally deſcended from Cerdic, refumed 
the poſſeſfion of this iſland as his rightful inherit- 
ance, of which his family had been forcibly de- 
prived by Wulfer; in effecting which, the country 
was greatly ravaged and defpoiled. 

As Ceadwalla had embraced the Chriftian faith, 
and poſſeſſed no ſmall ſhare of religious zeal, his 
averſion to the Pagan idolatry of the inhabitants 
determined him to extirpate them, to make room 
for his. Chriſtian countrymen. But he was pre- 
vailed upon by Biſhop Wilfrid to ſpare their lives, 
on condition of their being baptized into that 
profeſſion; a condition, which, it is more than 
probable, the greater part complied with. We 
learn from Bede, that the Prince of the iſland had 
two ſons, who at this time endeavoured to make 

their 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 29 


their efcape, but were taken at Stone, probably 
in that part of the foreſt, near Fawley, almoſt op- 
poſite to the iſland. Being doomed to death, 
they were firſt, as an act of clemency, permitted 
to be baptized. 

Azovr a hundred years after, towards the cloſe 
of the eighth century, this iſland was ſurpriſed by 
the Daniſh pirates, which about that time infeſted 
the ſeas. Their deſign, it is obvious, was to 
make it a place of retreat; to which they might 
repair with their ſpoils which they pillaged on the 
other part of the coaſt. Since the Saxons had 
eſtabliſhed themſelves in Britain, their ſhipping 
had been much neglected; whilſt the Danes, who 
lived by piracy and plunder, by attending to a 
navy, were greatly ſuperior to them. The Saxons, 
too, were greatly deranged by their own inteſtine 
commotions, and were, therefore, a more eaſy 
prey to theſe marauding depredators. 

Ir was not till the reign of King Alfred, ſur- 
named the Great, that a fleet was fitted out to 
ſcour the channel, and to free the inhabitants from 
theſe ſurpriſes. The daring ſpirit of theſe pira- 
tical freebooters could alone rouſe them to revenge 
the repeated inſults they received. Alfred's ſuc- 
ceſſors, and particularly Edgar, paid a ſpecial 
attention to this defence. His vigilance and acti- 
vity ſecured the ſouthern coaſt, and his defeat of 
the Danes near the ſhores of Devon procured a 
temporary reſpite to this part of the channel; for 
in the year eight hundred and. nine en aſter 

D 3 5 the 


30 HISTORY OF TRE 


* 


the Daniſh fleet of fix ſhips had plundered the ifle' 
of Wight, and retired with their booty, he pur- 
ſued them to the weſtern counties, overtook them 
on the coaſt of Devonſhire, engaged them and 
took two of their veſſels, after killing many of 
their men, and drove three more of them on ſhore. 
The crews of theſe being taken, in their endea- 
vours to eſcape, were carried to the King who was 
then at Wincheſter, where he cauſed thera all to 
be hanged as public robbers. This, however, did 
not relieve the other parts of Britain, where the 
Danes had eſtabliſhed themſelves ; for their roving 
countrymen, inured and accuſtomed to rapine and 
plunder, continued, as advantages and opportu- 
nities offered, to infeſt the coaſts in other places. 

Tas tardy and inactive diſpoſition of Ethelred, 
gave the Danes a very manifeſt opportunity of re- 
newing their depredations. About the year nine 
hundred and ninety-eight they found the channel 
- withqut defence, when they plundered the adjoin- 
ing coaſt, and, having carried their booty to their 
veſſels, this iſland afforded them an aſylum, their 
force being far ſuperior to any thing which could 
oppoſe them. Here they lived for ſome time 
without controul ; from whence they made an ex- 
curſion into Devonſhire and Somerſetſhire, where 
they committed the greateſt outrages, plundering - 
and afterwards deſtroying many towns. Their 
return to the iſland was marked with devaſtation, 
where ſeveral villages were wholly deſtroyed, with 
the town of Wealtham ; but whether this be meant 
T6 of 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | 31 


of Newtown, or of a large hamlet called Werrow, 
or perhaps Wellow, not far from Thorley, in the 
road to Yarmouth, is a matter not altogether cer- 
tain. The probability of the latter is founded 
upon theſe conjectures ; that there are plain and 
evident traces and remains of a town ; that the 
foundations of very old buildings have been diſ- 
covered in various parts of it; that a large com- 


mon field, called Werrow common field, is con- be | 


. tiguous to it, which is a general indication of a 
town adjoining. About three years were ſpent 1 in 
theſe plundering excurſions. 

In a few years after this, a Daniſh fleet, having 
made a deſcent on the Kentiſh coaſt, where they 
plundered the town of Sandwich, with all the 
neighbouring country, retired to this iſland, as to 
a ſecure aſylum, with their booty. From hence 
they. made a predatory excurſion into the county 
of Berks, and returned to their uſual retreat. 

Wurd Earl Godwin was outlawed, and driven 
to baniſhment, by Edward the Confeſſor, and had 
conſequently joined the Earl of Flanders, he pro- 
cured a naval force, and therewith plundered the 
iſle of Wight and the peninſula of Portland, after 
watching a favourable opportunity for that pur- 
poſe. After this he was joined by his ſon Harold, 
with nine ſhips from Ireland; hen the wretched 
and miſerable inhabitants were completely ſtripped 
of every thing, which had remained to them, after 
the former depredations. The Earl of Northum- 
berland, who was alſo a ſon of Earl Godwin, whoſe 

-- hs name 


TN HISTORY OF rut 


name was Tofti, and had been driven from that 
country for his cruelty and injuſtice, alſo made a 
deſcent upon this iſſand; when it once more 
ſmarted under the ſcourge of hoſtile invaſion. His 
fleet had been collected in Flanders for the pur- 
poſe of this invaſion; and had been encouraged 
by William, Duke of Normandy, who had then 
meditated the congueſt of Britain, as a means of 
diſturbing the government of King Harold. 
TRANQUILITY and peace ſeem to have ſucceed- 
ed William's conqueſt, for more than two hundred 
yeats, till the year one thouſand two hundred and 
ninety-five. This iſland was now become the 
property of King Edward the Firſt, by purchaſe, 
as we ſhall ſee more fully hereafter ; and an inva- 
ſion of England being meditated by France, about 
the twenty-third year of this King's reign, for 
which they had fitted out a numerous fleet, the 
defence of it was committed to the Biſhop of Win- 
cheſter, Adam de Gordon, and Sir Richard de 
Affeton, a gentleman of the iſland. Being jointly 
commiſſioned as wardens and protectors, they had 
orders and inſtructions in what manner they ſhould 
conduct themſelves, and execute thoſe inſtructions, 
ſhould they be attacked ; but as this invaſion never 
took place, the inhabitants were not expoſed to 
the effects of ſuch a meaſure. It appears, how- 
ever, that they concerted ſome judicious meaſures, 
by way of precaution, in a ſubſequent reign, about 
fiſty years after; when Sir John de Langford, the 
conſtable of Cariſbrook Caſtle, Sir Bartholomew 
| | de 


ISLE or WIGHT. 33 


de Liſle, and Sir Theobald Ruſſell, were appointed 
wardens, for the defence of the kingdom, in the 
thirteenth year of King Edward the Third, when 
he aſſerted his claim to the Crown of France. 
About this time it ſuſtained ſeveral attacks. 

Wes think it will afford entertainment, as well 
as inſtruction, to our readers, to lay before them 
the precautions alluded to, as the means of ſecu- 
rity againſt theſe attacks. One of the firſt provi- 
fions, was, that there ſhould only be three ports 
in the whole iſland, which were to be, La Riche, 
Shamblord, and Yarmouth; and that three per- 
ſons ſhould be appointed wardens of theſe ports, 
to prevent any perſons from retiring out of the 
iſland, or exporting any kinds of ſupplies of corn 
or other food from thence, without ſpecial licenſe 
ſo to do, None but licenſed boats were to be 
permitted to paſs, except the boat belonging to 
the Abbot of Quarr, the boat of Sir Bartho- 
lomew de Lifle, and another which appertained 
to Robert de Pimely. Watches were alſo appoint- 
ed in every place neceffary ; and perſons nomi- 
nated for their ſuperintendence, and to keep the 
beacons properly guarded. | 

THaess precautions were ſoon found to be of the 
utmoſt importance. An invaſion actually took 
place, and the French debarked at St. Helen's 
Point. From hence they began to march forward, 
till they were met by the iſlanders ; when a ſharp 
conteſt took place, in which Sir Theobald Ruffelf 
was ſlain. He is called by Stowe, Sir Peter Ruf- 
ſell. 


34 | HISTORY OF THE 


fell. The French were repulſed, and driven back 
to their ſhips. 

TuII the beginning of Richard the Sven 
reign, the iſland continued free from farther inva- 
ſions; though frequent menaces had been made. 
But they now made a ſucceſsful deſcent upon it, 
Which was ſuppoſed to be the effects of negligence, 
if we may give full credit to what is related by 
Stowe. For our own part, we confeſs, that we 
cannot diſcover on what grounds he formed ſo 
favourable an eſtimate of the ſtrength of the iſland 
at that time; when it was evidently expoſed to 
the inſults of all thoſe, who might come in any 
force of numbers to invade it, as there were no 
forts or places of ſtrength in thoſe ages to prevent 
or obſtruct the landing of any enemy. For altho' 
the Caſtle of Cariſbrook, of which we ſhall alſo 
ſpeak hereafter, was at this time in exiſtence ; its 
central ſituation ſerved chiefly as a place of re- 
treat, to which the inhabitants might flee with 
their moſt valuable effects, in caſe of invaſion. 
Brot the precautions, already mentioned, 
vere taken, during the reign of Edward the Third, 
many of the inhabitants of this iſland, for want of 
a ſufficient domeſtic ſecurity, and wearied out 
with continual alarms and depredations, withdrew 
_ themſelves, with their families, from the iſland. 
The directions and orders which were then iſſued, 
to the wardens of the iſland, which enjoined them 
to ſcize the lands of thoſe-who refuſed to return, 
afford full proof of theſe emigrations. 
| FROM 


ISLE OF WIGHT, * 


- From the regulations which were at this time 
made, the iſland had been in ſome meaſure formed 
into a means of regular defence; ſo that in the 
time of Richard the Second, they had a militia, . 
conſiſting of nine companies, of one hundred men 
in each company, But as. the French preparations 
_ afforded timely intimation of their hoſtile inten- 
tions, they had been reinforced both from the 
county of Southampton and alſo from London.— 
The enemy having effected a landing; the inhabi- 
tants fled for ſecurity and refuge to the Caſtle of 
Cariſbrook, at this time defended. by Sir Hugh 
Tyrrel ; whither the French purſued them, and 
beſieged: the Caſtle, Great numbers of the aſſail- 
ants were ſlain in this ſiege; and a party of them, 
in attempting to force their way cloſe to the Caſtle, 
with more courage than diſcretion, were cut off 
by an ambuſcade, which had been formed to in- 
tercept them. The lane by which they attempted 
to paſs, ſtill bears the name of Deadman's Lane; 
and the preſent Node Hill, which forms one of the 
avenues to the town of Newport, and now built 
upon, is a corruption of Noddies Hill, as the tu- 
mulus, where the ſlain were buried, was then 
exultingly called, We think it our duty to ſtate 
this circumſtance for the information of our read- 
ers; as it muſt be ſatisfactory to all perſons who 
poſſeſs the leaſt curioſity, or wiſh to have a know- 
ledge of the cauſe and origin of names. 
Bz1xG thereby obliged to raiſe the fiege, which 


they found it uſeleſs to prolong, they prepared to 
| leave 


"> . r 2 


Dey 
= | 


EE ae 


* 


o '4 
«3 
5 7 
* 
=. 
: 
__— 
„ 
7 
Rt 
u Ll 
$4340 
. 
of of® 
* * 
LT 
$07 
. : 
73 . 
. 
* 
7,328 
4 o 
1 . FI 
p 4 
£44 
1 
. 


- Iz 9 


a — — — 


— __ 


2 — 
— — 
——— 


. Ate... 


— 
— — 
, * = 
——— 8 OT CO TE —— 
3 9p. — we) y_ — * 


2ͤ pe 
. Fl — 
— 
— ——— 


n .. as a. R 


9 — — 
— - _ 
. * = « o 
„ 2 2 
— 4  __ —— — 
- << ws ˙ — T. 
12 — 


— p Y PX — 
— . —— 


” 
þ 4 — — — —— _ — * > 
e wa. - . — 22 
* — S „ 2 


r 


36 1 HTSTORY OF THE 


leave the iſland, and to return to France ; but as 


the natives in general, thoſe few excepted, who 
had found protection in the Caſtle, were ſtill at 


their mercy, they levied a contribution of a thou- 
fand marks, which was readily given, to fave the 
houſes from being deſtroyed. An oath was alſo 


adminiſtered to them, to enſure their ſubmiſſion 


to the French, if Ws po a Fur they ſhould eee 
the iſland. | 

Tur next occaſion, on which we meet with 
them, was towards the latter end of the fifth year 
of King Henry'the Fifth. A body of Frenchmen 


at that time landed upon this iſland, with a deſign 


of continuing there for ſome ſpace ; but their ob- 
ject was, manifeſtly, that of plunder. Near a 
thouſand of them were engaged in driving away 
the cattle of the natives to their ſhips ; when the 


iſlanders, with great ſpirit and reſolution, attacked 


them, and compelled them to relinquiſh the booty 
they had obtained, with the loſs of many of their 
men. 2 : 

Ir was not long after this, that a large French 
fleet arrived off this iſland, and demanded a ſub- 
ſidy in the name of King Richard and Queen 


Iſabella; which claim the 1flanders reſiſted, in a 


manner which ſufficiently proves, that they began 
to feel their own importance, to which, probably, 
their late ſucceſſes againſt invaders had not a little 
contributed. They boldly anſwered, that Richard 
vas dead, and that his Queen had been ſent back 


to France; that no ſtipulation for the payment of 


any 


SLE OF WIGHT. Tr 


any fubſidy had ever been made, and therefore 
they ſhould not ſubmit to the demand; that they 
were prepared to conteſt the bufinefs with them in 


the field, in order to which they ſhould: not only 


be permitted to land, but be allowed ſix hours to 
refreſh themſelves. This gallant declaration of 
the iſlanders had the beſt effect; for the French 
immediately retired, without giving them an 185 
portunity of demonſtrating their vatour. 

DuxinG the conteſt between the two powerful 
kouſes of York and Lancaſter, this iſſand was en- 
tirely free from any of its effects, and enjoyed a 
ſtate of peace and tranquility. It was no leſs free 
from the depredations of the French, who were at 


that time equally engaged with their own domeftic 


troubles, and without any means of attending to 
foreign invaſions. 
We meet with little farther, reſpecting the hif⸗ 


tory of this iſland, diſtin from the hiſtory of the 


kingdom at large, till the reign of Henry the 
Eighth; in the thirty-ſixth year of whoſe reign, a 
formidable fleet of more than two hundred fait of 


ſhips, was fitted out by order of Francis the Firſt, 


of France, with the particular, expreſs, and avowed 
object of invading this country. The Engliſh fleet 
were then at St. Helen's; but as they did not 


amount to half the number, they retired into the 


channel, aud endeavoured to decoy the enemy to 
follow them. But the French Admiral, whofe 
name was Annebout, did not fall into the fnare; 
unacquainted with the dangers of the rocks and 

ſhallows, 


38 HISTORY or THE 


ſhallows, and fearful of the conſequences of an 
attempt to purſue, the Engliſh ſhips remained ſe- 
cure and unmoleſted, for they were too prudent 
to riſk the conſequences of engaging a fleet, which 
was ſo vaſtly ſuperior in ſtrength and number. — 
About two thouſand men were, therefore, ap- 
pointed to land on this ifland, which they propo- 
ſed to fortify and keep poſleſſion of; a council of 

war declared againſt this as an impracticable mea- 
ſure, and plunder and conflagration enſued, in 
which ſome villages were deſtroyed. Yet did not 
this ſucceed eventually to their wiſhes ; for they 
were ſuddenly attacked by the governor and cap- 
tain of the ifland, whoſe name was Richard 
Worſley, and had collected a ſufficient force for 
the purpoſe of defeating this plundering and de- 
ſtructive expedition, by whom they were driven 
to their-ſhips, after loſing their commanding officer 
and a great number of men. 

Such repeated inſults were the reaſon of con- 
Shrine the neceſſity of ſome other means of de- 
fence. From hence we are to date the occaſion of 
erecting the different forts, in various parts of the 
iſland, for the purpoſe of oppoſing the landing of 
an enemy; by which future depredations were in- 
tended to be prevented, and the property of the 
inhabitants more effectually ſecured. Of theſe 
we ſhall have occaſion to treat diſtinctly in a ſub- 
ſequent chapter; and though they might be 
deemed of conſiderable importance at that time, 
they are not now thought of any great eſtimation. 


It 


ISLE OF WIGHT; 39 


It ſhall ſuffice to ſay in this place, that the ſubſe- 


quent reign of Elizabeth produced a much more 


effectual defence, in the very great augmentation 
of the naval ſtrength of the kingdom, to a degree 
unknown in all preceding ages. The great power 
of France upon the ſea was ſufficient to excite the 
attention of a princefs, remarkable for her attach- 
ment to the public welfare; and the long and 
continued preparations of Spain, in a manner un- 
exampled in the records of hiſtory, ſuggeſted the 
neceſſity of a proportionable increaſe of the ma- 
rine. Her averſion to a matrimonial alliance with 
Spain, with the aids afforded to the revolted pro- 
vinces of the Netherlands, againſt that govern- 
ment, left no cauſe to doubt of the object of their 
preparations; for which common prudence directed 
her to provide. This force has, from that time, 
proved a more effectual ſecurity to the iſland, than 
all its fortreſſes and works of defence could have 
done without it. 

Hex we might have cloſed the military hiſtory 
of the iſland, ſo far as it may be ranked under the 
head of antiquity ; but we think ourſelves obliged 
to take notice; as far as authentic records will 
_ warfant us, of the particular meaſures which were 
taken, irom time to time, by thoſe who were en- 
truſted with the defence of the iſland. Theſe we 
ſhall endeavour to collect and — in the ſub- 
5 een 


n * TY 


5 CHAPTER Iv. 


a UTSTORY OF THE | 


CHAPTER IV. 


or THE ANCIENT PROTECTION AND DEFENCE Of | 
THE ISLAND. 


| \ \ HEN we come to fpeak of the lords of this 
iſland, we ſhall have occaſion to relate many 
things of a prior date to the accounts, which it 
will be in our power to produce on the preſent 
 fubjet. | 
From an inquiſition which appears to have been 
taken at a place called Shide Bridge, on the Thurſ- 
day next after the feaſt of St. Peter in the Fetters, 
in the eighteenth year of the reign of King Edward 
the Second, before John de Ia Hoeſe and John de 
_ Lifle, keepers of the ports and coaſts of the iſland, 
we-learn the cuſtomary defence of the faid ifland, 
which is therein particularly and fully Rated. On 
this occafion, it appears that ſome of the principal 
mhabitants, to the amount of- forty-five, were re- 
queſted to declare, and that they actually did de- 
clare on oath, the true ſtate of the uſual defence 
of the ſaid ifland. In the eaſtern part of it were 
at that time, appointed thirteen watches, and in 
the weſtern diviſion fixteen ; ſome of which in the 
former part were ta be attended by fix men, ſome 
four, ſome three, and ſome two men by night, 
with a fire, and by two or one man in the day.— 
All the watches of the weſtern part were appointed 
5 to 


1sIE OF WIGHT. 47 


to be guarded by four men in the night, and by 
two men in the day. 
AvoTHR inquiſſtion was alſo taken in the ſame 
year, at the ſame place, and before the ſame per- 
ſons, on the Monday next aſter the Feaſt of St. 
Peter in the Fetters; the occaſion of which is ſtated 
to be the ſame as the preceding, with the parti- 
cular application that two watches had been ac- 
cuſtomed to be maintained in time of war, within 
the liberty of Freſhwater, having each three men 
by night, and two by day. 
Ir appears alſo from an inquiſition taken at 
Newport, in the iſle of Wight, on the vigils of 
the nativity of st. John the Baptiſt. in the ſeventh 
year of King Edward the Third, before John 
Tichborne and Lawrence Martin, commiſſioners 
of our lord the king in the county of Southamp- 
ton, for the purpofe of aſcertaining the knights' 
fees, which were held within the iſland of the crown 
of England; that no ſuch tenure then exiſted, or 
had ever exiſted, thoſe only excepted who were 
under age, and conſequently under the care and 
guardianſhip of the kings of England. That nei- 
ther archbiſhops, biſhops, priors, or any other 
dignitaries had any juriſdiction over them; nei- 
ther were the lands of the iſland held by any of 
the poſſeſſors in virtue of any tenure derived from 
them. But that many lands and tenements were 
held of the honour of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke, 
within the ſaid iſland, by certain military ſervices 
to be performed; by which they were bound to 
E guard 


—— — 3 l 
<ul. ET: hi 
. 3 — 
> WS * a 
p ew — 0 ans | a - 
_— 2 4 
> 5 — 


J £ 
} 
* 
* 
* 
b 
4 
7 
is 
A 
t 
«7 
259 
97 
1 4 
* 
L 
* 1 
v9 
% 
Ts 
* 
1 
F 
. ' 
4 
4 
8 
3 © E 
_ 
2/6 
{ 
4 , 
i 
+ 
0 6 
{th 
% 
„ 
A 
er 
1 
$ 


42 | HISTORY OF THE 


TIRE the ſaid caſtle in time Fl war, at their own 


coſts and charges, for the ſpace of forty days, as 
it appeared to have ſtood in the fourth year of 
Edward the Firſt. This was cſtabliſhed on the 
oath, and upon the credit, of four knights and 
eight gentlemen of the iſland, who were well ac- 
quainted with the matters on which they gave their 
teſtimony. From this inquiſition it appears, that 
ſomething more than twenty-nine knights' fees 
were held of the honour of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke 
at the time above mentioned. 

We have noticed the laſt inquiſition in this 
place, to enable our readers to account for the 
different invaſions mentioned in the preceding 


chapter. It does not appear, that the kings of 


England intereſted themſelves greatly in its de- 
fence, until they became poſſeſſed of it by pur- 


chaſe, which was not till the reign of Edward the 


Firſt. Whilſt it remained in the hands of the 
earls of Devon, we learn that they conſtantly fur- 


niſhed ſeventy- ſix men at arms for that purpoſe; 


and by an inquiſition taken in the ſixteenth year 


of Edward the Third we find, that a liſt of men at 


arms, which were furniſhed to Edward the Firſt for 


the defence of the iſle of Wight, amounted only 
to ſeventy-three. Of theſe ſeven were furniſhed 


by the abbot of Glaſtonbury, fix by the commu- 
nity of Wilts, five by the biſhop of Saliſbury ; the 


abbots of Malmſbury and Abygdon, furniſhed 


three each ; the abbots of Stanley and Cirenceſter, 
two each, as did Mary the King's daughter, who 
Was 


ISLE OF WIGHT. —_— 


was a nun at Ambreſbury; the abbots of Walton, 
Glouceſter, Romele, found each of them one man 
at arms, as did alſo John Blaine for the abbot of 
Thukeſburgh, William Ires for Shafton Abbey, 
and each of the abbeſſes of Godſtow and Whor- 
well. The preceptors of Shalford and Conele alſo 
ſupplied one man each; and alſo the biſhops of 
Worceſter and of Bath and Wells. We alſo meet 
with the prior of Hurle who furniſhed a man at 
this time; and of another, but through a defect in 
our authority, cannot aſcertain for what place. The 
hundreds of Herewalkden and Warham ſupplied 
each a man; as did Chipham and Malmeſbury 
jointly, Chalk and Domerham, with Heightſbury, 
and Weſtbury. Alice de Bavent and Beatrice de 
Winterſhall are alſo returned as having furniſhed 
one man each for their reſpective lands; beſides 
the names of | twenty-two gentlemen who, for 
themſelves or thoſe whoſe lands they poſſeſſed, 
ſent each a man at arms for the defence of this 
iſland. And we meet with two diſcharges of ſer- 
vice performed to the abbots of Glaſtonbury, in 
the twelfth and thirteenth of Edward the Third; 
wherein amongſt other things it appears that they 
ſent three men at arms, on account of the lands 
they held in Wiltſhire, and one for their cds in 
Berkſhire. 

Wr alſo find in this afey-firſ year of the reign 
of the ſaid Edward the Third, that mapy of the 
inhabitants of the iſland, in conſequence of an in- 


vaſion which was then threatened on the coafts of 
E 2 this 


-< -- HISTORY OF THE 


this kingdom, and probably from their own 
recollection or the information of their forefathers, 
of the. miſchiefs experienced on thoſe occaſions, 
entertained ſerious thoughts of withdrawing from 
the iſland. | Continually expoſed to theſe depre- 
dations, from their defenceleſs ſtate, and the 
proximity of the oppoſite ſhore, preparations were 
made by many to retire to a leſs turbulent fitua- 
tion. But theſe intentions were defeated by the 
king's writ to the lieutenant of the county, to 
Hugh Tyrrel, keeper of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke 
in the ſaid iſland, and to John Griffith, the con- 
ſtable of the ſaid caſtle; whereby all perſons were 
commanded to remain in the iſland, and to pre- 
pare themſelves to defend it againſt all oppoſition. 
As, from the expoſed ſituation of this iſland, it 

required a peculiar care and attention, the mea- 
ſures taken' by this king were admirably adapted 
for its defence. To counterbalance the hardſhips 
attendant on a general muſter of the force of the 
ifland, and to encourage their hearty and zealous 
attachment to military fervice, which in ſuch caſes 
was abſolutely neceſſary, the inhabitants were in- 
dulged with divers privileges, and exonerated from 
various burdens and impoſts, which were laid up- 
on the ſubjects of the kingdom in general. It 
was notified to them, that from henceforth they 
ſhould be exempted from the aid granted to the 
king, and that no inhabitant of the iſland ſhould 
be compelled to ſerve on any jury or inqueſt out 
of it; and the better to enſure the defence which, 
| | was 


Pg CINE I 4 ay » 
— * 
— 


* —_ 
"74 - — 
— . 5 
— — _ 
$042 <+<# 47 Yay ww eee 
— OE 


— anne 


1 7 
9 * ö 
— 4 
3 
1 


ISLE'OF WIGHT. 45 


was neceſſary, it was eſtabliſhed in parliament, 
that licences of abſence ſhould not be granted to 
any one 1n time of war, by order of the privy -ſeal 
or otherwiſe, who was bound by his tenure to de- 
fend the iſland, unleſs in a caſe of the moſt urgent 
neceſſity, and not without the conſent of the coun- 
cil, who were to be informed of it, and to judge 
of the propriety and juſtice of the reaſons aſſigned. 
By theſe judicious meaſures, many were induced 
to ſettle in the iſland; and thereby an acceſſion of 
its natural ſtrength was obtained. 

Bur the ſaid king, at his own proper coſts and 
charges, ſupplied the caſtle of Cariſbrooke with 
_ conſiderable ſtores and proviſions; amounting to 
ten tuns of wine, an hundred quarters of wheat, 
the ſame quantity of malt, half the quantity of 
beans and peaſe, an hundred quarters of oats; 
beſides ſalt, coals, wood, and other neceſſaries, for 
the ſupport of its defenders. Commiſſioners were 
appointed to execute this buſineſs, and to ſee it 
delivered to John de Langford, who was at that 
time conſtable of the ſaid caſtle. (647 

Tur ſame king Edward alſo authoriſed the 
iſlanders, in caſe of danger, to chuſe a warden for 
themſelves; and the ſheriff of Southampton, and 
the conſtable of the caſtle, were directed to call 
them together for that purpoſe. This was a judi- 
cious and maſterly ſtroke of policy, calculated to 
inſpire the inhabitants with reſpect for their lead- 

er, who was to conduct them in their operations 
for the defence of the iſland. The confidence and 

E 3 ſecurity 


"db HISTORY OF THE 


ſecurity thereby obtained would ſtimulate them to 
acts of courage and intrepidity ; and rouſe them to 
exertions, whenever requiſite, to repel the attacks 
of invaders. As a check to any improper uſe of 
ſuch a power as the warden muſt be poſſeſſed of, 
the grant was to be valid during the king's plea- 
ſure only. At the ſame time, as a general re- 
ſource to enable the king to ſupport theſe ex- 
pences, a writ was iſſued to the collectors and ven- 
dors of the ninth fleece, which had been granted 
as an aid for the ſupport of crown, within the county 
of Southampton, directing them to diſpoſe of that 
ninth within the iſland, as an encouragement to 
its defenders, 

AxornrRx indulgence was 4 to this iſland, 
to which we have in part alluded, under a com- 
miſſion to John de Standford, Philip de Weſton, 
John de Kingſton, and Nicholas de Bokeland ; for 
thedue adminiſtration of juſtice within it. Asno in- 
habitant was to be compelled, to ſerve on jury or 
inqueſt out of the iſland, in time of war; as well 
o avoid the great trouble and expence of being 
obliged to come before the king's juſtices in the 
county of Southampton, as to prevent injuſtice 
from any perſons, either by oppreſſion or other- 
wiſe, theſe gentlemen were appointed juſtices to 
enquire, on oath, touching any miſdemeanours, 
extortion of the king's: officers and receivers of 
taxes, offences againſt the laws in carrying wool 
out of the kingdom without paying cuſtom, or 
concerning any treſpaſſes committed againſt any of 


his 


ISLE OF wWInr. 47 


his majeſty” 8 ſubjects, and to enquire into aliena- 
tions of lands or tenements which had taken place 
within the laſt hundred years. 

Hz we may account for the very vigorous 
and hearty defence, which the iſlanders were en- 
couraged to make from this time forward. Their 
internal regulations and arrangements fully de- 
monſtrate their grateful ſentiments on this oc- 
caſion. United by one common intereſt for their 
ſecurity and protection, that alone became their 
object; and danger, under ſuch encouragements, 
only acted as an incentive to valour, and enſured 
ſucceſs in every enterprize, which a : daring foe 
might render neceſſary. | 

We have already ſtated, that in the laſt year of 
this king's reign, writs were iſſued to the King's 
lieutenant of the county, with the keeper and con- 
ſtable of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke, to prevent any 
of the inhabitants of the iſland from leaving it; 
on which occaſion their attendance at the aſſizes 
was diſpenſed with, that the iſland might not be 
left without a ſufficient protection. 

In an early part alſo of the ſame reign, as far as 
can be collected from circumſtances, we meet with 
another roll or catalogue of men at arms and arch- 
ers, which were at that time ſupplied for the de- 
fence of the iſland; in which catalogue we find 
fifty-four men at arms, and one hundred and forty- 

one archers or bowmen. At this time five men at 
arms and twenty bowmen were furniſhed by the 

churches 1 in the Eaſt Medine, or part of the iſland; 
EIA 5 


48 Hs rok OF THE 


and four men at arms and twenty-three archers by 
the churches of the Weſt Medine. 3 

Ox this occaſion we learn, that the king ſent 
one hundred ſlingers and bowmen, and the city of 
London three hundred; and an order for arraying 
the clergy. of the iſland, in a letter to the biſhop 


of Wincheſter - from the king, is ſtill extant. The 


alarm at this time appears to have been of ſuch 
conſiderable i importance, as to induce the king to 
iſſue an order ſor removing the prior and the two 
monks from Appuldurcombe to Hyde Abbey near 
Wincheſter, during the war with France, as to a 
place of greater ſafety; on account of the numer- 
ous inſtances of predatory attacks to which the 
iſland had heretofore been expoſed. | 

THzRE cannot be a ſtronger proof of the diſ- 
creet and prudent management of Edward the 
Third, than what we are ſupplied. with from a, re- 
cord which contains the officers appointed to com- 
mand the militia of the iſland, in the reign of the 
aforeſaid Edward the Third. In this roll we 
find, that William Ruſſell, lord of Everland, was 
entruſted with the defence of Everland, Binbridge, 
Northil, and Brading ; having the lord of Wool- 
veton, in Binbridge or Bembridge, for his lieute- 
tant. Peter de Heyno, lord of Stenbury, was alſo 
appointed to defend Stenbury, Whitwell, W roxal, 
Bonchurch, Cliff, Apſe, Nyweton or Crab Ny we- 
ton, and Sandham, having the lord of Wathe for 
his lieutenant. Theobald de Gorges, the lord of 
Knighton, had the defence of Knighton, St. He- 


lens, | 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 49- 


lens, Kern, Ride, Quarr, Binſtead, and New- 
church, with Reynold Oglander, lord of Nunwell, 
for his lieutenant. John Urry, the lord of Eaſt - 
Standen, with the lord of Wootton for his lieute- 
nant, had alſo the command of Eaſt Standen, Ar- 
reton, Whippingham, St. Catharine's, Rookly, 


Nettlecomb, and Wootton; and the bailiffs of the 


borough of Newport were charged to undertake - 


the defence of the town. Theſe were the military. 
officers who were appointed to defend, and en- 
gaged to maintain and ſupport the inhabitants of 
the eaſtern part of the iſland, in the poſſeſſion of 
their property; and thereby pledged themſelves 
to marſhal and array the ſtrength of the iſland, in 
oppoſition to all enemies and invaders. Though 
we meet with the name of Giles de Beaucamp in 
this roll, as poſſeſſed of Freſhwater, for which he 
was to furniſh two men at arms; yet we learn from 
the diſcharge of ſervice, which he obtained in the 
twenty-ſixth year of this reign, that he had attended 
the king in his wars abroad, and had furniſhed a 
quota of ſix men on that occaſion. Howto account 
for and reconcile theſe different circumſtances, 
may not perhaps be an eaſy matter, unleſs we may 

be allowed to call in conjecture to our aid ; which 
may ſuggeſt to us, either that the number and 
rank of men which were to be found by each land- 
holder, were not then diſtinctly aſcertained, or 
that the ſix men which are mentioned in the 
diſcharge might only be bowmen, and therefore 
conſidered only as an oquivatons to two horſemen, 
or men at arms. | Or 


380 : HISTORY OF THE 


Or the weſtern part of the iſland, we meet with 
John de Kingſton, who, with his lieutenant, Sir 
John Liſle, Lord of Wootton, for his manor of 
South Shorwell, or Weſt Court, had the command 
of Kingſton, Shorwell, Cariſbrooke, Park, North- 
wood, and Watchingwell. The lord of Modeſton, 
Thomas Chyke, and Thomas Langford, Lord of 
Chale, his lieutenant, were charged with the de- 
tence of Modeſton, Newtown, Caulborn, and Brix- 
ton. Shalfleet, Thorley, and Yarmouth, were 
under the command of the Lord of Brook, with 
the prior of Chriſtchurch, who, for his manor of 
Nigewood, was appointed his lieutenant ; and 
Adam de Compton, lord of Compton, had the 
charge of Compton, Affeton, and Freſhwater, with 
' Robert de Affeton, lord of Affeton, for his lieu- 
tenant. Such were the officers, under whom the 
people were to be conducted to defend their pro- 
perty in caſe of invaſion; ſuch the meaſures taken 
to withſtand the incurſions and depredations of 
any enemies, which, might attempt to diſturb 
them in the peaceable * of their lands and 
inheritances. 

Tur warden of the iſland appears at this time 
to have been poſſeſſed of great power and autho- 
rity. In the very year of the aforeſaid diſcharge 
to Giles de Beauchamp, we meet with a commiſ- 
fion to John de Gatteſden, which appointed him 
to that office. By virtue of this, he was author- 
ed 1 to rey the men at arms, or probably horſe- 

| | men, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 3 


men, as we have juſt mentioned, hoblers, who 
were perhaps light armed ſoldiers, and mounted 
on ſmall horſes formerly called hobbies, and bow- 
men or archers, as well as all others both horſe and 
ſoot. He was further inſtructed to levy new 
forces, if it was found or ſuppoſed that thoſe al- 
ready raiſed were inſufficient; and he was direct- 
ed to provide them with weapons, and to train 
them to the exerciſe of arms. He was further 
empowered to take men from the county of South- 


ampton, who were to be paid by the king, as well 


as from the iſland, without any exception whether 
they were within the liberties of the town, or 
otherwiſe. All abſentees were, in like manner, 
to ſubmit to and obey his ſummons, to repair to 
defend the caſtle of Cariſbrooke, and all other parts 
of the iſland, to which they might be ſent; but on 
failure of returning within a limited time, with 
their families, according to the obligation ſtipu- 


lated in their tenures, their lands and tenements, 


and all their goods and chattels, were to be con- 
fiſcated and forfeited to the uſe of the king. If 
they did not themſelves comply with theſe injunc- 
tions in perſon, they were at leaſt obliged to pro- 
vide men to ſupply their places. There are many 
ſimilar inſtances in hiſtory, in old times, of orders 
iſſued for the defence of the kingdom in different 
parts, under the like penalty; when the people 
were commanded to continue on the coaſts, or 
forfeit their er. 


f _ In 


522 HISTORY OF THX 


1 


I this year alſo we meet with the form of a writ, 
directed to William Montacute, earl of Saliſbury, 
commanding him to repair before a certain day to 
the iſland, together with his men and his whole 
family, to perform the ſervices due by tenure for 
his lands and tenements within the iſland, held 
from the king; to repel the hoſtile aggreſſions 
threatened againſt the peace and ſafety of the in- 
habitants, and to defend the property and protect 
the perſons of the king's faithful ſubjects againſt 
all invaders. Similar writs were alſo directed to 
ten knights and eight eſquires, whoſe names are 
handed down to poſterity, commanding them in 
like manner to aſſemble in arms, for the purpoſe 
of defending the iſland; a proof that every proper 
precaution was taken to diſappoint and fruſtrate 
the deſigns of the common enemy. 

Azour ſeventy years after, in the twenty-cighth 
year of Henry the Sixth of England, we meet with 
| a petition of the inhabitants of the iſland, addreſſed 

to the king and parliament, which has reference 
to its weak and defenceleſs ſtate at that time. As 
it may afford entertainment to many of our readers, 
we believe that our /ervice in quoting it may be ac- 
ceptable: 


Prririox of the IntrapiTanTs of the Iſle of Wight, 
to the Ko, in the 28th of Hewnky VI. 1449. 
7“ Ifle of Wight. 

To the kyng our ſoveraigne lord: Pleaſe 


it unto youre moſt excellent grace to be en- 
formed 


ISLE OF wienr _ r3 


formed how that your iſle of Wighte ſtond- 
eth in the grettyſt juperdye and daunger of 
any parte of youre Realme of Inglond ; the 
whiche Ifle withynne five yeres was at the 
nombre of x m. fenſable men and xxx 
Knyghtes and ſquyers dwellyng withynne; 
the whiche xm. aboveſeid are anentiſed 
through peſtellence and Werres, and ſome 
voided becauſe of oppreſſion of extorcioners, 
that nowe there is ſkante xii c. of fehſible 
men, and Knyghtes never one, and ſquyers no 
mo but Herry Bruyn ſquier of youre How 
hold, that may labour aboute Werres. And 
youre caſtle withynne youre ſeid iſle is not 
repeired, nother the walles, garriettes, and 
lopes, nother ſtuffed with men and harneys, 

nother with gonnes, gonnepouder, croſſe 
boyes, quarelles, longe bowes, arrowes, longe 


4 ſperes, axes and gloyves, as ſuche a place 
ſnuld be in tyme of Werres: herefore youre 
ſeid ſubgettes ben ſo diſconforted, and thor- 


dught the grete elamer noyſe and enforma- 
cion that they heren daily of youre trewi lige 
men, that ben diſtruſſed and comen owte of 
Normandye, that youre adverſaties of Fraunce 
ben fully purpoſed and ſette, and other youre 
enemyes, for to conquere the ſeid ile, whiche 
God defende., Beſechith mekely youre full 
humble ſubgettes of the ſeid iſle, that it may 
like unto youre highneſſe to ordeyne and ap- 
poynte other elles to commande ſuche as 
hall 


54 0 HISTORY OF THE 


ſhall occupie the ſaid Ile through vertue of 
youre grante, to ordeyne and appoynte ſuche 
ſufficiante of men and ſtuffe above wretyn, as it 
may be ſufficiant for the defence of the ſaid 
Caſtell and Iſles as youre ſaid ſubgettes ſhall 
have no cauſe for to voyde owte of your ſaid 
Iſle; and youre ſeid ſubgettes ſhall pray to 
God for you. 
Reſponſio. The kyng woll that the Lord 
Beauchamp ſee to the rule thereof.” ? 
Havins laid before our readers this curious ſpe- 
cimen of the language of this nation as it was ex- 
preſſed more than three hundred and forty years 
ago, which on that account will be acceptable, as 
well as from. its diſcovering the true ſtate of the 
iſland at that time; we cannot doubt that it will 
be no leſs grateful to them to be preſented with 
their addreſs to the parliament on the ſame occa- 
ſion. From hence will more fully be ſeen the 
reaſon of the numerous emigrations from this 
ifland,* which are ſo ſerioufly complained of in 
their petition to the king, and the neceſſity of that 
aid which is there ſo feelingly requeſted. This 
petition, from the ſpecimen which has been already 
given, we confider as equally curious and intereſt. 
| ing; and for this reaſon we confider it as equally 
| our duty to preſent it to the public: „ 
« Inhabitants of the iſle of Wight. | 
Ux ro the wiſe and diſcrete comens of this 
Parlement aſſembled : Prayen the poure peple 
inhabitant within the ile nm Wyght in the 
Counte 


- ISLE- OF WIGHT. ICE 


Counte of Hampſhire unto all the Commons 
aſſembled in this preſent Parlement, to con- 
ſidere the great noyſe that dayli goeth uppon _ 
the ſee by owre enemyes, and the adverſite 
that thei ſhewen daili unto the ſaid Ile; the 
which Ile is undirtaken by certayn warriours 
of owre ennemyes of Fraunce to be conquerid 
into there hands bi ſhorte time, the whicke 
God defende ; upon the whiche the poure 
peple of the ile ben diſcomforted and amayd, 
ſeyng the febelnyſſe within themſelves. Cer- 
tefying your wyſdoms that whereas the ſaid 
lle hath been hereafore at the nombre of gret 
peple fenſable, hit hath been ſo pelyd and 
oppreſſid now of late bi one John Newport 
ſteward of the ſaid Ile made by the Duke of 
York, for the whiche myſgovern..unce was 
by hym diſcharged and put oute of his office; 
and then after his diſcharge the ſaid. John 
Newport and others of his ſecte the laſt ſomer 
uppon the ſee, ſo thretenyng the Kyng's peple 
of the Ile and diſtreſſing thom, -their, bodies 
their harneis and their godes, bothe bi londe 
and bi ſee, that the peple is forſaken the ile, 
ſo at this day there is not xv peple fenſable, 
the whiche is unto us al enhabitanz in the Ile 
grete hevyneſſe, ſeyng no more ſtuf of men 
nor no ſtuf of archerie fenſable left within the 
Ile, nor within the Caſtell of the ſame Ile, hit 
hathe cawſid us alle to make ſupplicacion unto 
the Duke of Yorke and his counſaile for ſup- 
portac ion 


- HISTORY or THE 


portacion and aide of the ſaid Caſtel and ile 


bothe for men and archerie in ſalvacion of 
the Ilonde, and of the King's peple there. 


Certefying unto youre aller wiſdoms of no re- 
lief by cauſe of doubtze of reſumpcion ; and 
that it is noiſed here, that by the reſumpcion 


thys Ile ſhal ſtond in the King's hand, and 
that the forſaid John Newport ſewith dailli to 


the King our ſoverayne lord to be lewtenant, 


ſteward, reſſeyvour, and baylly within the ſaid 


He, the whiche God defende, conſideryng the 


gret oppreſſion bifore reherſid; and alſo it is 


openli ſpoken and noyſed, that the ſaid John 
Newport hath ſold the ſaid Ile and deſireth 
to have the hed offices there to the entent to 


hurt the poure peple to ther otteraunce ondoy_ 


ing and diſtruccion of the ſaid Ile; the 


vwhiche God of his hie mercy defende. More- 


over certefying your wiſdoms, that the ſaid 


John Newport hath at this day no lyvelode to 
mentayne his gret countenance but bi the op- 
preſſing of the peple in the contray that he ſitt 
in, thorw the whiche he hath gretli empovred 
and hurt the poure Hond ready; for what 
time he was ſteward of the Ile he had but x 


marks of fee, and kepte an houſhold and a 


' countenance: like a lord, with as rich wynys 
as coulhe be ymagened, namyng himſelf New- 


port the galaunt, otherwiſe called Newport 


the riche, whom the country courſon dayly 
that ever he com there. And after time the 


ſaid 


— 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 57 


ſaid John Now pant was ſo diſcharged bi the 
duke of Yorke, the ſaid duke ordayned and 

made one Harri Bruyn ſquyer to be lewte- 
naunt and ſteward of the ſaid Ile; whoſe rule 
hath ben honourable there both to God, the 
Lord, and the peple of the Ile, as law and 
rygth at al times hath required, and well 


yrulyd in his litil time the contray, and were 
like to bring hit into his furſt aſtate if he were 


like to contynew and abide within the Ile, for 
he-hath beſtowed a gret good of his own bothe 


in gonnys and in archerie lying within him 


ſelf within the ſaid Ile, the which is at this 
day a gret ſtrenthe, riches, ſocour, and com- 
fort to al the Iſle. Praying ſpecialli ro your 
aller wiſdoms, in ſalvacion of the ſaid Ile, and 
in ſalvacion of the Kinges peple there, that 
foraſmoche as the ſaid Harri Bruyn is the 
Kinges houſhold man, and borne to gret re- 
putacion and wel enherited, and at no time 
corrupte but egalli rulith the ſaid Ilond after 


juſtice withoute complaynt, and enrichid the 


contray with his gret ſtuf if nede of the Warre 


required, that he might contenew ſtille in his 
good rule, keping the contree undir the forme 


as he hath bigonne, to the moſt ſalvacion of 
the ſaid Ilond, and of the Kinges peple there; 
for whoſe good rule we al wul ondurtake to 
the King our ſoverayne lord. And alſo that 


al other officers of the Ile, that is to ſay, Harri 
. Tarn, Conſtable and Porter, may have 
ſtraytely 


- 
- 
— 2 — — — 


| 
| 
| 
| 
l 
| 


_ HISTORY OF THE 


ſtraytely in comaundement by the Kyng to 


abide reſident within the faid Ile duryng the 


time of the Werr: certefying at al times the 
EKinges Hieneſſe that and John Newport ſhould 


come to governe the ſaid Ile, hit wul be the 
cauſe of diſtruccion of the contray, to whom 
no man wul obeye excepte the Kinge our 
ſoverayne lordes pleſure, for he and his hath 
don ſo many gret offencis in the ſee aboute 


the Ilond in morthering the Kinges peple and 


his frendes, caſting them owte of ther veſſelles 
into the ſee, as thei have be comyng to the 
port of Hampton, bi the whiche the Kinges 
cuſtomes of his port of Southampton hath be 
loſt by his riot kept upon the ſee of v or vi m. 
marks a yere. And alſo the ſaid Newport 


hath the King oure ſoverayne 
lord, and defrauded him in graunting x marks 

worth of liflode gret hurt and 

trouble hereafter for the ſaid 


liflode is entailed; the whiche is hid fro the 


Kinges hieneſſe; bi the whiche menes he de- 
fireth to be recompenſed by the offices of the 
Ilonde aforeſaid. And alſo the faid Newport 
hath taken the ſame yer extorcionouſli in 
Hampſhire, gret multitude of diverfe graynes 
of- corne in the Kinges name of the poure 
peple of him that had but iiij quarters of 
corne toke one, and made him carie hit to 
Hampton, ſome men x miles and ſome men 


xx Miles at their own coſt, and there as was 


plenty 


iSLE or wic nr. 59 


plenty of corne he toke money to his owyn 
uſe, to the ſum within the ſhire of an c markes; 
the whiche the peple of the conttai curſe him 
daily therfor. And to the witnyſſe herof for 
the more credance we have ſet to oure ſelis. 
Reſponſio. Le roy s'adviſera.“ In Engliſh. 
Anſwer. The king will confider of it. 
N. B. The above blanks ate left to ſhew the de- 
fects which time hath made in the record. 

Ir is manifeſt from the anſwer given by the king, 
that theſe petitions were duly attended to, and 
probably productive of the deſired effect. Richard 
Plantagenet, who was duke of Vork at this time, 
appears from hence to have been one of the lords 
of the iſland, and empowered as ſuch to grant ap- 
pointments to offices within it; to whom they had 
applied for the redreſs of grievances, and to put 
the caſtle in a ſtate of defence, as well as to provide 
for the ſecurity of the inhabitants, but without 
effect. What his deſigns at this time were, is not 
perhaps altogether certain, yet probability is in 
favour of the idea that he had begun to form his 
plans for ſecuring his ſucceſſion to the crown. — 
Two teaſons may be aſſigned for this neglect of 
conttibuting to the defence of the iſland, that he 
could not, or that he would not; the latter, on 
the ſuppoſition that the ifland might be reſumed 
by the crown, for which he might have juſt cauſe 
of apprehenſions; and the former, which might 
partially refult from this, that the queen and her 
favourites, who had begun to entertain jealouſies 

F 2 CE, and 


60 HISTORY OF Tur 


and ſuſpicions of him, cauſed him to be removed 
to Ireland, with a commiſſion to ſuppreſs the re- 
bellion in that kingdom. It is certain, that the 
duke of Somerſet, who had before ſupplanted him 
in the regency of France, was appointed to ſuc- 


ceed him; and it is highly probable, that he was 


appointed to conduct the affairs of Ireland, that 

his adverſaries might be free from ſo potent a rival. 
Either way, we have a ſatisfactory account of the 
neglect of ſuch defence as was neceſſary; becauſe 
the duke of York's intereſt required much political 
ſagacity, to prevent his furniſhing his enemies 
with weapons againſt him. 

TowaRDs the latter end of the reign of Henry 
the Eighth, about the year 1543, the French made 
an attempt to deſtroy the fleet of England; but 
though they were at this time very ſuperior upon 
the ſeas, their deſign was not crowned with ſuc- 
ceſs. Whether they were incited to this attempt, 
in conſequence of their former and continued en- 

mity to this nation, or were more particularly en- 
couraged to hope for ſucceſs, from the late bulls 
| Which had been iſſued by the Pope, is not perhaps 
very material to determine. For king Henry had 
been excommunicated for refuſing to appear at 
Rome, in conſequence of having executed Sir 
Thomas More, ſometime lord chancellor, and 
Dr. Fiſher, biſhop of Rocheſter, and a cardinal ; 
which ſentence, it is probable, might have ſome 
influence upon the minds of the French on this 


occaſion. 
FAIIING 


ISLE OF WIGHT. þ 61 


FAILING in their attempt, as already related, 
they made a deſcent upon the iſland, of which 
they deſigned to take poſſeſſion. In this attempt 

alſo they were unſucceſsful ; for, by the bravery of 
the iſlanders, and the good conduct of the captain, 
they were ſpeedily driven back to their ſhips with 
much loſs, their general and a great many of their 
men being killed in the attack. 

Ir was not till this period, that any regular 
means were thought of, for preventing a deſcent 
on the iſland, by affording a particular protection 
to the acceſſible parts of the coaſt. The neceſſity 
of this was now rendered manifeſt ; and forts were 
erected in different parts to enſure its future ſecu- 
rity, and as a means of defence till ſufficient ſuc- 
cours coyld be detached. Of theſe forts the cap- 
tain had the particular direction; and one of them 
in particular, was called Worſley's tower, on 
Norton common, on the coaſt immediately oppo- 
fite to Hurſt caſtle, on the N tide of the _ 
channel. 

CayTain Worſley's exertions were moſt eſfen- 
tially productive of the means of defence, and of 
the beſt conſequence to the peace of the inhabi- 
tants. His repreſentations were attended to with 
cheerfulneſs; and a train of artillery was provided 

by the people, at their own expence, to ſecure 
them againſt future invaſions. We ſhall, in fu- 
ture, have occaſion to ſpeak particularly of the 
forts and caſtles erected at this time ; but we find 
a return made- to certain commiſſioners for thar 


F 3 Pur- 


— 


_— HISTORY OF THE 


purpoſe appointed in the firſt year of Edward the 
Sixth, of the ordnance and ammunition then 
found, in ſubſtance as follows. This is a moſt in- 
conteſtible proof of the zeal and efforts of the in- 
habitants ; inſtigated thereto by the example of 
their patriotic and benevolent captain and go- 
vernor. 

AccoRDINGLY we find that in YARMOUTH caſtle, 
which was then committed to the care and charge 
of Richard Ewdall, as captain of the fort, were 
found twelve pieces of braſs and iron ordnance, of 
different calibre and dimenſions, one of which was 
broken; with two hundred and ninety-one ſhot, 
of which fifty were of ſtone, and fifty a mixture 
of lead; eight half barrels and three double barrels 
of powder; nineteen hagbuts, with half a barrel 
of corn powder; a hundred and fifty. bows; two 
groſs of bow ſtrings in a firkin; two hundred and 
_ forty-eight ſheafs of arrows; and two hundred and 
twenty-three bills. 

Ar the caſtle of CARISBROOKE were 1 the 
following ordnance, ammunition, &c. provided for 
its defence, in the cuſtody. of Richard Worſley, 
eſquire; governor of the iſland, five pieces of iron 
ordnance; five hundred and twenty ſhot of vari- 
ous ſizes; twenty-three double barrels and three 
firkins of powder; one hundred and forty hagbuts, 
having only one hundred and twenty flaſks and 
touch boxes; four double barrels of corn powder; 
and fix hundred coils of lint. Beſides theſe 
were fiſty-nine cheſts of arrows, twenty-one 

Cheſts 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 63 


cheſts of bows, three barrels of bow ſtrings, five 
hundred moris pikes, two hundred and eighty-four 
javelins, and ſeven hundred and fifty bills. 

In the caſtle at WesT-Cowtes were found the 
following ordnance and ſtores. The barbican 
had ſix pieces of oid 1ance, one unſerviceable, and 
one hundred and forty-eight ſhot, of different ca- 
hbre. The weſt wing had three pieces, but unfit 
for ſervice. In the main tower were found eight 
pieces, of which five were unſerviceable, with two | 
hundred and ten ſhot ; one double barrel and two 
firkins of powder; ten unſerviceable hagbuts, with 
four pounds of corn powder; nineteen bows ; 
thirty-two cheſts of arrows; twenty-two picks; 
and twenty bills. 

Tur blockhouſe at SnARPNODE had two pieces 
of braſs ordnance, with forty-four iron ſhot, and 
a double barrel of powder. 

Tur caftle at SanDHAM bay, now called Sau- 
bow fort, was furniſhed with eleven pieces of braſs 
and iron ordnance, and ſix hundred and five ſhot 
of different ſorts and ſizes, as iron, a mixture of 
lead, and ſtone, with twelve hollow ſhot for wild 
fire, and twenty-eight caſes of hail ſhot. for port 
pieces; three double barrels and one firkin of 
powder; ſeventy-eight hagbuts, but without 
flaſks and touch boxes, and a firkin of corn pow- 
der; a cheſt of bows and another of arrows; one 
hundred and fifty picks, and a hundred and twen- 
ty bills. : 


„ Cap. 


64 HISTORY OF THE 


Capralx Worſley was ſuperſeded in the govern- 
ment in queen Mary's reign, orat leaſt found it pru- 
dent to ſurrender the command; but he was rein- 

ſtated by queen Elizabeth, after he had executed 
a commiſſion jointly with the then governor of 
Portſmouth, in ſurveying and repairing the forti- 
fications there. A ſimilar commiſſion was alſo en- 
truſted to him, jointly with a gentleman of the 
name of Smith, to put the forts in a ſtate of de- 
fence in the ifle of Wight: In four months after 
he received his commiſſion as captain and gover- 
nor of the iſland, at a time when a French inva- 
ſion was apprehended. The nature of that com- 
miſſion we ſhall now proceed to deſcribe. | 

Ix the firſt year of the reign of queen Elizabeth, 
of glorious memory, we meet with a grant of a 
civil and military nature, the former of which we 
ſhall have occaſion elſewhere to notice, to Richard 
Worſley, eſquire, as captain of the iſle of Wight. 
From hence we learn that the defence of the iſland 
was entruſted to him, and that he was enjoined 
without delay to order and array the inhabitants 
for that purpoſe, in ſuch meaſure and manner as 
to him ſhould ſeem meet and proper; and that 
either by the authority of his office, or by conſent 
of the freeholders and people, he ſhould immedi- 
ately apply himſelf induſtriouſly and actively to 
provide for ſuch defence, and to reſiſt every at- 
tempt which might be offered or made againſt its 
peace and ſecurity. Unforeſeen difficulties, for 


which he could not effectually provide, or to the 
redreſs. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 65 


redreſs of which he could not conſider himſelf 
fully competent, he was therein directed to certify 
to the queen's majeſty, with his free and candid 
opinion of the means and meaſures beſt calculated 
to remedy the ſame. d 

Fox the better execution of his duty as captain 
and governor of the ſaid iſland, in order to its ef- 
fectual protection and defence, he was then and 
therehy enjoined, in time of peace, to ſummon 
every hundred, by directions and inſtructions to 
the high conſtable or other provincial head officer, 
to aſſemble twice in every year, to ſuch place and 
at ſuch time as he ſhould appoint; that they 
ſhould then and there deliberate, conſult, adviſe, 
and determine on the means neceſſary to be 
adopted for the more ſecure preſervation of the 
iland, and the beſt mode of encreaſing its natural 
ſtrength and fortification, All the inhabitants of 
every hundred were alſo to be called together 
twice every year, who were capable of bearing 
arms, to be muſtered and exerciſed in the uſe of 
arms; and proviſion made for furniſhing ſuch 
arms and ammunition as might be neceſſary. It 
was further ordered that ſoldiers in arms ſhould 
neither inhabit or keep any houſe or tenement for 
the purpoſe of huſbandry, if they received her 
majeſty's wages, but ſhould apply themſelves ſolely 
to the ſervice of the kingdom, in ſuch manner as 
might be required. 

An for the ſtill more effectual e of the 
ſaid iſland, it was farther enjoined, that all perſons 


having 


66 | HISTORY OF THE 


having lands of the clear yearly value of twenty 
warks ſhould find one hagbutier, completely fur- 
niſhed and accoutered, in time of war, to remain 
in the iſland under the command of the governor 
or captain of the iſland. Thoſe, whoſe lands were 
not of the clear yearly value of twenty marks, but 
amounting to the value of forty ſhillings and up- 
wards, were in like manner to contribute, in pro- 
portion to their real value, fo as to furniſh out 
and to equip one ſuch hagbutier for every clear 
yearly value of twenty marks; uniting and joining 
to fit out ſuch force, in time of war, ſo as to fur- 


| : niſn one hundred ſuch hagbutiers for the clear 


annual value of every two thouſand marks. 
And in order, to the due and orderly equipment 
of fuch force, the captain of the iſland ſhall call 
together the freeholders and other tenants of the 
iſtand, and therewith agree upon the proportions 
to be rated to every landholder for raifing the ſaid 
force, and to make entry in ſome book or record 
of ſuch rate and proportion. Fs 
THz ſaid captain was alſo farther required by 
the directions ſubjoined and annexed to his com- 
miſſion, to endeavour to encourage and promote 
population in the iſland, by granting every reaſon- 
able privilege, immunity, and indulgence to the 
inhabitants, to prevail upon them to refide, ſettle, 
and continue within it, as far as was conſiſtent 
with general ſafety and protection ; to muſter and 
put in warlike array the ſaid inhabitants, to exer- 
ciſe them in the uſe of muſquetry, and to do ſuch 
other 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 67 


other matters and things as ſhould be of ſervice 
for the general defence of the ſaid iſland. 

Ar this time we find that the common and or- 
dinary expence of maintaining the caſtle of Cariſ- 
brooke, was fixty-nine pounds nineteen ſhillings 
and four pence yearly ; the wages of one armour- 
er and one harquebut maker at eight pence per 
day each, and one armourer, one boyer, one fletch- 
er, one carpenter, and one wheelwright at fix 
pence per day each. Sandham fort had a porter 
at eight pence per day and three gunners at fix 
pence per day each; the amount of which was 
thirty-nine pounds ten ſhillings and ten pence. 
Weſt Cowes, Yarmouth caſtle, and Sharpnode with 
Worfley's tower, had each the ſame appointments, 
and their annual expence amounted to one hund- 
red and eighteen poynds twelve ſhillings and fix 
pence. Two hundred and eighty-one pounds 
eight ſhillings and four pence was alſo paid annu- 
ally for fees and wages, as expreſſed in the patent, 
to the captain at fix ſhillings and nine pence. per 
day, his deputy at two ſhillings per day, and thir- 
teen ſervants at fix pence per day each, and two 
pence per day to. the keeper of the foreſt. Other 
payments, allowances, penſions, &c. were paid, ſo 
as to augment the ordinary annual expence of 
maintaining the government of the ſaid iſland, 
to five hundred and fixty-ſeven pounds; a ſum 
which at that time was very conſiderable. 

Wurd the kingdom of England was threatened 


with the pretended. invincible armada from Spain, 
3 this 


=: HISTORY OF THE 


this iſland became a peculiar object of attention, 
Sir George Carey, afterwards lord Hunſdon, and 
a near relation of queen Elizabeth, who was at. 
that time captain, and was in reality the firſt per- 
fon who-aſſumed the title of governor, was a man 
of aſſuming manners; and on this occaſion, pre- 
ſuming on his rank and affinity to the queen, ren- 
dered himſelf obnoxious to the gentlemen of the 
iſland, by demanding in poſitive terms what they 
might have ſubmitted to with little reluctance, by 
prudent management, when their ſecurity was the 
principal object of it. The orders given were 
fimilar to thoſe which had been iſſued in the reign 
of Edward the Third; the precedent, therefore, 
was ſtrongly in his favour, but he was leſs happy 
in his mode of procedure, by neglecting to obtain 
the ſuffrage and conſent of the inhabitants, as 
had been done on that occaſion. | 
IT more properly belongs to the civil than the 
military part of our hiſtory; either to notice the 
remonſtrance of the gentlemen of the iſland againſt 
their captain's conduct, addreſſed: to the lords of 
council; or their letters to the lord chancellor, 
and to Sir George Carey, with the anſwer of the 
latter. They were perhaps more diſſatisfied with 
the manner of their captain's behaviour towards 
them, than the matters inſiſted on; and though 
the time of theſe repreſentations of grievances, 
whether real or imagined, was certainly unſeaſon- 
able and improper, it muſt on the other hand be 


acknowledged that it was ſomewhat unreaſonable 
and 


Ld 
«4 
. 
1 
I 
ö 
£ 
© 
4 
Cl 
& 
i* 
- 
. 
7. 
© 
F 
«x 
4 
— 
. =; 
2 
= 
[ 
# 
is A 
f oY) 
"= 
» i 
4 7 
of 4 
L : 
. 4 
is p 
* * 
FYi 
: 
Es 
nt 
— 
4 
#9 
* 
24 
4} 
— 
4 
. 
5 
7 


| 
| 


: r , - * 
e W * oy 


e a / * by 43s 


oa, SER. r 
DS - 


— 
* 


* 
r 


ISLE OF WIGHT. "+ 


and unfounded to call in queſtion their loyalty and 
attachment, the proofs of which had been ſo lately 
| manifeſted in their liberal exertions to defend the 
iſland, when every pariſh had provided a piece of 
braſs ordnance for that purpoſe. Their appre- 
henſion that a military government was in the 
contemplation of their preſent captain, made them 
overlook the ſuſpicious handle which might be 
made of ſo untimely a remonftrance ; but, though 
it was productive of ſome partial inconvenience, 
it appears to have had the deſired effect, in the 
ultimate conſequences, and to have prevented all 
future claims of the captain or his ſucceſſors, to 
which they now objected. When an object of ſo 
much magnitude as the defence of the iſſand was 
brought before them, the means of ſecurity ought | 
not, in common prudence, to have been too nicely 
canvaſſed. The manuſcript memoirs of Sir John 
Oglander ſpeak highly of the conduct of Sir George 
Carey ; from whence it js very probable, that the 
grievances complained of were magnified by ima- 
gination, like the diverging rays of a teleſcope _ 
glaſs, which a principle and idea of extenuation, 
and a reaſonable allowance for circumſtances, 
would have diminiſhed, and produced the effe& 
of the ſame inſtrument in an inverted poſition. 
Tur next account we meet with relative to the 
military hiſtory of the iſland, appears from a note 
dated in 1625, by Sir John Oglander, then cap- 
tain, as delivered by him to the council. It re- 


cords the 3 ſtrength of the iſland, as a 
body 


70 HISTORY OF THE 


body of militia, exerciſed for its defence, under 


the command of different gentlemen, to the 


amount of more than two thouſand men; conſiſt- 
ing of one thouſand and eighty-eight muſkets, 
thirty-three collivors, two hundred and ſixty- 
three corſlettes, one hundred and ninety-fix pick- 
men, ten halberts, two hundred and ninety-ſeven 
unarmed men, commanded by one -hundred and 
thirty-three officers. | 
Bor as the detail of this force may be more 
pleafing to ſome of our readers, we ſhall preſent 
them with the ſtrength of each particular band. 

Stix John Oglandet's band confiſted of ninety- 
ſeven; of which ſeven were officers, fixty muſke- 
teers, twenty-one corſlettes, and nine bare picks. 

Tux band of Sir Edward Dennis conſiſted of two 
hundred and ten men, of which ten were officers, 
one hundred and three muſkets, thirteen corſlettes, 
twenty-three bare Picks, and fixty-one r men un- 
armed. 

 AyPLeDuRcoMst band conſiſted of nine officers; 
one hundred and fifty muſkets, twenty-five corſ- 
tettes, thirty-ſeven bare picks, and forty men un- 
armed; and the whole number amounted to two 
hundred and ſixty-one. 

Tur band of Mr. Dillington conſiſted of one 
hundred and twenty-two men; of which number 
twelve were officers, ſixty muſkets, twenty corſ- 
lettes, fifteen bare picks, and fifteen men Which 
had no arms. 


Six 


rst E or WIGHT; 71 


St John Rycharde's band conſiſted of one hun- 

dred and nine men; having fix officers, fixty-one 
 muſkets, fourteen corſlettes, and ns. bare 
picks and men unarmed, 

Tus next band we meet with is that of Mr. 
Cheeke, which amounted to one hundred and fifty- 

four; having ſeven officers, one hundred and 
| thirteen muſkets, twenty-one corſlettes, and thir- 
teen bare picks. 

Six William Meux commanded two hundred 
and ſixty-one men; confiſting of twelve officers, 
one hundred and fifty- ſix muſkets, twenty-nine 
collivors, forty-four corſlettes, and twenty unarmed 
men. 

Mx. Leyghe's band conſiſted of ninety-five men; 

being ſix officers, ſixty-three muſkets, fixteen 
corſlettes, and ten bare picks. 
Mx. Boorman's band was one hundred and fif- 
teen; of which thirteen were officers, ſixty-five 
muſkets, ſeventeen corſlettes, and twenty bare 
picks. 

Mx. Hobſon's band conſiſted of one hundred 

and ſeventy ; having eighteen officers, etghty-three 
muſkets, thirty-eight corſlettes, and thirty-one 
men unarmed. 
Masa. Urrie's band amounted to one hundred and 
twenty-two; of which were eleven officers, eighty 
muſkets, twenty-two cofflettes, and nine bare 
picks. 

LastLy, the Newport band numbered three 
hundred and four men of the various defctiptions ; 

It 


in 4 


pies 


E 


r 
5 — I, 4. 


3 ee n E 
2 S ms ro 
* 


— wrt 7 HR 
rue 


td A are 


22 ug 


. 
Wd. Nr P n 
4 . 
— 


CU LAS BO © ax vr ERR 


— 


72 HISTORY OF THE 


it had twenty-two officers, ninety-four muſkets, 


four collivors, twelve corſlettes, thirty-two bare 


picks, ten halberts, and one hundred and thirty 


-men unarmed. 


Ir is added by way of note to this account, that 
theſe were all armed, ſubſequent to that time 


when the note was delivered. ; 


Wr learn farther from an order of rank and pre- 
cedence of the year 1628, on the 24th of March, 
that Sir Edward Dennis and Sir John Oglander, 
were appointed by John, lord Conway, then cap- 
tain and governor of the iſland, to take the com- 
mand of the two general diviſions of the iſland, as 
might ſuit the convenience, or as they could come 
to an agreement between themſelves. The ſubor- 
dinate captains of the Weſt Medine were then to 
precede each other in the following order, in the 
field, and in all other meetings upon martial bu- 
ſineſs; Sir William Meux, knt.; Sir John Leygh, 
knt. ; Boorman, eſq.; Hobſon, eſq.; 
| Harvie, eſq.; Mr. James; Mr. John Urrie; 
and the town of Newport. Thoſe of the Eaſt Me- 
dine were; Sir —— Worſley, bart. ; Sir Dil- 
lington, bart. ; Sir William Liſlie, knt. ; Edward 
Cheeke, eſq.; Baſkett, eſq.; and Mr. Tho- 
mas Ryce. 

ABourT ten years after, in the year 1638, we 
meet with an account of watches and wards which 


were kept in the iſland, under the command of 


the captains juſt mentioned, with their two ſupe- 
riors. In the Eaſt Medine, capt. Ryce kept a ward 
with 


1SLE OF WIGHT, 73 


with two men at St. Catherine's, and a watch with 
two men on the Hatton Nighton field. Sir Ed- 
ward Dennis had a watch with two men at Lanes, 
and a ward at Roxall down. Sir John Oglander 
kept a ward one man, and a watch two men, at 
Aſhen down; alſo a watch, two men, at St, Helen's 
point. Sir R. Dillington had a watch with two 
men on Knyghton, and a watch with two men at 
Ryde. Sir Henry Worſley had on Appuldurcombe 
a watch with two men, and the ſame at Criple at 
Nighton. Capt. Cheke kept a watch and two men 
on St. George's down; and Capt. Baſket had a 
ward of one man, and a watch of two men, on 
Binbridge down. Sir William Liſlie was appointed 
to take care of Eaſt Cowes, . Wootton point, and 
Fiſchowſe, probably Fiſh-houſe, at Fiſhbourn 
creek, by a watch of two men a piece at each 
ſtation. | | 

In the Weſt Medine Mr. Meaux had the com- 
mand of Rams, or Ramſey down, where was a 
watch with two men, and the ſame at Chale down. 
Sir John Leygh had the care of Lardon down and 
Atherfield, with a watch and two men at each 
place. Captain Urry had the command of Harbe- 
roe down and the ſea ſhore at Brixton; at the 
former was a ward with two men, and at the latter 
2 watch with two men. Captain Harvie had 
Avington down, Northwood, and Gatcomb down, 
with a watch and two men each. Captain Boor- 
man had Freſhwater down, on which were both a 
watch and ward, with two men cach; and Motſon 


G or 


74 HISTORY OF THEP 


or Mottisfont down, where was a watch with two 
men. Captain Hobſon had a watch with two 
men at Hamſted point, to the eaſt of Yarmouth ; 
and the two companies of n kept watch 
only in the town. 
Wurd the rupture began to break out between 
the king and parliament, Philip, earl of Pembroke, 
was appointed captain by the parliament, in the 
room of the earl of Portland, whom they had diſ- 
placed, as a perſon in whom they had leſs con- 
fidence. Sir John Dingley was deputy govern- 
or, and accordingly was applied to for informa- 
tion touching the ſtate and condition of the iſland; 
whoſe obſervations were no way calculated to 
conciliate any differences. The inhabitants had 
in vain petitioned for the continuance of the earl 
of Portland as governor, and many of the gen- 
tlemen had ſigned a declaration that they would 
protect the peace of the iſland, and *admit no 
„ forreyn power, or forces, or new government, 
« except his majefly, by adviſe of his parlia- 
” ment, uppon occafione that may ariſe, ſhall 
% think it neceſſary to alter it in any particulars 
« for the good and ſafety of the kingdom.” 
This was figned on the eighth of Auguſt, 1642, 
by twenty four gentlemen of the land. 
Bur this petition and declaration were equally 
unavailing; and, which perhaps reflects no great 
credit on their ſincerity or attachment to the go- 
vernment, they foon changed fides, and clearly 


came into the views of the parliament. The coun- 
teſs 


2 ey * — | - nas 


we. 


— er — * —— 


NY ea. rome atone aan 


: 
« 
. 


* uh "Is 
K 
A 4s. 

— 


* 


: . —— > > — 


— 


8 . — - — 
3 42 1 893 
TIP wr e 
2 * 


De ox > 


5 

— — — — 4; 5 
* * — 

8 — * 229 3 — 


the Wi 


AAS nat 


P 
© oF 
L VE HER OIL nne 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 75 


teſs of Portland ſtill remained in Cariſbrooke 
caſtle, and colonel Brett was conſidered as a perſon 
inimical to any innovations. Accordingly it was 
repreſented that the town of Newport could not 
be deemed ſafe, and that the mayor, whoſe name 
was Moſes Read, could not anſwer for its fide- 
lity, if theſe perſons were ſuffered to remain in 
the caſtle; for the king had given the cuſtody of the 
_ caſtle to Brett, on the earl of Portland's being diſ- 
placed, and the counteſs had retired thither for re- 
fuge and ſecurity, with her five children, and her 
huſband's brother and ſiſter, in confidence of the 
declaration expreſſed by the inhabitants in his 
favour. She had hopes alſo, by continuing in the 

caſtle, to preſerve it for the king. | 
Taz mayor, however, had concerted his plan to 
diſappoint theſe hopes. His repreſentation to 
the parliament, who readily caught the opportu- 
nity of ſecuring a man who might be ſo extreme- 
ly uſeful to ſupport their views, was not 'to be 
neglected; and they immediately commiſſioned 
him to take his own meaſures for the ſecurity of 
the iſland, in their intereſt, and at the ſame time 
directed the captains of the ſhips in the river to 
be aſſiſting to him. Four hundred men were im- 
mediately landed to join the militia of the town 
of Newport ; who, with Read as their command- 
er, proceeded at once to the caſtle, and beſieged 
the. colonel and the counteſs, with about twenty 
men, which was the whole force at that time with- 
in the caſtle for its defence. The violence of the 
| TS: -:: populace, 


76 HISTORY or THE 


populace, who now diſregarded all forms of re. 
ſpect, prevented many of their friends from afford- 
ing the neceſſary aſſiſtance; and, "intimidated by 
the threats and menaces of ſo conſiderable a body 
of men, thoſe who wiſhed well to the beſieged 
durſt not adopt any meaſures to afford them re- 
lief, or to furniſh them with ſupplies. Amongſt 
the moſt diſtinguiſhed of this hoſtile train, was the 
ungrateful curate of the town of Newport, whoſe 
name was Harby; who had acquired the canting 
ſpirit and language of the times, and very actively 
encouraged the beſiegers to perſevere againſt the 
counteſs and her children. He deſcribed their 
attack as a praiſe-worthy act; that they were 
fighting the battle of the Lord; that the counteſs 
Vas a papiſt; and ſtimulated them to continue 
and accompliſh their deſigns, by every inſinuation 
and falſhood, which ingratitude and baſeneſs could 
deviſe. His conduct was the more infamous, as 
he had been in the habit of receiving favours and 
obligations from the ſaid earl and his family. 

Ar the time of this hoſtile viſit, the caſtle- was 
not only unprovided with men for its defence, but 
even forthis ſmall number there were not three days 
proviſions in ſtore. The counteſs, notwithſtand- 
ing, manifeſted a noble ſpirit, which will do hon- 
our to her memory ; and the remembrance of her 
conduct retained, with veneration in the page of 
hiſtory. With a match in her hand, and all the 
courage and maganimity of an Amazon, ſhe repair- 
ed to the platform, and there boldly and undaunted- 

ly 


— es | | » 


ISLE OF WIGHT. © | | —_T” 


ly declared that ſhe would defend the caſtle to the 
laſt extremity, unleſs they would grant honourable 
terms of ſurrender ; aſſuring them that ſhe was ready 
to fire the firſt cannon herſelf, and would not ſubmit 
but with the loſs of her life and the brave men 
which were with her. The beſiegers thought proper 
tocommencea negociation, and to treat for the ſur- 
render of the caſtle; the conſequence of which 
was, that articles of capitulation were agreed on, 
and the caſtle was vacated. It was hereby ſtipu- 
lated, that the colonel and the gentlemen with 
him, together with their ſervants who compoſed 
the garriſon, were to be allowed the liberty of the 
iſland ; that the counteſs was to enjoy. her lodg- 
ings in the caſtle, until the contrary was ordered 
by the parliament; but they were all reſtricted 
from going to Portſmouth, which at that time 
held out for the king. We need not be ſurprized 
at the order which was received ſoon after for re- 
moving the counteſs from the iſland, on the ſhort 
notice of only two days; when, through the hu- 
manity of the ſeamen, ſhe was ſoon provided with a 

veſſel, in which ſhe embarked with her family. 
When this principal fortreſs had thus ſurren- 
dered, it is not extraordinary to find that the other 
forts were ſoon ſeized. The earl of Pembroke 
ſoon after arrived, and was reſpectfully received at 
Weſt Cowes by the gentlemen and principal inha- 
bitants of the iſland, who had aſſembled for that 
purpoſe. Their object was to tender their beſt 
ſervices; and by this decifive ſtep, in complying 
G 3 ſo 


78 | HISTORY OF THE 


ſo fully with the views of the prevailing power, 
they ſecured a quiet and undiſturbed poſſeſſion 
during the enſuing commotions, till, by an ill- 
fated meaſure, the king unhappily ſought here an 
aſylum. Such a ſtep was extremely impolitic and 
injudicious ; as he could not be a ſtranger to the 
manner in which his enemies had obtained pol- 
ſeſſion of the iſland. His only hope of meeting 
with refuge here was, probably, that colonel Ham- 
mond, who was at that time governor of the 
iſland, in 1647, was nephew to his chaplain, doctor 
Henry Hammond ; but againſt this reaſoning, it 
might have been recollected, that his connections 
were entirely on the other ſide; that through the 
Intereſt of Cromwell, on whom he was entirely 
dependent, he had married the daughter of the 
famous Hampden, and that he had lately been 
appointed governor by the ſame power, But 
of this more in another place; and of the dread- 
ful cataſtrophe which followed theſe tranſactions. 

During the uſurpation which enſued, when 
the government of this kingdom had begun to aſ- 
ſume ſome regular ſhape, inſtructions were iſſued, 
though the authority was irregular, for the con- 
duct of the military force of the iſland. And as 
this may be taken for the ſettled and eſtabliſhed 
diſcipline of the times, it is our duty, as hiſto- 
rians, to preſent the ſame to our readers. They 
are dated the ſeventeenth of May, 1651, and are 
as follows, : 


« Inſtructions 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 79 


„Inſtructions to be obſerved by the militia of the 
iſle of Wight. 

Imprimis, upon the diſcovery at either of the 
Forelands, or at any other Watch of the Iſland, 
of ten ſhipps and ſoe to twenty making to- 
wards the Iſland out of the Roadeway, then the 
Searchers to hange up the Gare to inform the 
| Centoner. mw 
Item, upon Notice thereof, the Centoner to 

repaire to the Sea Side, and yf he find thoſe 
| ſhipps bounde for Land in the Iſland, and they 
thought to be enemies, then to give Notice to 

the Captaine of the Iſland, or in his Abſence to 
his Deputie, and the Centoner to raiſe his com- 
panie, and to ſend as many of the next Cen- 
toners for to raiſe their companies, as ſhall be 
thought fitt for the Hinderance of their Land- 
Inge, by raifing the Gare, by ringinge all the 
Church Bells, and alſoe by ſendinge about all the 
Hoblers to give the Alarum to all Companies 
to repaire to the Randezvous, and to ſtay untill 

they have further Order. 
Item, yf the Watch at the Forelande, or at 
any place of the ſaid Iſland, diſcover a great- 
er Fleet of Shippinge making towards the 
Ifleland out of the Roade Way, then to give 
Notice to the Centoner who is preſentlie to re- 
- paire to the Sea Side, and yf he finde them 
enemies, determininge to land in the Iſland, 
then preſentlie to give Notice to the Captaine 
of the Iſland, or in his Abſence to his Deputie, 
G 4 | that 


4 
3 
9 
* 
0 
+ 
F 
5 
_ 
l 
t 


—_ 
— 2 


r — #7, 04, eto 
| * 3 


47 r 8 
= 7 ' — 
4 * * A 2 Py 
4A of . * b 5g he by ron, Oe — 
_ 70 4 - = — —_—— — 2 * I 
Q + — — XIE . _ 2 — 28 — — — — 1 th = 
* 5 
. 
* 


80 HISTORY OF THE 


that Order may be given for the Firinge of the 
Beacons; and the ſaid Captaine is in mean 


Time to make what Reſiſtance he can by his Com 


pany, and the Companies adjacent, to the End 


to hinder or retarde the Landinge of the Ene- 
mie as aboveſaid, which ſaid adjacent Com- 
panies are to be accordinglie aſſiſtant. 
Item, upon the Firinge of the Beacon, yf 
yt be in the Eaſt Medine, then all the Cen- 
toners there are to repaire with the ſeverall 
Companies towards Bradinge Downe, and there 
to expect further Directions, and all the Com- 
panies in the Weſt Medham are to repaire to- 
wards St. George's Downe to expect further 


Directions. And yf the Beacon be fired in the 


Weſt Medham, then all the Companies there 
to repaire towards Yarborrowes, and to receive 


further Directions, and all the Companies of the 
Eaſt Medham to repaire to Avington Dou ne, 
and there to receive further Directions from the 


Governor, or in his Abſence from his Deputie. 

Item, every Centoner to chooſe the moſt ſuf. 
ficient Man in his Companie lying convenient 
for yt to be his Searcher, or to cauſe the old 
Searcher, being not able himſelf, to find a 
ſufficient Man. And eſpecially Care is to be 


taken, both in having the Beacons well ſearch- 
ed, warded, and watched, and a ſufficient Quan- 


titie of Wade to lay by them if Occaſion ſerve. 
Item, every Centoner is to charge every Muſ- 


kericere in his Companie to have in a ReaCineſs 
three 


ISLE OF WIGHT.” | 81 


three Pounds of Powder, and forty Bulletts. 
Item, every Watchman, both by Day and 
Night, is to come unto his Watch with a Muſ- 

kett loaden and a Match lighted. 3 
Item, the Searchers to come at Sun Riſinge, 
and at Sun Settinge to charge the Watch, and 
not findinge the Watchmen there readie to doe 
their Duties then to appoint” ſufficient Men to 
ſupply their Places, and to complayne to the 
Centoner, who ſhall pay them (ſoe placed) their 
Wages, which the Offenders ſhall repay, and be 
puniſhed for the firſt Tyme in the Stocks, and 
the ſecond Tyme by being ſent to the Captaine 

of the Ifleland to receive further puniſhment. 
Item, yf the Searcher doe not his Dutie in 
truelie ſetlinge the Watch, and alſoe for ſearch- 
inge of yt, thrice in the Night, and twice in the 
Day, then the Watch to give Notice of his Neg- 
ligence to the Centoner, who ſhall ſend the ſaid 
Searcher to the Caſtle to be there puniſhed by | 

the Captaine of the Iſland. 

Item, every Maſter that will appoint his "> 
' vant to watch for him in the Night ſhall for- 
beare his Service and Labour for the half Day 
before his Watch, that he may take his Reſt and 
be thereby better enabled to doe the ſaid Dutie. 
Item, yf the Watch perceave any ſuſpicious 
Perſon, either by Night or by Day, drawinge 
neere unto them, with whome they may not be 
probably able to make their Parlie good, then 
one to repaire unto them to knowe what they 
are, 


382 HISTORY OF THE 


are, and the other to keep further out of Dan- 

ger, ſoe that he may eſcape them, and fly to the 

Searcher for Ayd. And alfoe that the Watch ap- 

prehend all Rogues and idle Perſons that are 

Strangers to be brought before ſome Juſtice of 
Peace to be 8 and ſent out of the 
Contry. 

Item; the Searchers are to PE their Orders 
once or twice a Week to the Watch, to the 
| End they may the better underſtand their Du- 
1 ties; that every Captaine by himſelf or his 

Licutenant frequentlie view the Watch by 
Night, to ſee how the Searcher performs his 
Rs and to puniſh him yt he find by Neglect 

in him. | 

That no Perſon refuſing to ſubſcribe the late 
Engagement, ſhall beare his own Armes, but 
ſhall find ſuch an able man or men as the Cen- 
toner ſhall approve of, according to that Pro- 
portion as was uſually impoſed onthem. And that 
they ſhall pay unto ſuchas ſhall beare their Armes 

12 D. a Day for every Day they ſhal be ym- 

ployed for them. And the ſaid Perſons ſhall 
alſoe find ſuch able ſpare men as the Centoner 
ſhall like to bear ſuch other Armes beſides their 
trained Armes, as are and have been uſually im- 
poſed on them, or the Eſtates which they en- 


Joye. 


9 ä—ͤ— OA 27 
— 3 9 


r 
1 e 1 L ts 


— —— yy 


* 4 


i 

' 

: 
s 


CO A 


1 
# 


; 
; 
h 
| 
4 


you - 
— ts 


. 0 — 
* iS... 


* This was the engagement which ipulated for their fidelity to 
the Commonwealth, as eſtabliſhed without king or houſe of 


lords, 
That 


88288 T a» nts AE 
r 


r 


ISLE OF WIGHT. $3 


That noe Perſon ſoe refuſing to ſubſcribe, 
ſhall be permitted to be a Watchman or Search- 
er of the Watches, but that the Service be not 
neglected, all ſuch Perſons ſhall procure ſuch 
able Perſons as the Centoner ſhall approve of, 
to be Watchmen and Searchers in their Steeds, 
giving ſuch ſatisfaction as hee ſhall be able to 

agree for. 

That noe Perſon whatever whoe ſhall ſoe neg- 
lect, or refuſe to ſubſcribe the Engagement, and to 
conforme to the preſent Government, ſhall be 
permitted to keep any ſort of Arms in his Cuſ- 
todie, but ſhall either bringe in their Armes to 
Cariſbrook Caſtle, there to be ſecured and de- 
poſited as a Magazine for the Ifland, or be 
otherwiſe ſecured in the Handes of ſome Offi- 
cer of the Militia within the Limitt of that 
Company, where the ſaid Perſon doth inhabit 
to be appoynted by the Centoner. 

That all others not refuſinge to ſubſcribe, 
ſhall accordinge to ancient Cuſtom of the 
Iſland beare their own Armes, without a2 
Diſpenſation from the Centoner under whome 
they ought to ſerve, to the contrary. And that 
all Perſons who are charged with other Armes, 
beſides thoſe they bear themſelves, ſhall find 
ſuch able men and no other who ſhall be ap- 
proved of by the Centoner, 

That every Centoner ſhall take Care to have 
in a Readines, what Horſe hee can get furniſhed 
of ſuch Perſons of Qualitie within his Lymmitts, 

who 


- on HISTORY OF THE 


who ſhall rather chooſe to ſerve on Horſeback 
than on Foot, and whome he ſhall think fitt 
to diſpenſe with, of all which Horſe the ſaid 
Centoner ſhall take a Liſt and retorne yt fairlie 
written, togcather with the Liſt of his Com- 
pan, unto the Captaine of the Iſland, at every 
general Muſter, when they are to cauſe the ſaid 
Horſe to be brought forth furniſhed, to be 
viewed and exerciſed, that they may be fitt for 
Service yf any Occaſion ſhall happen. 

And that noe Perſon within the ſeveral Com- 
panies of the Iſle, who ſerveth or ought to ſerve 
in his owne Armes, or is appoynted-to beare the 
Armes of others, ſhall wilfully abſent himſelt 
from his Muſter upon Payne of Ympriſon- 
ment. 

That all ſuch who ſhal be tend by the 
Samoa to beare Armes for other men who 
have ſubſcribed the Engagement, ſhal be payed 
by them for whome they beare the ſaid Armes, 

| fix Pence a Day for every Day when they ſhall 
appeare upon private Muſters, and 12 D. a Day 
at general Muſters, or in Caſe of any ſpeciall 
Duty or Service. | 
That every Centoner trayne his Company at 
leaſt every Month untill he receave Order o 
- the contrary. | 
That at every generall. Muſter every Centan- 
er doe take Care to have all his Muſketteris to 
- appeare in the Field on Horſeback, to the End 


that they may be in the better Readincs for that 
Sort 


D 


11 
i 
4 
# 
. 
V 


n 
* 2 — 


n 


r 


*F +1 Os ; 
N Se, Kg 


- A. 
W n „% , «a 4 


2 


r „„ 
6 : 


w _ 5 


D 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 85 


Sort of Service very much conducinge to the 
Safetie of this Iſle as there ſhal be Occaſion. 
That every Centoner take Care that the Pa- 
riſh Guns belonginge to the ſeverall Companies 
be kept compleat, and provided with ſufficient 
Wheeles and Carriages, togeather with neceſ- 
ſarrie Stores of Powder, Bulletts, and Caſe 
Shott, to be in a Readineſſe for Service. | 
Every Centoner is to cauſe theſe Inſtructions 
to be diſtinctlie read at every private Muſter in 
the Head of his Company. 


We have thought it our duty to favour our 
readers with this genuine and diſtinguiſhing mark 
of the ſpirit and character of the times ; by which 
it will appear that the utmoſt precaution was 
taken by the ruling powers to guard againſt ſur- 
prize from foreign enemies or domeſtic malcon- 
tents. But from this period we hear no more of 
the inhabitants, in a regular military capicity, till 
the militia act of one thouſand ſeven hundred and 
fifty ſeven, which ordercd that 60 men ſhould be 
ballotted in this iſland, to conſiſt of one company, 
and to be commanded by a captain, whoſe ap- 
pointment was to proceed from the governor of 
the iſland. In the year one thouſand ſeven hun- 
dred and ſeventy, when it was firſt embodied, it 
became an independent company. An irregular 
and ill-appointed train band had before been 
raiſed ; but it had little to recommend it but its 
number. 


Ir 


86 HISTORY OF THE 


IT has been noted, that the iſland was provided 
with artillery, and that every pariſh provided one 
braſs cannon, which was either kept in a houſe 
built for the purpoſe, or in ſome part of the 
church. We are informed that eighteen of theſe 
pieces of ordnance are ſtill in being; but they 
are of different calibre, from one to fix pounders, 
and from their date we are aſſured that they were 
eaſt in the reigns of Edward the Sixth and of 
queen Elizabeth. The pariſhes, for whoſe ſervice 
they were appropriated, were obliged to procure 
carriages and ammunition; and ſome particular 
farms were ſubject to the call of horſes for draw- 
ing them, if they ſhould be wanted for actual ſer- 
vice. The defence which ſuch a force, concentrat- 
ed and united, was capable of making was far from 
deſpicable : they were generally brought into the 
field at a public muſter, and the inhabitants ſo 
frequently exerciſed themſelves in firing at marks, 
that they became very expert in the uſe of theſe 

as well as of ſmall arms. 


} 1 
1 ; 
* 
1 
= - 
i o 
> 


B 
"—_ DLAI 208-2244 
. £ ++ 


1 * 5 


CHAPTER 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | 87 


CHAPTER V. 


OF THE CASTLES AND FORTS OF THE ISLAND, 


RErERENCE has been made in the preceding 
chapters to the forts and other means which were 
heretofore uſed for the defence of the iſland againſt 
the aſſaults of invading foes. Fora place of retreat 
and ſecurity, before the invention of artillery, the 
eaſtle of Cariſbrooke, in the centre of the iſland, 
was admirably adapted, from the nature of the 
eminence on which it ſtands ; being capable from 
ĩts conical form to command every way or paſſage 
to it by its elevated fituation. It was erected by 
William Fitz Oſborne, carl of Hereford, and firſt 
lord of the iſland, ſoon after the Norman conqueſt; 
for it appears from Domeſday-book, that it was 
accounted to occupy a virgate of land, or twenty 

acres. | 
WuzTHtR this was the original erection of this 
eaſtle, or only a large and complete reparation, 
may indeed admit of ſome doubt. There are per- 
fons who think it of much older date, and believe 
it to have been built in the time of the ancient 
Britons, and repaired by the Romans after they 
had ſubdued the iſland, under the conduct of Veſ- 
paſian, about forty-five years before the Chriſtian 
æra. When the page of hiſtory next preſents it 
to our attention, we find Cerdic, king of the Weſt 
Saxons, beſieging and taking it; a demonſtrative 
argument 


—_— 


. HFSTORY or THE 


argument that in the year of Chriſt, 530, when 
this happened, the ſtrength and importance of it 
were objects of no mean conſideration. He ſoon 


after beſtowed it upon Withgar, or Whitagar, one 


of his followers, who ſoon after rebuilt it, and 
from him it took the name of Whitgaraburgh ; 
from which it was afterwards contracted into Gara- 


burgh, Garabrook, and Cariſbrooke, in the iſle 


of Wight, by a natural and eaſy tranſition from 


the gradual improvement of language. It was re- 


paired by Richard de Rivers, earl of Devon, avout 
the time of king Henry I.; but received its prin- 
cipal improvement under the auſpices of our me- 
morable queen Elizabeth, when the other forts and 


caſtles were conſtructed and raiſed for the defence 


of the iſland againſt foreign invaders. 


| _ CARISBROOKE CASTLE. 

IT is related in Domeſday-book, to which we 
have already alluded, that this caſtle ſtands on a 
part of the manor of Avington, which manor was 
at that time held by the king ; that, in the time 
of Edward the Confeſſor, when a prior account of 
the lands of England had been taken by an inqui- 
ſition or ſurvey, the plan of which ſerved as the 
ground-work for this of Domeſday, the manor was 
eſtimated at two hides and a half, but now at two 
hides, on account of the ſpace taken. up by the 
caſtle ; that it contained ſix carucates of land; in 
which were eight villaines and two cottagers, with 
four carucates, two mills of the value of five ſhil- 

nog. | 


18LE OF WIGHT. 8g 


lings, and fix ako of meadow ; that ĩt was valued 
at three pounds a year, but paid a rent of four | 
pounds. \ 


Ir has been already obſerved, that this caſtle 00 


ſtands on a beautiful and exalted eminence, and 
was moſt happily ſituated for a place of defence 
before the invention of ordnance. The walls ori- 
ginally occupied a ſpace, ſurrounding about an 
àcre and a half of ground, nearly in the form of a 
rectangled parallelogram, with the angles rounded. 
Theſe angles were taken down in the repairs of 
queen Elizabeth, and rebuilt ; as may be collected 
from the date of one thouſand five hundred and 
ninety- eight on the north-eaſt angle, and one thou- 
ſand ſix hundred and one on the ſouth-eaſt angle. 
Its greateſt length is from eaſt to weſt; but the 
ſcite of the old caſtle has outworks of a more mo- 
dern conſtruction, being ſurrounded by an irregu- 
lar pentagonal breaſtwork, with facings of ſtone, 
and defended by five baſtions. Theſe outworks 
are about three quarters of a mile in circumference, 
are encompaſſed by a deep ditch, and take up a 
ſpace of about twenty acres. They were additions 
of queen Elizabeth, and are ſaid to be conſtructed. 
on the plan of the citadel of Antwerp, which was 
conſtructed by an Italian engineer, of the name of 
Genebella, _ 8 
Tux entrance to this fortreſs is on the weſt ſide, 
in a curtain between two baſtions, through a ſmall _ 
gateway. The date of its erection is alfo inſcribed 
on the arch; which the ſame queen had alſo re- 


BYE H | Paired 


* 


8 HISTORY er THR 


paired and improved, in one thouſand five hundred 
and ninety-eight. As a demonſtration of this, 
the initial letters of her name muſt put all uncer- 
N out of the queſtion. 8 
Havine paſſed through this gate, to which the 
acceſs is pretty ſteep, a ſecond entrance through 
one of much greater antiquity, is within it; and 
this is flanked and defended by two Targe round 
towers. The age of Edward the Fourth is con- 
cluded to be the æra of its erection, and is ſup- 
| Pofed to have been built by lord Woodville, lord 
of the iffand, about the year one thouſand four 
hundred and fixty- five; the reaſons aſſigned are 
very ſtrong for this conclufion, which are, that 
the arms of Edward the Fourth are carved on a2 
ſtone at the top, with the roſes of York on each 
fide. The paſſage into the caftte yard is through 
This old gateway, the gate of which is ftill remain- 
ing, having a wicket of ftrong lattice work, faſten 
ed with large nails at every croſſing. 
| O the right hand, as foon as you are entered 
into the area, is the chapel of St. Nicholas, which 
is a military appointment, with the fame pay to 
the chaplain as the chaplains of other garrĩſons. 
It has long been a fihecure; but we underſtand 
that the preſent worthy governor, whoſe gratitude 
for his recovery from a valetudinary ſtate has en- 
ſured his partiality to this healthy 'fpot, has deter- 
mined to revive the performance vf divine worſhip, 
and to reſcue the chapel from thoſe unhallowed 
purpofes to which it has been too Tong applied. 
; - ; In 


"ry or WIGHT. | gy 


In this chapel the chief magiſtrate and high con- 

ſtables of the town of Newport are annually ſworg 
into office. Behind it is a cemetery incloſed. This 

building, though plain, is ſufficiently capacious to 

contain a reſpectable congregation; and was erected 

onthe rujns gf anancientone, which was in exiſtence 

when Domeſday-book was compiled, about the year 
1738, as appears from the inſcription over the 

door, G. II. 1938, and during the government of 
lord Lymington, as is alſo manifeſt from a ſtone 
tablet at the eaſt end of it. 

Turning our eyes to the left hand, we are pre- 
ſented with the remains of ſome buildings, where 
our unhappy and ill-fated monarch, king Charles 

the Firſt, was confined. The ſtone-work of a 

window, with an upright iron bar, ſuch as are 
ſeen in old-built houſes in country villages, is ſtill 

remaining, where that monarch flept, and through 

which, it is ſaid, his attempt to eſcape was unfuc- 

ceſsfully made. A flight view of it, indeed, ſeems 

to be ſufficient to convince the reflecting mind, 

that it was not capacious enough to promife ſuc- 

ceſs to this experiment; though the noble hiſto« 

ian of thoſe times ſays, that the ſize of the aper= 

ture had been meafured ; and the proje& confidered 

as practicable. This doubt, we think ourfelyes 

juſtified in ſuggeſting, that the curious may be 

induced to confider this matter with à more criti- 

cal attention; and from thence to form ſuch con- 

cluſions, or to deduce ſuch reflections, as cannot 

be wanting to the ſpeculative and ingenious. 

| H 2 FARTHER | 


92 HISTORY OF THE 


-* FarTHzR on, in proceeding towards the eaſt, 
the barracks and governor's houſe are ſituate. 
The preſent governor has been at a vefy conſider. 
able expence; to render the rooms comfortable 
and commodious; and has connected ſome broken 
parts of the walls, ſo as to preſerve the ancient 
buildings, and prevent that farther decay, to which 
the depredations of time would otherwife expoſe 
them: And as it had formerly been uſed fora military 
hboſpital, the damages to which theſe buildings had 
been ſubject demanded the ſupport of a hand as 
Able to beſtow, as it ſnould be willing to repair the 
ſeveral parts of this long- neglected fortreſs. The 
Propriety of the ſituation, than which none could 
be more proper for the recovery and reſtoration of 
the ſick and infirm, we readily admit; but we la- 
ment, that a building, diſtinguiſhed for ſo many 
and ſignal occurrences of hiſtory, ſhould ever have 
been expoſed to the hazard of being waſted he 

deſtroyed by improper uſe. 
« In proceeding farther on that ſide, - the keep or 
dungeon preſents, itſelf to our notice in the 
north-eaſt corner. It ſtands on a mount, which 
is raiſed to an elevatien, conſiderably higher than 
any of the other buildings; of the form of an ir- 
regular polygon, to which is an aſcent of ſeventy- 
two ſteps, ſomewhat broken and injured by time, 
with fome additional ſteps within the building. 
The great antiquity of this tower muſt be admit- 
ted, from the very ſight of it: buttreſſes or wall- 
ing ot hewn ſtone appear to have been added to 
ſtrengthen 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | | 94 ö 


ſtrengthen the angles, and very probably about 
the time of Edward the Fourth, when the great 
gate was rebuilt. In this keep is a well, which 
is now uſeleſs; it is therefore in good meaſure 
filled up, as dangerous. It is ſaid that it was 
three hundred feet deep. From this keep is a moſt. 
pleaſing and enchanting proſpect, particularly to 
the north-weſt, north, and north-eaſt; with a view 
of St. Catharine's tower to the eaſt, _* 

Taz remains of another tower are found at the 
ſouth-eaſt angle of the caſtle; this was, called 
Montjoy's tower, was very ſtrong, the walls in 
ſome places being eighteen feet thick, From. 
hence the proſpect is pleaſant, but not ſo exten- 
ſive as from the keep. Between theſe towers the 
rampart is about twenty feet high and eight feet 
thick, including a parapet of two feet and a half, 
which extended round the caſtle, when in its per- 
fect ſtate. . N N 

In the caſtle yard is another —_ withis a 
ſmall building, at the fide of which is a wheel of 
very conſiderable dimenſions, about fifteen feet. in 
diameter, for the purpoſe of drawing water for the 
uſe of the garriſon. An aſs is kept here to per- 
form this operation by treading the wheel, in the 
ſame manner as the timber and other engines of 
the ſame nature are at the crane houſes in the 
dock yards and at ſome other public wharfs, or as 
dogs turn the wheel of a ſpit. It is called a 
windlaſs wheel. One of theſe animals died about 
the year 1771 after having performed this ſervice 

H3 forty- 


dz HISYORY OF rue 


forty=five years; that which now performs it has 
been kept for the ſame purpoſe twenty=two years, 
Theſe circumſtances are mentioned as curioſities} 
which are perhaps, inftead of conſidering theſe 
Inſtances of longevity as profligies, rather to be 
Attributed to the neglect of this uſeful and hardy 
Inimal, whereby we are precluded from knowing 
their natural hiſtory ſufficiently, to be able to 
_ aſcertain the common and ufual duration of their 
SxrRANOERSs are generally entertained with the 
ceremony of dropping a pin into the well, or 
Tome other very ſmall but heavy body; which 
_ acquires a force and velgcity ſufficient in the fall 
Xo ſtrike the ſurface of the water fo powerfully, 
Fs to occafion the return of the found, aſtonith- 
ing beyond conception, to the ſummit, after a 
lapſe of near four ſeconds of time, that is taken 
up from its fall to the hearing of the ſound. 
This time is allowed on the ſuppoſition that its 
depth is two hundred and ten feet; but if we | 
reckon it at three hundred feet, according to the 
account of the man who will ſnew the experi- 
ment, the lapſe of time will be fome what more 
than four ſeconds and a half, according to the 
laws of 'deſcending bodies, and the uniform ve- 
locity of ſounds, This may be n by a 
good ſtop watch, 

AxNoruxx very curious experiment i 1s common- 
ly made here, by lighting a ſheet of brown paper 
rolled up, not too tight, and dropping it into the 

well; 


ISLE Or Ware N 95 


well; * which the line of the well. is. diſ. 
tinctly ſeen as far as the ſurface. of the water. In 
deſcending a ſtrong ſound is created from the 
flame, like that of a ſtrong hollow wind, or that 
of thunder at a maderate diſtance; and as the 
paper will burn ſometime on the ſurface of the 
water, it affords abundant leifure to view the 
well in that diſtant ſituation. It ſhould not be 
forgotten, that the building, by its being cover- 
ed, precludes the light of the ſky, except what 
comes in horizontally from the door, which is 
ſhut when this experiment is ſhewn. 2 
Ir would be an overſight, ſhould we omit to 
mention the purity and tranſparency of this water: 
the value of which can never be ſufficiently eſ- 
timated, but by perſons who are unhappily deſ- 
titute of ſo excellent an element. To the pa- 
late it is extremely grateful; and produces ſenſa- 
tions of the moſt pleaſing and agreeable nature. 
Ween Montacute, earl of Saliſbury, was lord of 
this iſland and of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke, it is 
highly probable that it received ſome reparations 
from his munificence ; for the arms of that family 

are placed on a buttreſs at the angle of a part 
of the governor's lodgings. Theſe were three 
lozenges ; and we know that the earls of Saliſ- 
bury bore three lozenges red and feſſways in a 
ſilver field, expreſſed in heraldic terms, Argent, 
three lozenges gules in feſs. He was lord of this 
iſland and caſtle from the ninth to the twentieth 
year of king Richard the Second; as we ſhall have 
H 4 occaſion 


.6 HISTORY OF THE 


| occaſion to notice hereafter, when we come to 
treat of the lords and e of the iſland and 
of this caſtle. | 
Amoncsr other things we find in the ſecond 
year of queen Elizabeth, that the ordinary charges 


of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke amounted annually to 


fixty-nine pounds nineteen ſhillings and two- 
pence ; having two armourers, one at eight pence 
and the other at fix pence a day, one harquebut | 
maker at eight pence a day, and one boyer, one 
fletcher, one carpenter, and one ONTO, at 
ſix pence a day each. 

Bur the principal of ſuch buildings as are e ſtill 
remaining were doubtleſs erected in the time of 
queen Elizabeth; to which ſhe contributed one 
thouſand marks, being thereunto ſolicited by Sir 
George Carey, who was nearly allied to the 
queen, and captain of the caſtle and iſland, when 
the Spaniſh Armada was forming to invade Eng- 
land, and to reduce it to the ſubjection of that 
power. At the ſame time the gentlemen of the 
iſland contributed four hundred pounds, and many 
of the commonalty were not wanting in affording 
their perſonal labour. At this time it was that 
the principal part of the governor's apartments, 
as well as the offices and outworks, were erected; 
and the outer ditch, it is ſaid, on the authority of 
ſome manuſcript memoirs, was wholly excavated 
by the diligence and induſtry of the people, with- 
aut pn. e 


As 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 97 


As the governor or captain was entruſted with 
the power of directing the works neceſſary to be 
done, ſo were thoſe diſtinguiſhed perſonages, 
Thomas Worſley and John Dingley, eſquires, with 
that of receiving and paying the neceſſary ſums, 
in character of general accomptants, to which 
they were appointed by the lords of the queen's 
privy council. The whole amount of the ex- 
pences incurred upon this occaſion, for ſtrength- 
ening this caſtle, is ſtill extant; it affords many 
particulars, of a nature peculiarly calculated to at- 
tract and command the attention of the curious. 
We ſhall copy the ſubſtance of it, for the informa- 
tion and amuſement of our readers; from which 
many ſtriking obſervations will occur to the re- 
flecting mind, calculated to impreſs it with ideas 
of the ee importance in political ſpecu- 
lations. 

From the auditing of theſe accounts, before 
William, baron of Burleigh, lord high treaſurer 
of England, in the year ſubſequent. to the com- 
pletion of thoſe works in 1588, the expences are 
thus ſtated. 

« Tur ſaid Accomptauntes ar alowed for 
Money by them iſſued payde and defrayed for 
Woorkes and Reparacons done upon her Majeſ- 
ties Caſtles and Fortes within the Iſle of 
Wighte, viz. at 

CARESBROOKE. 
Firſte, the ſaide Accomptauntes are allowed 


for Money by them ſaid to be layed out and 
diſburſed 


98 HISTORY OF THE 


| diſburſed for Woorkes and Reparacons done 
uppon her Majeſty's Caſtle at Cariſbrooke afore- 


_ . faide within the Tyme of this Accompte, viz. 


making 269 Perches of Wall of twoe and 3 
| Feete thicke uppon the South Ravelin and 
921 Perches uppon the Eaſte Ravelin, mak- 
ing a treade Whele for the Well with the 
Gudgeons Shafts and other Yron and Carpentry 
Woorke aboute the ſame, and a Platforme over 
the Wellhouſe, Chardges of the Maſons Woorke 
of the Southeaſte and Southweſte Knightes, the 
Kepe a Ravelin in the Northe Parte of the ſame 
Caſtle takinge doune two Towers and makinge 
the Loopes of the ſame agreeable to tholde 
Walls, ftoppinge all the Loopes of the Walls 


uith Planks and makinge a newe Bridge at the 


Caftle Gate with ſondrye other Neceſſarie Re- 
pacons and Fortificacons done there within the 
Tyme of this Accompte. The Particularetyes 
whereof with their ſeverall Natures and Quan- 
tetyes are ſett downe as hereafter followeth, 
viz. for | 
Empcons and Proviſions, viz. for 
Boordes, 103 Foote 6 5 
Carriadges, 2, viz. one for the Cannon Os 
Pewtrell with Yron Woorke to the 
ſame 1. 45. 7d. and one for the Cul- 
veringe 16s. 8d. in all $5443 
Lyme, 315 Quarters, viz. 276 . 

5 Boz, 25. 8d. the Quarter 360. 175. 
84. and 39 Quarters at 2s, the Quarter | 
. 18s. in all 40 15 8 


a 


ISLE Or WIGHT. | 


Bricks one thouſande with Carryadge 


4 myles 13 
Firre Boordes, viz. 2 at 12d. the pece 25, | 

and 3 at 6d. 184. in all 3 
Lathes oO at 84. the 100 4 
A Myll to grynde Corne bought of 

Frauncis Porke of Wincheſter 6 6 
Heare one Quarter 5 7 :4Y 
Joyned Table one 6 
Treſtles 3 at 124. the Pece 3 
Whelebarrowes 50 at 15. 6d. the Pece 3 is 
Baſkets 12 Doz. I at 25. the Doz. 4 *4 
Pypes to kepe Water for the . 

At 25. 62. the Pece 5 


Bowdg Barrel one and for mendinge and 


hoopinge a Water Tubbe 2 

Wellropes 2 Poiz. 300% at 1. 15. 6d. 
per Medm. 4. 16s. makinge out 

newe Rope and Tarringe of the fame 

175. 4d. and for a Rope for the Watch 

Bell 129. in all with 1L. 75. for a newe 

Rope for a Gynne the Some of 7 8 
Caſements for the Chappell 3 13 
Tombrell, one 18 
Lambſkinnes for Sponges, 6 . 
Sande, 486 Lodes at 10d. the Lode for 
Digginge and Carriadge 20 5 


Wyninge of roughe Stone for the 
Woorkes viz. 334 Lodes at 3d. the 
Lode 4. 3s. 6d. and 1261 Lodes 


- Mo 2 2 


0 


at 4d. the Lode 21. os. 4d. in all 25 3 o 
9 Wynninge 


100 HISTORY OF THE 


Wynninge and Carriadge of hard Platt- 
ner Stone 126 Tonnes at 8d. the 


Tonne 4 4 00 
Wynninge and peng of +13 Lode 

of Freeſtone at 2s. the Lode 1232 ©- 
Hoopes 12 Doz. at 6d. the Doz. 66. ang 

for ſetting them on 26. in all 8 o 
Bucketts for the Well 2 6 8 
Ironwoorke of diverſe and ſondrye Sorts © 
with mendinge of Woorkmen's Tooles 4 2 1. 
Nay les of ſeverall Sortes and * 131 
Glaſſe and r K 2: 6th 

L-122 $5 '64 


Land Carriadge 


Of diverſe and ſondrye Provicons afore- 


ſaide from ſeverall Places to the ſaide 


Caſtle of Careſbrooke with 90. 8s. 6d. 


for Carriadge of 3874 Tonnes of Freſh - 


Water for Morter for the Woorkes 
diſtincte a Quarter of a Myle at 64d. 
the Tonne, and with 6. 6s. for the 
like Carriadge of Lyme from New- 


porte and Shyde Pitte to the ſaide 
Caſtle at diverſe Rates, the Some of 20 13 


Wages of Artificers and 3 viz. of 

Maſons at 12d. p. Diem. 
Carpenters at 12d. ann 104. per Diem 
Sawyers ſawinge of Planckes and Boordes 

at 25. 8d. the 100 


56 
2 


3 8 
EM 


{3 8 


Plaſterers 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 


Plaſterers for plaſteringe 42 Yeardes at -. . 


24. the Yearde 
Joyners woorkinge uppon the Modle of 


the Caſtle, the Barbican, Ravelyns, 
Kepe, Ditches, Banks, and other ne- 


ceſſarie Places at 109. per Diem 


the South and South-eaſte Ravelins. 
makinge the Trenches and Ditches 
aboute the ſame, filling the South-eaſte 


and South-weſt Knyghts, helping to 


wyn lade and unlade Stones with other 


101 


118 4 
Laborers occupied aboute the fillinge of 


neceſſarie Woorks at 8d. per Diem 128 6 4 


139 16 © 


Taſkewoorke, viz. to 


249 Perches of Wall of 2 and 3 Foote 
thicke, every Perche contey ning 18 
Foote in Lengthe and one Foote in 
Heighte uppon the South Ràvelyn at 
Careibrooke at 13. 6d. the Perche, 18. 


Ravelyn at 15. 6d. the Perche 6. 18s. 
9d. and for woorkinge 24 Foote of 


Thomas Maſon and others for making 


135. 6d. for makinge 921 Perchcs of 
Wall 3 Foote thick uppon the Eaſt 


Quoynes at 2d. the Foote 48. in all 25 16 3 


John Mathewe Maſon for Lyme and 
Woorkmanſhippe makinge 8 Perches 
of Wall of 2 Foote thicke in the South- 


weſt Knight at 25. 4d. the Perche 18s. - 


234... 


102 Ats rogRr OF THE 


84. for takinge dow ne and newe mak- 
inge a Stone Dore and the Wall to the 
ſame 10s. and for woorkinge and ſet- 
tinge a Stone Dore in the Garden Wall 
to paſs to this Knightes ids. in all 1 18 8 
To the ſayde John for Lyme and Woork | 
manſhippe taking downe and newe 
making one Stone Dore in the Wall to 
the ſame in the South-weſt Knighte 
| 1. for Lyme and Woorkmanſhippe 
/ making 10 Perches of Wall 5 Foot 
| thicke at 4s. 2d. 20. 15. 8d. for Lyme 
and Woorkmanſhippe for makinge 45 
Perches 6 Foote of Wall 2 Foote thicke 
at 25. 4d. the Perch 5. 5s. 8d. and for 
wynninge and ſtapelinge of free Stone 
for Lyme and Woorkmanſhippe for 
copinge the two Knights conteyninge 
309 Foote by greate 120. 6s. in all 20 13 4 
John Haſell for makinge a Treade Whele 
for the Well with the Gudgeons Shafte 
and other Iron and Carpentrie Woorke 
about the ſame and a Plattforme over 
the Wellhouſe by Agremente 16 © © 
John Mathewe for paving the Wellhouſe 
and makinge the Synke Ee the 
Wall 2 0 © 
John Hazell for digginge the Trenches | 
for the Well Whele and Frame thereof 
and for the Key boltinge of the Whele 
removing the Frame of the Whele to 


ſerve 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 103 


ſerve for 2 Bucketts and makinge a 

great duble Doore to the Kepe 15 © 
John Mathewe aforeſaide for the Maſons 

Woorke of the Southeſt and South weſt 

Knightes, the Kepe and a Ravelyn in 

the North Part of the Caſtle, takinge 

downe two Towers and makinge the 

Loopes of the Tame agreable to tholde 

Wall of the Caſtle accordinge to a Plott 
thereof drawen and ſaid to be remayn- 

inge with the Right Honourable the 

Lord High Threar. of Englaunde 90 © o 
To him more for makinge a Synck in the 

Kitchen and removinge certen Stones 

from the Chapel to the Woorke 3 0 
John Hazell aforeſaide for ſtoppinge all 
* the Loopes of the Walles with Planks 
4. and for makinge a new Bridge at By 

the Caftle Gate 2Y. in all 6 © o 


Rewardes and Enterteignments, viz. of 

John Daniell having the Overſighte and 
Ohardge of the faide Woorkes and 
Woorkmen and Diſburſement of there 
Paye by the Space of 13 Weeks at bs. 
the Weeke 3 16 © 

34 Men fent out of the mayne Late to 
have bene imployed in her Majeſties 
Woorkes and diſchardged to retourne 


* 
- 


Home, 


os. © HISTORY OF THE 


Home, ſome being ls to endure. 
the Woorkes others for that the num- + 
ber was full and ſo for their Chardges- 
to and from i, © 
John Haſell for his Enterteynment at- 
tendinge to kepe Notes of the Car- 
riadges of Stone Sand Lyme Water 
and Tymber by the Space of 171 Days, 
viz. 18 Dayes at Fs. and 153 * at 
rod. per Diem 1 6 
Capten Peers for his Paynes and Expen- 
ces cominge from Porteſmouth to di- 
recte and ſett out Plotts for the Places 
to be fortefied 3 10 
Willm Nutte for Spoyle made in his | 
Corne in the Wynninge and Carryadge 
of rough Stone worne in his Grounde 1 10 
John Leigh Gen. for the Expences and 
Chardges of himſelfe fyve Men and ſix 
Horſes for 12 Dayes travellinge from 
the Ifle of Wighte to London, ſtayinge 
there and bringinge downe the thou- 
ſande Markes lth for the For- 5 
tiications : . 4 © © 


5 1 10 4 
— 


In all the 8 of the ſaid Works 
and Fortifications done at Careſbrooke 
aforeſaide within the Tyme of this Ac- 

compt as by the Booke thereof ſigned 
- with Thands of Sir George Carey 


Knighte | 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 1056 


Knighte the ſaid Accomptauntes and 

John Daniell hereuppon duly peruſed 

caſte tryed and examyned may appear, | 
the Some of £-470 18 5 


So far we have cited the record.“ 


Sven was the expence incurred at Cariſbrooke 
caſtle, at this ſeaſon of a projected invaſion by the 
force of Spain. We ſhall preſently have occafion- 
to deſcribe the works, which were carried on at 
Yarmouth and Freſhwater at the ſame time; and 
thereby account for the diſtribution of the money 
appointed to ſtrengthen the fortifications of «the 
| iſland, As theſe works were accompliſhed in the 
ſhort ſpace of 245 days, between the 25th of 
March, and the 24th of November, 1587 we 
may readily conceive that their neceſſity was 
deemed to be preſſing and urgent; and that much 
energy and vigour were exerted to carry the plans 
of defence into execution. About this time alſo 
an armourer and fletcher, which were paid by the 
queen, reſided in the iſland. 

NoTaiNnG is more to be depended on, than that. - 
Cariſbrooke has been always confidered as the 
grand centre of defence of the iſland from the ear- 
lieſt periods of hiſtory. It was always the reſidence 
of the lords of the iſland, and of the governors 
appointed to command here after it came into the 
hands of the crown, whenever they: remained for 


any time in the iſland. The Right Honourable, 
I Thomas 


106 HISTORY Or TE 


Thomas Orde, Eſq. the preſent governor, whoſe 
recovery from a deplorable ſtate of health to that 

of convaleſcence and a new conſtitution, has been 
effected from the natural and powerful cauſes which 
this fituation affords, almoſt conſtantly reſides 
here; the declivities from the caſtle on every ſide 

are converting into pleaſure grounds, eſpecially 
towards Newport, and every thing 1s progreſſively 
improving which can render this ſalutary ſpot at 

o Ace rural, pleaſant, commodious, and attractive. 
 PzRHays it may not be unſuitable to gemark 

her e, that the town of Newport received their firſt 
char ter from Iſabella de Fortibus, and that it was 
dated | from this caſtle of Cariſbrooke. Philippa, 
| duche 5 of York, who was lady of the iſle of Wight, 
declare d and publiſhed her will, in the ninth year 
of Henr »y the Sixth, from the ſame place. Of the 
unhappy confinement of king Charles the Firſt in 
this caith, „ We ſhall have occaſion to take notice 
ina ſubſaa uent chapter; it was alſo converted into 
a priſon for bis children after his death. The lady 
Elizabeth d ied here in the year 1651, and was 
buried in th © church of Newport; her coffin was 
the chancel, on opening a grave for 
of a gentleman there in 1793, on 
d the following inſcription : Eliza- 
laughter of the late king Charles, 
8th, 1650.—One of our hiſtorians ' 
what authority we preſume not to 
evelling rulers of thoſe times had 


entice her to the degrading occu- 
pation 


dit overed in 

| the interment 

whack was foul 
eth, ſecond < 

' &.rceaſed, Sept. 

has: ſaid, but on 

; aſl ert, that the! 

defiigned to app 


\ 


1811 OF WIGHT. 167 


pation of a button maker; if ſo, we may conclude; 
perhaps not improperly; that the ſenſe of her hu- 
miliated condition might have no ſmall effect on a 
conſtitution, not adapted to ſuch treatment, and 
prepare the way for a premature death. And as 
this caſtle was thus uſed for a priſon by Cromwell 
and his adherents, we are told that Charles the 
Second, after his reſtoration, appropriated it to 
the ſame purpoſe: Since that time it has been 
gradually mouldering towards a ſtate of diſſolution: 

As the preſent military of ordnance eſtabliſh- 
ment of the caſtle was not mentioned in the laſt 
chapter, we ſhall cloſe this article with introduc- 
ing it here. The governor of the iſland has an 
appointment of 500. per annum, and under him a 
lieutenant governor of 365. per annum; beſides 
which there are appropriate to the caſtle, one 
captain at 10s: per day, or 1821. 10s. z one maſter 
gunner at 25. per day, or 360. 10s. per annum; 
and three other gunners at 12d. each per day, 
making 540. 158. per annum. 

Tux caſtle of Cowes and fort of Sandowri ſcem, 
as to importance, to claim our next attention; 
but we ſhall wave theſe for a few pages, to make 
room for. the account of the reparations carried on 
at Yarmouth and Freſhwater, on this occaſion.— 
By ſuch a contiguous relation of the expences in- 
curred at theſe places reſpectively, it will be ſeen 
the more readily in what manner the afore-men- 
tioned ſum of one thouſand marks was laid out, for 
the more ſecure protection and defence of the iſland. 

I 2 Having 


* ** 


> 
+ — 
> v * 4 fog 


A gr rt e n _— 1 


108 Ts HISTORY OF THE | 


Hav already traced, as accurately as poſſible, 
the origin and progreſs of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke, 
it may be ſufficient to ſay, that the principal æra 


for the erection of forts was about the thirty-ſixth 


of Henry the Eighth. Every part of the kingdom, 
where it was deemed neceſſary, was then fupported 
and defended by the erection of forts and block 
houſes ; and this iſland in particular, which ſeemed 
to require a ſpecial attention, was not overlooked 
in this general plan of defence. All the other 
caſtles and batteries of this iſland were at this pe- 
riod projected and raifed ; fo that the accounts we 
are now to produce, were not of expences incurred 


by new erections, but by the repairs and improve- 


ments of works already erected. 

Tur following account of the reparations of 
Yarmouth caſtle, in the aforeſaid year of 1587, the 
29th and 3oth of queen Elizabeth, is given in this 
place, for the amufement as well as information of 


our readers. 


YARMOUTH. 

Ar the time that the above-metitiotied account 
of Cariſbrooke was audited and paſſed before the 
lord treaſurer Burleigh, the record there referred 
to ſtates, that 

Tur Accomptauntes ar allowed for mak- 
inge of Fortificacons of Earth and Turffe at 
the ſaide Caſtle of Yarmouthe with other neceſ- 
ſarie Reparacons done there within the Tyme 
of this Accompte as hereafter is particularly 
menconed and declared, viz. 


ISLE OF WIGEHT. 


Empcons and Proviſions with other 
Chardges, viz. 

Fellinge and ſquaringe of 2 Elmes for 

Plancks for Stocks Carriadges and 
Wheeles 7s. 6d. makinge 2 Paire of 
Wheles for Culveringe and for Sacre 
and for Spokes and exinge them with 
Carriadges and Yronwoorke for the 


109 


fame 2L. 35. in all 2 10 6 
Mendinge = Powder Houſe in the Caſ- 
tle --; * 
Mendinge the Gutters and Leads in the _ 
ſaid Caſtle 16 0 
Spade Shoes 16 at 8d. the Pece 10 8 
Pickaxes 6 at 84. the Pece 8 
Spades 3 at 6d. the Pece I 6 
Mountinge thordinaunce upp into the 
Plattforme 83 
Yronwoorke of diverſe Sorts with Mend. -_ 
inge of Woorkmen's Tooles 9 4 
Other Neceſſaries, viz. a ſmall Lyne to 
meaſure the Plotts 1s. 3d. a Grynde 
Stone and a Wenlace 1s. 2d. and a 
Hatchett 1s. 4d. in all the Some of E 
Land Carriage of two Culverings from Smeg 
| Newporte to Yarmouth 8 © 
Laborers woorkinge uppon the Fortifica- 
cons of Earth and Turfe at 8d. per 
Diem 44 11 4 
In all the Charges of the es 
done at Yarmouth within the Tyme of 
| I 3 this 


A « 


r 1 
©” NY 


= 4 \ 
„%% 
4 of c 4 
od * 


b 
ö 0 
0 
3 
4 
bY 
{1 


* — — 


1109 HISTORY or THY 


defence was prepared to withſtand the approach 
of an enemy, but very indequate to any forcible 


to thirty-nine pounds ten ſhillings and ten pence 


| riſbrooke. This was erected for the defence of the 


this Accompte as by the perticular 
Booke therof ſubſcribed as aforeſaid 
and hereuppon duly peruſed caſt tryed 
and examyned may appear the Some 
of = =» TY 


— — — — 
— —— 


Here ends the record for Yarmouth.” 


Ir will not be unacceptable to recite the mili- 
tary eſtabliſhment of the ſecond year of queen 
Elizabeth, in order to ſhew that ſome degree of 


reſiſtance. Yarmouth caſtle had only at this time 
a porter at eight pence a day, and three gunners 
at fix pence a day each, amounting in the whole 


annually. Yarmouth was one of the forts erected 
by Henry the Eighth, out of the ruins of the re- 
ligious houſes, which were then diſſolved. 

Tux preſent military or ordnance eſtabliſhment 
of Yarmouth caſtle ſhall be the concluding article 
for this place, Beſides the governor and lieutenant 
governor, which are the ſame for the whole iſland, 
here is a captain, maſter gunner, and five other 
gunners, with the ſame daily pay as thoſe for Ca- 


entry into Freſhwater or Yar river, at the north- 
weſt part of the iſland. It i is ſituated at the weſt 
end of the town ; and a part of i it ſtands on the wall 
of the church, which had been demoliſhed by the 

French 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 111 


French in the thirty-fifth year of Henry the Eighth. 
All the forts built in that reign have a ſameneſs of 
conſtruction, under the direction of Richard 
Worſley, at that time captain of the iſland; he 
alſo erected another fort, known by the name of 
Worſley's tower, on the point of land nearly op- 
poſite to Hurſt caſtle, which ſtands on a narrow 
neck of land on the Hampſhire fide. This was 
about a mile and a half to the weſt of Yarmouth. 


FRESHWATER, SHARPNORE, or CAREY's 
3 ScCONCE. | 
Waen the reparations already noticed for Cariſ- 
brooke and Yarmouth were carrying on, it was 
thought adviſcable to repair the defence oppoſite 
to Hurſt caſtle, as Worſley's tower was then going 
to decay, and had probably been erected only as a 
temporary defence. But Sir George Carey, inſtead 
of the ſcite of that tower, choſe a point of land 
near half a mile nearer to Yarmouth, as an addi- 
tional ſecurity for the mouth of that river; which 
was in reality a new erection, but was accounted 
for as a reparation of a work formerly erected. — 
The record already deſcribed ſtates, that 
« Tax ſaid Accomptauntes likewiſe ar allowed 
for Woorkes and Reparacons done at Freſhwa- 
ter aforeſaide within the Tyme of this Accompte, 
viz. making a Skonce of Earth and Turfe at 
Sharpnode in Freſhwater, fellinge of trees hew- 
inge ſawinge woorkinge and ſettinge of Poſtes 
and Rayles about the ſame at Sharpnode con- 
14 teyninge 


= - ' HISTORY OF THE 


teyninge 39 Perches with other Woorkes done 
there within the Tyme of this Accompte as 
| hereafter more particulerly is mentioned, viz. 
Empcons and Proviſions with other 
Chardges, viz. 
Boordes for carry inge of Turfe and Earthe 
200 at bs. 8d. the 100 I. 4 | 
Sertinge of Pykes and Hedges to kepe off 
the Force of the Sea from the Skonce 1 4 0 
A greate Levell to be uſed about 8 
Woo kes with 3s. for a ſmall Corde 8 
Yronwoorke and mendinge of Tooles | 
with Clampinge of Whelebarrows and 
with 25. 9d. for Nayles 28-4 
Wages of Laborers making a Skonce of 
Turfe and Earthe at Sharpenode in 
Freſhwater at 8d. per Diem 117 0 8 
Taſkewoorke, viz. to John Brett Carpen- 
ter for fellinge of Trees hewinge aw 
inge woorkinge and ſettinge of Poſtes 
7 and Rayles aboute the Skonce at 
Sharpenode conteyninge 39 Perches at 
IS. 8d. the Perch 4 3 7 
the ' Earth woorkes and wana of 
the Labourers for 98 Days at 1s. per 
Diem 4 18 O 
Rowland Regles for his Paynes taken in 1 
directinge the Woorkes and ſeinge to 
the Woorkmen at Freſhwater 0 
In all the Chardges of the Woorkes done 1 
.at 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 113 


at Freſhwater aforeſaide within the. 
Tyme of this Accompte as by thafore- 
ſaide Bpoke ſubſcribed with the ſame 
Handes hereuppontrycd and examyned 
maye appeare the Some of - 130 5 2 


Some Total of the Peticons and Payments 
aforeſaide - . 61 11 2} 
p 

And ſo the ſayde Accomptauntes uppon 

the Determinacon of this there Ac- 

compte doe remayne in Debte the 
GERT DS ESE. 15 2 13 


Wurxror the faid Accomptaunte is allowed 
for his Rydinge Chardges from his Houſe at 
Appledercombe unto the Quenes Majeſties fore- 
faid Caſtles and Forts at ſeveral! Tymes within 
the Tyme of this Accompte for the like Chardges 
of twoe of his Men rydinge from his faid Houſe 
to London for the declaring and finyſhinge his 
Accompte and for the Travell and Paynes of 
one Clarke havinge the Chardge of the foreſaide 
Money and payinge and defrayinge the ſame at | 
ſondrie Tymes and for kepinge and writinge the 

particuler Booke therof the Some of 6/. And 
John Conyers one of her Majeſties Auditors is 
allowed for the Travell and Expences of himſelfe 
and his Clarkes during the Tyme of the ratinge, 
caſtinge, tryinge, and examininge of the Parti- 
culers of the ſaide Booke and reducinge the ſame 

into 


©” HISTORY OF THE 


into an Accompte and ingroſſinge the ſame Ac- 
compte in Parchment the Some of 5/. and ſo he 
 oweth 4. 25. 11d. which Some is paide into the 
Receipte of her Majeſties Exchequier as appear- 
eth by a Tallye thereof leavyed the third Day of 
November Anno 31 dne Elizabethe Regine and 
uppon this Accompte ſhewed and remayninge 
may appeare. And ſo theſe Accomptauntes 


uppon this Accompte doe remayne quyte. 
| W. BURGHLEY. 


J. FORTESCUE. 
| JO. CONYERS, Av. 
Hex ends the record of the reparations done 
for the defence of the iſland againſt the Spaniſh 
Armada in the year 1587.“ ö 


Ar Sharpnode and Worlley's tower a ſmall mi- 
1itary eſtabliſhment was formed in the ſecond year 
of queen Elizabeth, ſimilar to that already related 
for Yarmouth Caſlle, in a preceding page. It is 
_ unneceſſary to repeat it here, ſince it was exactly 
fimilar, and ſerved to the care of both theſe forts. 
No ſuch been exiſts at the preſent day. 


SANDOWN FORT. 

Wuen the neceſſity of fortifying the coaſts of 
this iſland was found neceſſary, and the ſyſtem of 
defence progreſſively advanced towards a ſtate of 
maturity, to guard againſt the marauding and 
plundering expeditions of the common enemy, and 
to afford protection and ſecurity to the lives and 
poſſeſſions 


TSLE OF WIGHT. 115 


poſſeſſions of the iſlanders; the ſituation of this 
ſpot, which is almoſt the only acceſſible part of 
the ſouthern coaſt, ſtrikes the eye as an object for 
military operations. Hence it was one of the firſt 
objects to fortify and defend this natural inroad 
into the iſland, in the time of Henry the Eighth ; 
and the demolition of the religious houſes, which 
was then rendered compleat, afforded ample ma- 
terials for theſe purpoſes. 

Tuts fort is on the ſouth-eaſt ſide of the iſland, 
and has the command of a bay, in which there is 
a good landing place. The building is very low, 
and of a quadrangular form; it is flanked alfo by 
four baſtions, and the whole is encompaſſed with 
a ditch, It had formerly an eſtabliſhment of a 
maſter gunner and thirty ſoldiers, being juſtly 
eſteemed from its fituation to be of the greateſt 
importance of any fort in the iſland. But this 
eſtabliſhment has been conſiderably leſſened ſince 
that time; and the pay of twenty-two of the ſol- 
diers applied to increaſe the ſalaries of the maſter 
gunners of the other forts, where the military 
eſtabliſhments are ſtill maintained.“ 

Fox ſome time this fort had been very much 
neglected ; but government have repaired it at a 
very conſiderable expence, and have refuted the 
apartments into a comfortable ſummer reſidence 


* In the ſecond year of queen Elizabeth we only meet with the 
eſtabliſhment of a porter at eight pence a day, and three gunners 
at fix pence a day each, as we have already mentioned under Yar- 
mouth and Freſhwater or Sharpnode, 


for 


” HISTORY OP THE 


for the captain. It now ſupports a captain at half 
a crown per day, twelve warders at eight pence a 
day each, a maſter gunner at two ſhillings a day, 
and three other gunners at one ſhilling a day cach; 
making an annual eſtabliſhment of two hundred 
and eighty-two e ſeventeen ſhillings and fix 
Pence. 


 COWES CASTLE. 
SUFFICIENT reafons haye already been albaned 
for noticing this caſtle in the laſt place, though it 
is the firſt which uſually attracts the traveller's or 
ſtranger's attention. It commands the road as you 
approach the town, on the weſt ſide; the building 
is but ſmall, and the battery is of a ſemicircular 
form, ſo that the embraſures admit the guns to be 
pointed in a manner which would defend or annoy 
an approaching enemy for a large ſpace, if well 
directed and reſolutely ſupported. It has eleven 
guns, nine pounders, mounted, with good apart- 
ments for the captain and gunners; and was built 
at the ſame time as Yarmouth and Sandown already 
mentioned, in the time of Henry the Eighth. A 
modern writer has made this humourous remark 
on this caſtle, which may nat improperly be cited 
in this place; he ſays, © the mighty caſtle afforded 
*« ſome remarks on— 


«© Gunners, who ne'er mount a wall; 
« And guns, that never fire at all.“ 


THERE 


ISLE or WIGHT. | 115 


Tnrre was originally another caſtle on the eaſt 
ſide of the entrance into the river of Newport, 
which had a mutual object, at the firſt erection, 
for the defence of the harbour. It was ſituated at 
the projecting point of land which forms the eaſt- 
ern limit of the road or entrance into the port; 
and its memory is ſtill retained by the modern 
name of Old Caſtle Point. But this is now ſo to- 
tally demoliſhed, that there is not the ſmalleſt 
veſtige of it remaining; probably from the idea 
that the weſtern fort was abundantly ſufficient for 
the protection of the road. 

Wr may peninently conclude this chapter with 
the franſietion from Leland : 


«« The two huge Cowes that bellow from the ſhore, 
« Shake eaſt and weft, with their tremendous roar ; 
„They guard fair NxRwrORr, and the lofty iſle 

* From fierce invaders, and their cruel ſpoil.” 


CHAPTER 


1 HISTORY or THE 


CHAPTER VI. 


or THE CIVIL HISTORY OF THE ISLAND TILL If 
WAS PURCHASED BY THE CROWN. 


Tut obſcurity and uncertainty of ancient hiſ- 
tory affords but very few materials for tracing this 
ſubject to a very high fource. Beſides what we 
have noted, \in relating the antiquity of Cariſ- 
brooke caſtle, we have here to add, that Wulpher, 
king of Metcia, took this iſland in 661; which 
he gave to Adelwalch, king of Suſſex, whom he 
had made a priſoner, in 663, in conſequence of his 
having turned Chriſtian. But Adelwalch was de- 
feated in 686 by Cedwalla, king of Weſſex, and 
flain in battle ; who made himſelf maſter of the 
iſle of Wight, and compelled all the inhabitants 
to turn Chriſtians, and to be baptized. This iſland 
was ſeized by the Danes in 1001, of which they 
kept poſſeſſion ; and from thence, as opportunities 
occurred, they made various excurſions for the 
fake of plunder and rapine, and committed great 
havock in the adjoining counties. 

In the time of Edward the Confeſſor, earl Good- 
_ win, who had incurred the king's diſpleaſure, 
made a deſcent upon this iſland, and from thence 
failed up the Thames to London. It was after- 
wards plundered in 1066 by Toſton, brother « of 
king Harold. | 


Tur 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 119 


Tur government of the iſland does not appear 
to have been granted to any ſubject before the 
time of William the Conqueror; but the tenants 
of the crown appear to have held their eſtates on 
the ſame conditions as the landholders in every 
other part of the kingdom, ſo late as under the 
reign of the Confeſſor. | 

We now come to a period in which the face of 
things was changed ; and the conqueſt of England 
in general involved this particular part of it in all 
its conſequences. As the lands were for the moſt 
part given tothe favourers of William, ſo this land 
was granted by the king to William Fitz Oſborne, 
a relation, who had been of the moſt ſignal ſervice 
tohim in the memorable battle of Haſtings, as well 
as on many other occaſions which had mutually 
contribut ed to procure him the ſucceſſion to the 
crown. For he had not only promoted and advi- 
ſed this expedition to England, but had acted as 
marſhal of his army; and was as highly deſerving 
of the king's confidence in | the council as in the 
field. 
Bxsross theſe returns of gratitude to ſo power- 
ful a ſupporter, he likewiſe entruſted him with the 
cuſtody of the caſtles of York and Wincheiter, 
which had been recently erected. He was alſo 
appointed the king's chief juſticiary for the north 
of England, as the king's brother, Odo, biſhop of 
Bayeux, who was created earl of Kent, was for 
the ſouth. | 


Bor 


120 HISTORY or THE" 


Bur what more immediately relates to our pur- 
poſe, is, to notice the grant of this ifland ; which 
| he was to hold as freely as he himſelf held the 
realm of England. This is fully manifeſt from 
the chartulary or roll of the priory of Cariſbrooke, 


"which is ſtill extant. Yet ſcarcely did he content 


himſelf to govern the inhabitants with the ſame 
degree of arbitrary power, as William did his 
Engliſh ſubjects ; for that king, generally fpeak- 
ing, only confiſcated the lands of thoſe who had 
been active in the ſupport of Harold, but Fitz 
Oſborne ejected all the former poſſeſſors, without 
regard to either party, excepting the officers or 
ſervants of Edward the Confeſſor, as may be 
clearly collected from Domeſday-book. Theſe 
lands he parcelled out to his own followers. 

IT was the prevailing notion of thoſe times, 
that the greateſt crimes might be expiated by the 
founding and endowing religious houſes for the 
reception of monks, nuns, and other eccleſiaſtics 
and ſeculars, who choſe a monaſtic life. Nothing 
| was conſidered as equally demonſtrative of the 
piety and zeal of the founders, whatever might be 
the motive which induced them to theſe acts of 
religion and devotion. We cannot determine, at 
this diſtance of time, what particular motives 
might prevail upon William to theſe proceedings; 
but he was no ſooner poſſeſſed of his ſeigniory 
of the iſland, than he founded two abbeys in Nor- 
mandy, that of Lyra and Cormeilles, and a priory 
at Cariſbrooke. Six churches in the iſle of Wight 

| were 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 121 


were at this time given to the abbey of Lyra, as a 
foundation, with ſeveral others in other places; 
but the church of Cariſbrooke was by ſome means, 
or for ſome reaſons, omitted in the grant. . Yer, 
after all theſe bounties, it 1s ſaid that he incurred 
the diſpleaſure of the monks. _ 

Bur he did not long enjoy the honours and dig- 
nities to which he had been raiſed, which he ſur- 
vived but four years ; for he was ſlain in battle, 
together with Ernulph, the earl of Hainault, who 
pretended a right to the earldom of Flanders, to 
whoſe aſſiſtance he had been ſent by the queen. 
Another motive which probably induced him to 
| take a part in this quarrel, originated doubtleſs 
from his having married the mother of Ernulph 
for a ſecond wife. He was buried in Normandy 
in his new abbey of Cormeilles. - 

His ſon and ſucceſſor in the iſland was Roger 
de Breteville, or de Briſtolis, earl of Hereford, to 
which dignity he had himſelf been created in 
1066. By his firſt wife Adeliza, daughter of 
Roger de Tony, who was William's ſtandard 
bearer at the battle of Haſtings, he had three ſons ; 
of whom the eldeſt ſucceeded to his Norman poſ- 
ſeſſions, the next was a monk at Cormeilles, and Ro- 
ger inherited the lordſhip of this iſland, with all 
-his other lands in England. William Fitz Oſborne 
had no ifſue by his ſecond wife. 

W1iLLIaM's ſucceſſor is known by the name-of 
Comes Rogerus, or carl Roger, in Domeſday- 


book ; and it is there ſaid that he had given lands 
| SCRE, 7 


FIT .. HISTORY OF THE 


at Wilmingham in the iſland to Croc. He fell 
under the king's diſpleaſure on the following oc- 
tafion. The king having oppoſed the marriage 
of Emma, Roger's ſiſter, to Ralph de Waer, who 
in 1073 had been created earl of Norfolk, for ſome 
| reaſons which do not appear in hiſtory, they were 
both ſo highly incenſed ar the refuſal, that it was 
reſolved in a conference on the fubject to depoſe 
him. As a prelude to this violent meaſure, and 
ungrateful proceeding, as well as rebellious, they 
determined to effect this defired union, during his 
abſence in Normandy, whither he was gone to re- 
pel the hoſtile invaſion of Philip, king of France. 
The nuptial entertainment afforded an opportu- 
| nity of ſecuring the intereſt and aid of many of 
the gueſts to accompliſh the undertaking ; among 
others was Waltheof, earl of Huntingdon, North- 
ampton, and Northumberland, to which See 
he had been created in 1068. 

Bor Waltheof, who proved falfe to his engage- 
ment, ſoon after paſſed over into Normandy to the 
king, and there diſcloſed the whole of this con- 
ſpiracy. Whether he was induced to this mea- 
ſore from remorſe of conſcience, and a ſenſe of 
kis allegiance, or to prevent the great misfortunes 
of which the ſucceſs muſt have been productive, 
or, laſtly, from the hope of a large reward for 
making the diſcovery, is not recorded; the con- 
ſequences were by no means ſuch as he was pro- 
bably induced to expect. He had either little 
confidered the arbitrary temper of the king, or 
there were Circumſtances tn his caſe of a nature 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 123 


4 


which precluded him from receiving that pardon 
and mercy which he ſolicited. But whatever was 
the true ſtare of the caſe in other reſpects, the fact 
is certain, that the king had, in the firſt place, 
loaded him with honours and dignities; that he 
had joined in this conſpiracy, at a time when an 
act was committing in direct oppoſition to the 
king's deelared pleaſure; and that he had now 
avowed himfelf the author of a ſecond treachery, 
in betraying that truſt which he had ſolemnly en- 

gaged to maintain and preſerve. On all which 
accounts he was deemed as unworthy of all con- 
fidence ; and the king cauſed him, as a terror to 
others, to be beheaded at Wincheſter in 105), 
after his return from Normandy. It is ſaid that 
he had firſt obtained the king's pardon, and that 
he afterwards ſuffered in direct contradiction to it; 
but of this we muſt not preciſely determine, being 

concerned as hiſtorians chiefly in relating the 
facts. 

Ir we . ſhould be permitted to dend a conjec- 
ture in ſuch a way as to ſoften or exculpate the 
king's conduct in this tranſaction; is it not 
very probable that on his return from Normandy, 
many of the aggravating circumſtances of Walthe- 
of's conduct might be laid before the kin g, which. 
before had been ſuppreſſed ; and that the earl in- 
ſtead of being ſurprized into the meaſure as an 
accomplice by perſuaſion and artifice, might ap- 
pear in the character of a principal, and. an active 
mts of this treaſonable conſpiracy? We 
oP? K 2 know 


124 | HISTORY OF THE 


know that we are treading upon unfrequented 
ground, ſince all hiſtorians condemn William, 
without the ſmalleſt extenuation, for this act; but 
ſurely we may be allowed to ſuggeſt, that theſe 
favourable circumſtances are not improbable, and 
we do not pretend to vouch for their authenticity. 
Io proceed with Roger, whoſe uncle Odo conti- 
nued ſole regent after the death of his father; he 
was compelled to retire with a few forces which 
he had aſſembled into his county of Hereford. The 
regent, with a few active adherents, had exerted 
the utmoſt vigilance in ſuppreſſing the conſpi- 
racy, which vas in a good meaſure effected before 
the king's return. After Roger was taken, it was 
not in his uncle's power to prevent his being 
tried, and found guilty of treaſon; but his ſen- 
tence was probably mitigated on that account, in 
the ſparing his life, being ſentenced to perpetual 
impriſonment and the confiſcation of his lands. 
Yzr did not theſe ſufferings, which to a mind 
leſs haughty would have been ſufficiently humili- 
ating, ſubdue his ſpirit. When the king, at a ſo- 
lemn celebration of the feaſt of Eaſter, ſent him 
his robes, an act which might be' reaſonably con- 
ſtrued into a relaxing temper, and conſidered as a 
prelude to ſome greater favours; this arrogant 
traitor, to ſhew his contempt of the king's indul- 
gence, cauſed them to be burnt. But when this 
laſt daring action was reported to the king, he 
ſwore by the glory of God, that the earl ſhould 


continue } in priſon for life, an oath which he ſtrictly 
and 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 125. 


and religiouſly kept ; for he remained in priſon 
till the year 1086, from which only he was releaſed 
by that power which terminates all the troubles 
of life. The lordſhip of the iſle of Wight, with 
all his other lands, were thereupon eſcheated to 
the crown. His ſons Renauld and Roger, who 
proved good ſoldiers in the ſervice of Henry the 
Firſt, were in conſequence diſinherited; nor could 
they ever obtain the royal favour. It was, not 
till the reign of Henry the Firſt, that the lordſhip 
of this iſland was again diſpoſed of. That king, 
who raiſed Richard de Rivers, or Redvers, or Ri- 
pariis, in the firſt year of his reign, to the dignity 
of earl of Devonſhire, conferred upon him many 
| gifts, and amongſt. others, the lordſhip. of the. iſle 
of Wight. He was' the ſon of Baldwin de 
Brion, the ſon, of Criſpin, earl of Brion, Who was 
the ſon of Godfrey, earl of Eu, an illegitimate ſon 
of Richard the firſt duke of Normandy. He took 
the name of Redvers from a town: in Normandy 
of the ſame name; and was one of the five barons 
who firmly adhered to the intereſt of Henry, in the 
conteſt for the crown with his brother Robert. 
On this account he enjoyed a very large por- 
tion of the king's. favour ; and Camden tells us that 
he beſtowed upon him the town of Tiverton and 
the honour of Plympton. When he was honoured 
with the title of earl of Devonſhire, the king alſo 
granted the third penny of the yearly revenue of 
that county, which amounted to ten marks, and 
alſo conterred upon him the title of lord of the 
K 3 ille 


4126 _ HISTORY OF THE , 


iſle or Wight, as an addition to that of earl. He 
had alfo the lordſhipand hundred of Chriſt-church 
in Hampſhire, with all the lands from thence to 
Beaulieu, together with many churches and cha- 
pels; theſe were the eollegiate or convefitual 
church, of Chriſt-church Twyheham, the chapel 
of Milford, the chapel of Boldre, with the 
_ churches of Brokenhurſt, Holehurſt (probably 
Holdenhurſt), and Soptey, which, with their 
tithes, he appropriated ro Chriſt-church, and from 
a houſe of ſecular canons converted it into an Au- 
guſtine monaſtery, As prebends to the ſaid 
church, he gave the town of Hurne, with the lands 
of Goſtlel, Stanput, Huborn, Strode, Dudcomb, 
and the two Preſhims, alſo Apſe and Hamftede in 
the iſle of Wight. Baldwin his ſon Tucceeded 
Richard as carl of Devonſhire and lord of this 
iſland, in the firſt year of king Stephen, in 1135 ; 
he was a zealous partizan of the empreſs Maud in 
her conteſt with Stephen for the Engliſh crown, 
and fortified his caſtle and the iſland for her, both 
which were taken by the king. He then fled out 
of the kingdom, with his family; but an accom- 
modation took place between the contending par- 
tles, and he was reinſtated in his honours and 
8 poſſeſſions. It is necellary to take notice here, that 
the abbey of Quarr was founded by Baldwin in the 
life time of his father, of which we ſhall hereafter 
take particular notice, for the purpoſe of receiv- 
ing Ciſtercian monks from Savigny in Normandy ; 
to which foundation, we are informed, the abbot 


ot 


ISLE OF en. 147 


of Savigny contributed, as Lot abbot: had. the 
manor of Arreton from Baldwin for him to build 
a monaſtery. Breamore abbey in Wiltſhire was 
alſo founded by him, which he endowed with 
lands granted to his father by Henry the Firſt. 

The name of Roydon, in the pariſh of Boldre, near 
Lymington, was a part of this grant, as the name, 
which ſignifies king's gift, Plaiply denotes. He 
died at Quarr abbey, which he had founded, in 
1155, in the firſt year of king Henry the Second, 
and was there buried; his wife Adeliza and his 
ſon Henry were alſp interred there. Three of 
his ſons, Richard the eldeſt, who ſucceeded to his 
titles and honours, with William and Henry, ſur- 
vived him. Dionyſia, the daughter of Reginald 
earl of Cornwal, who was natural fon of Henry 
the Firſt, became the wife of Richard, the ſecond 
earl of Devon of that name. He not only con- 
firmed all his father's donatians to the abbey of 
Quarr, but added divers other lands, and. his 
tythes of the falt-works at Lymington ; under the 
expreſs condition that they ſhould conſtantly pray 
for the ſouls of his father and mother. He died 
at the city of Mante in France, in the year {1162, 
and left iſſue two ſons, Baldwin and Richard, who 
were ſucceſſively earls of Devon and lords of the 
iſle of Wight. Baldwin, who was the eldeſt, ſuc- 
ceeded his father and was the ſecond of that 
name; but had no iſſue by his wife Alice, daugh- 
ter of Ralph de Dore, in Berry, and died before 
his brother. Richard, the third earl /6f that 
K 4 name, 


8 | | HISTORY OF THE 


name, and lord of this iſland, ſucceeded his bro- 
ther, both in his honours and eſtates. He was the firſt 
who bore for arms, or, a lion rampant azure, armed 
and langued gules. He married Margaret, the 
daughter and coheireſs of John, lord Biſſet, but 
had no iſſue. The abbey of Breamore was farther 
endowed with lands by this earl, that prayers 
might be offered up by the monks for the ſoul of 
earl Richard, his father, and for his own health 
and that of the counteſs Margaret, his wife. He 
died in 1184, and was buried at Montzbourg in 
Normandy; and was ſucceeded by his uncle, the 
ſecond ſon of the firſt earl of Devon of the name 
of Baldwin, whom we mentioned beter as ſurvi- 
ving his father. | e 5 
Tuts William was ſurnamed de W Gul 
the place of his birth in Normandy as ſome ac- 
counts relate, but others, as the book of Ford ab- 
bey, where he was educated; and was one of the 
four nobles who ſupported the ſilken canopy over 

Richard the Firſt, on his ſecond! coronation at 
Wincheſter, after his return' from captivity in 
Germany. He was then ſtyled earl of the iſle of 
Wight. We learn from Dugdale and Brooke, tha: 
he married Mabel, the daughter of Robert earl of 
Mellent, and had with her all the ſaid earl's lands 
in Kidderminſter, Moreis, and Redeliſton, which 
before had been the lands of her mother Maud, 
one of the daughters and heirs of Reginald earl 
of Cornwal. By her he had one ſon, Baldwin 
who died before his father, and two daughters; 
which 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | 129 


which Baldwin married Amicia, the daughter of 
Gilbert de Clare, earl of Glouceſter and Hereford; 
and had by her a ſon and daughter, of whom we 
ſhall 'preſently take notice. 

To the abbey of Quarr, which had been "OY 
ed by his father, the firſt Baldwin, 1132, three 


years before his grandfather's death, this Wil. 


liam de Vernon, the ſecond ſon, gave lands for 
the benefit of the ſouls of king Henry the Second, 
His father Baldwin, his mother Adeliza, earl Ri- 
chard his elder brother, Mabel his wife, and 
Baldwin his ſon, by a deed of charter bearing 
date the fourth of September, 1206. 
Wars king John came to the crown, the barons 
were greatly oppreſſed by his demands, and refuſed 
to join him in his expedition to France; for which 
they compounded by paying him two marks for 
every knight's fee, after he had compelled them to 
to ſubmit, and to deliver their children or grand 
children to him as hoſtages for their future fidelity 
and obedience. He had already obliged William 
to pay five hundred marks to be reinſtated in his 
caſtle at Plympton and other poſſeſſions; with 
permiſſion to govern his tenants and others in the 
iſle of Wight by military ſervice, and according 
to the laws of the land, by judgment in his court, 
and that he might do with his lands as he ought. 
In conſequence of this, he had demanded the 
grandſon of William, as a hoſtage for his fidelity, 
to prevent him from uſing meaſures for his re- 
dreſs; and his being forced to purchaſe, at ſo 
| great 


130 HISTORY OF THE 


great a rate, a permiſſion quietly. to enjoy his 
right, proves the arbitrary diſpoſition of this 
prince. So little regard was had to juſtice in the 
king's courts, or decency in the public tranſactions 


of thoſe times, that the higheſt bidder commonly 


ſucceeded. Theſe ſcandalous proceedings drove 
the barons at length to deſperation ; they aſſembled 
together to concert meaſures for recovering their 
rights on various occaſions, but ſectetly to prevent 
alarm; and at laſt refolved to appeal to the ſword, 
to obtain a reſtoration of their rights and privileges. 
The cave is now ſhewn under the caſtle hill at 
Reigate in the county of Surrey, where theſe aſ- 
ſemblies were repeatedly held; and the reſult of 
this oppoſition to the king's tyrannical and op- 
preſſive acts, is well known by the confirmation 
of their Tights, in procuring a ratification of that 
bulwark of liberty, known 24 the name of NMagns 
Charta. 2 

Wie have Bede to nad. that chis William de 
Vernon, earl of Devon, moſtly reſided at Cariſ- 
brooke caſtle within the iſland; that he caufed a 
monument to be erected for his father and himſelf 
in Quarr abbey, which the former had founded, 
and in which he was buried. This earl died at 
the abbey, and was interred there, in the firſt year 
of king Henry the Third, in 12163 and was ſuc- 
ceeded by his grandſon, his ſon Baldwin having 
died a'ſhort time before his father. 

 Bazowin, the grandſon, of earl William, was 
the next earl of Devon and lord of the iſle of 
| * 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 134 


Wight. His father married the daughter of 
Waryn Fitz Gerald, chamberlain to king John, 
and lord of Harwood in the county of York; by 
whom, beſides this Baldwin, he had two daugh- 
ters, as we have already obſerved. Theſe were 
Mary, and Joan or Jane; of which the former was 
married to Sir Robert Courtney, ſon of Reginald, 
from whom ſprung the earls. of Devon of that 
family, and the latter to William Bruer the 
younger, lord of Torbay, who died before her. 
She was next married to the famous Hubert de 
Burgh, carl of Kent, and had this lordſhip; of the 
iſte of Wight given her, as part of her portiom; 
which 'reverted to the male heir of her father. on 
Het dying without iſſue. _ 

We have noted, that the laſt Baldwin married 
aho daughter of the earl of Glouceſter ; he died 
in the year 1245, and was buried at Breamore in 
Hampſhire, and left a ſon of the name of Baldwin, 
his ſucceſſor, and“ a daughter Iſabel, married to 
William de Fortibus, earl of Albemarle. After 
the death of Baldwin, his counteſs gave lands to 
the abbey Bruarne, to pray for the ſouls of Gil- 
bert de Clare, late earl of Glouceſter, her father, 
for Iſabel the counteſs her mother, for Balduin 
late earl of Devonſhire and of the iſle of Wight 
her huſband, for her own ſoul, and for her ſon 
Bald win. She died in 1283. 


| . Margaret, another daughter became a nun at 1 in Wilts, 
and was living 1 in 1278. This Baldwin was created earl of the 

iſle bf Wight 1 in 1240, about the time of his marriage. 

Wann 


132 IIS TOR OF THE 


Wu the fourth earl of Devonſhire of the name 
of Baldwin, ſucceeded to that earldom and of the 
ile of Wight, he was but ten years of age. His 
_gvardianſhip was committed to Richard, earl of 
Cornwal, brother to the king; but it is faid by 
our beſt authority for the hiſtory of the iſland, 
that this grant was ſoon after recalled; and Gil- 
bert de Clare, earl of Glouceſter, for a fine of two 
thouſand marks had the grant of directing the 
marriage of Baldwin, who was left a minor, 
through the mediation of the carl of Cornwal. 
Ir is proper to make ſome curfory obſerva- 
tions on this account, that our readers may not 
be miſled into an error, from our neglect of point- 
ing it out to them. We have ventured totally to 
reject the account of the third earl of Devon, o 
the name of Baldwin, who is ſaid to have been the 
grandſon of carl William, and to have died ſoon 
after his grandfather ;| which is contrary to other 
authorities in our poſſeſſion, and to the pedigree 
:of the family in the ſame hiſtory. This carl, who 
«was born in 1235, is the only one who was left in 
a ſtate of minority; which was ſubſequent to the 
death of the firſt Gilbert de Clare, earl of Glou- 
ceſter, and prior to the time of his grandſon, who 
. vas the ſecond of that name, the intervening earl 
being called Richard. But it is on all hands 
agreed, that Amicia the ſecond daughter of 
the firſt Gilbert de Clare, car] of Glouceſter, was 
married to Baldwin Rivers, earl of Devon and 
lord of the iſle of Wight ; and therefore the only 
difficulty 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | 133 


difficulty is, how to account for the payment of 


this fine by Gilbert de Clare, and for what pur- 
poſe it could be demanded. | 

We muſt call to mind, for the ſolution of this 
difficulty, the cuſtom of the Kings and ' princes. 
of thoſe times, to refuſe the marriages of noble 


- families, whenever thoſe marriages were adapted 


to give too much influence to particular families; 
or, from policy, to induce the parties to purchaſe 
their approbation by a voluntary gift, by way of 
fine, when their avarice or neceſſities ſuggeſted 
theſe means of ſupplying their wants. It is no 
way improbable to attribute ſuch a fine to ſome 
cauſe of this nature; or probably to his being 
permitted to ſtyle himſelf earl of Glouceſter, whoſe 
mother was Amicia the ſecond ne and co, 
heireſs of the laſt earl. 

Io return to earl Baldwin, who was left a minor, 
who at the age of twenty-two, in the year 1257, 


married the lady Avicia, of the houſe of Savoy, 


and coufin to queen Eleanor. When John duke 


of Brittany, married Beatrix, the king's ſecond 
daughter, this Baldwin received the honour of 


knighthood. The firſt charter of franchiſes to 
the town of Yarmouth was given by this earl; 


and he alſo procured the grant of a market and 


fair to be held at Cariſbrooke. He died in Sep- 
tember 1262, in the forty-ſixth year of king Hen- 
ry the Third, and was buried at Breamore afore- 


faid, with his father. It is generally underſtood 


that he died of poiſon, which is ſaid to have been 
: given 


"> CI 2 


4 F- 4 b Se _ 


1 
; N 
94 
8 
4 4 
1 
4 & | 


— 3 Hh I: * 
> 3 1 = > — 


! 
4 
4 
, 
f 
2 
8 
1 


r 
2 EY 


134 HISTORY OF THE 


given him at the table of his kinſman, Peter de 
Savoy. He had only one ſon, named John, who 
died at ten years of age. 

Arrer the death of John, earl of Devonſhire 
and lord of the ifle of Wight, his aunt, Iſabel- 
la, who had been married to William de Forti- 
bus, earl of Albemarle, who died two years before 
Baldwin, in the year 1260, was entitled to the ſuc- 
eeſſion. But the lordſhip of the ifle of Wight, 
Chriſt-church and other lands of her inheritance, 
did not come into her poſſeſſion till after the death 
of Amicia, her mother, counteſs dowager of 
Devon, the daughter of Gilbert de Clare, ear] 
of Glouceſter, in 1283, as we have before noted. 
During her life Amicia retained theſe . and 
inheritance, as her dower. 

| Isaztr de Redvers, who now 3 as ; lady 
of the iſle of Wight and counteſs of Devon, by 
inheritance,. and counteſs of Albemarle by mar- 
riage, chiefly reſided in the caſtle of Cariſ- 
brooke. Here ſhe maintained great ſtate and 
dignity, and was a conſiderable benefactor to 
many religious houſes; in which ſhe not only 
confirmed and ratified the grants of her anceſ- 
tors, but added many freſh liberalities of her 
own. Amongſt others, ſhe gave to her mother 
Amicia the inheritance of the manor of Buck- 
land in Devonſhire, Brickeley, Woolhampton, 
and Celliton, with the hundred advowſons of 
ehurches and appurtenances, with which was en- 


N the abbey of Buckland. She likewiſe 
confirmed 


ISLE OF wẽIonr. 135 


confirmed her mother's gift of the manor of 


Shorwell to the nuns of Laycock in Wiltſhire; 
and to the monks of Quarr fhe ratified the dona- 
tions of her predeceſſors, and thoſe who held un- 
der her in the iſle of Wight. She alſo gave to the 


canons of Bolton the lordſhips of Wiggedon and 


Brandone, with other lands; and to the abbey of 
Montſburg in Normandy ſhe confirmed the manor 


of Lodres in Dorſetſhire, with the lordſhips of 


Armue, Wolveley, Appuldurcombe, and S 
which her anceſtors had given to it. | 
Fon theſe premiſes, her extraordinary regard 
for monaſtic inſtitutions is fully demonſtrated; 
but ſhe was a ſtrenuous affertor of her right of 
patronage over all the religious houſes founded 
by her anceſtors. 'The monks, in all their artemps 


to encroach, were as ſtoutly reſiſted; inſomuch 


that their differences were n oblignd to 

be ſettled by reference. | 

Tür abbey of Quarr, and the priories of Cariſ- 
brooke, Chriſt-church, and Breamore, all afford 
inſtances of theſe differences. In the rolls of par- 
lament of the ſeventh year of Edward the Firſt, 
we meet with a complaint of the abbot of Quarr 
againſt the counteſs for withholding lands which 


belonged to the abbey; which occaſioned the 


king, in the tenth year of his reign, to iſſue a 
precept to William de Braybeuf, ſheriff of Hamp- 
ſhire, directing him to take the abbey and lands 
under the -royal protection, until the diſputes 
Thoutd be adjuſted. On the election of a prior 
of 


n 


2— 


— On : — Aa 


136 HISTORY OF THE 


of Cariſbrooke, without her conſent and appro- 
bation, ſhe ſummoned him to anſwer in her 
court; which was a power that the patrons of 
religious houſes ſometimes aſſerted in thoſe times, 
even to the Pope himſelf. To this effect Mr. Sel- 
den cites a letter from Pope Alexander the Fourth 
to the nobility of England. During the vacan- 
cy of a prior of Chriſt- church, the counteſs alſo 
aſſumed the power of holding the lands of the 
convent in her hands. A diſpute alſo aroſe be- 
tween the counteſs and the abbey of Breamore, 
but on what account does not appear; the latter 
had complained of great loſſes which they had 
ſuſtained chiefly from Iſabella de Fortibus, when 
Edward the Firſt deſired the biſhop of Win- 
cheſter to give the church of Brading in the iſſe 
of Wight to that convent, in conſideration of 
the injury they had ſuſtained. Sh 
Itrx ſhall ſuffice to ſay in this place, that ſhe 
formed a new borough in the neighbourhood of 
Cariſbrooke, and gave to the inhabitants a charter 
of franchiſes. Of the circumſtances which attended 
the grant of theſe privileges, we ſhall have occa- 
fion hercafter to take notice. | 
By her huſband William de Fortibus, earl of 
Albemarle, the ſaid counteſs had three ſons and 
two daughters. The ſons were John, Thomas, 
and William, and the daughters, Avice and Ave- 
line; but all the ſons, and Avice the daughter, 
died young, and conſequently without iſſue, ſo 


that Aveline alone ſurvived, and became ole 
| | heireſs 


1017 or ]Wur. 137 


heireſs to the great poſſeſſions of the earls of De- 
von and lords of the iſle of Wight. In the pedi- 
gree of the lords of this iſland it is aſſerted ſhe 
was firſt married to Ingram de Percy, and for her 
ſecond huſband had Edmund, ſurnamed Crook - 
back, ſecond fon of king Henry the Third; but 
no mention is made of ber firſt huſband in any 
other account. She was à minor at the time 
when ſhe became counteſs of Albemarle in her 
own right, and ber wardſhip was firſt granted to 
Richard carl of Glouceſter ; but this was ſoon ſur- 
rendered, and transferred to the aforeſaid Ed- 
mund, which renders it extremely improbable, 
that ſhe ſhould have been married to any other 


perſag. 
Ne1THER can we reconcile the account of a treaty 


between king Edward the Firſt on the one part, 
and the ſaid Edmund and Aveline on the other, 
for purchaſe of the ile of Wight, in the fourth 
year of his reign, with the account of her death 
during the reign of Richard the Third in 1269. 
Either, therefore, no ſuch treaty in the life-time 
of Aveline was in contemplation, as it is not very 
probable that Edmund ſhould chuſe to part with 
the lordſhip of the iſland, though it is ſaid that 
he died ſoon after without iſſue before the propo- 
ſal could be effected; or that the time of her 
death muft be carried forward ſix years farther, to 
1275, becaufe the ſaid treaty is ſaid to have been 
in contemplation, as we have obſerved, in the 
fourth year of king Edward. As the latter is 

L ſomewhat 


138 - nrsrToRY or TRE | 
ſomewhat difficult to be admitted, the exiſtence of _ 
any ſuch treaty may juſtly be doubted, and the 
impoſſibility of it, under the circumſtances ſtated, 

feems naturally to follow from the premiſes. It 
appears ſtill farther improbable from the affidavits 
adduced to eſtabliſh the ſale of it in 1293, by 
Iſabella de Fortibus ; for theſe only ſpeak of a ten 
years treaty, whereas the interval of time elapſed 
from, the death of Aveline to the completion of 
the agreement was twenty four years, and nothing 
occurs, as we ſhall preſently diſcover, to intimate 
that any ſuch treaty had ever been i in contempla- 
tion before Aveline's death. | 

BEroxk we proceed to confider the terms of the 
treaty, and the tranſactions relating to it, we 
think it may be proper to obſerve, that the ſaid 
Iſabella counteſs of Albemarle and lady of the.iſle 
of Wight, had the office of chamberlain of the ex- 
chequer, which ſhe executed by deputy ; and we 
learn that William de Cotton was' appointed to 
this ſervice. Margaret de Redvers or Rivers had 
done the ſame before her; and a precept was iſſued 
to the barons to admit her deputy, though he was 
not a knight. 3 

 Powprrnam caſtle, which & juſtly attracts the 
| notice of all the curious who come into its neigh- 
bourhood, being a. few miles from Exeter, and the 
reſidence of the preſent earl Courtney, was built 
by this lady; it deyolved with other lands in that 
county to Hugh Courtney, great grandſon of 
Mary, who was married to Sir Robert de Court- 
ney, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 139 


ney, daughter of William Went called of Ver 
non, from the place of his birth, as we have ſaid, 


and ſiſter of Baldwin Rivers who died before his 


father. To this laſt Baldwin alſo ſhe was grand- 
daughter. 

'Tars Hugh ſucceeded to the Sidon of Devon, 
after the death of the counteſs, being before that 
baron of Oakhampton, which he inherited from 
his father and grandfather; but failed in his en- 
deavours to ſet aſide the treaty made by king Ed- 


ward the Fourth with the counteſs for the pur-. 
chaſe of that iſland, with Chriſt-church and other 


lands in Hampſhire. | 
IsABELLA de Fortibus had ſigned the convey- 
ance of the iſle of Wight to the king but a few 


hours before her death, which happened at Stock- 
well, not far from Lambeth in Surrey. She was, 
buried at Breamore. It was not, therefore, to be 


wondered at on the one part, that her heir, by a 
collateral deſcent, as we have ſtated, ſhould be in- 
clined to demur, and to doubt at leaſt the vali- 


dity of this conveyance ; or on the other, that 


king Edward ſhould be willing t to have this affair 
properly cleared up, to the ſatisfaction of the pub- 
lic, as he knew that the manner in which it had 

been obtained would bear the ſtricteſt ſcrutiny. 
AccorDInGLY we find that Hugh de Courtney, 
earl of Devon, made this claim, and the whole 
tranſactions were laid before parliament for their 
deciſion, It was urged on his part, that the con- 
veyance was ſuſpected to be either forged, or frau- 
2 dulently 


r CERT A . I - ter, Fo: CNY Rr ee - . 


140 HISTORY OF THE 


dulently obtained ; that the deceaſed counteſs had. 
eonſtantly refuſed to part with it, not only when 
ſhe had been applicd to by the king's agents, but 
when ſhe had bcen ſolicited by. the king in 
perſon; that, therefore, he proſecuted his claim, 
and ſought for redreſs from the determination of the 
parliament, as the only tribunal which could pro- 
perly take cognizance of it. The whole proceed- 
ings are recorded in the rolls of parliament of the 
$th and gth of Edward the Second; from whence 
we ſhall be able to ſelect ſuch information, as will be 
fully ſatisfactory to remove this doubt from the 
minds of thoſe who may be in ſuſpence. 

We ſhall here, in the firſt place, preſent them 
with the king's writ reſpecting this enquiry, and 
then produce the evidence reſulting from it. 
The writ 4s contained ary in the following 


| terms. 


Eowakd, by the Grace of God, &c. to his 
Treaſurers and Chamberlains Health. Where- 
as our beloved and faithful Hugh de Courtney 
by his Petition exhibited before us and our 
Council hath requeſted to be put in Poſſeſſion 
of certain Lands and Tenements with their 
Appurtenances formerly belonging to Iſabella 
de Fortibus, Counteſs of Devon, in the Iſle of 
Wight, and alſo of the Manor of Chriſt-church 

with the Appurtenances in the County of South- 

- amptdn; which Lands and Tenements, if the 

aforeſaid Counteſs, of whom the ſaid Hugh aſ- 
ſerts he is the neareſt Heir, was ſeized in De- 

meſne, 


SLE or WIGHT. 147 


meſne, in Fee, on the Day ſhe died, as the 
Right and Inheritance of the aforefaid Hugh, 
we ſhall render to him. And becauſe, as well 
for ourſelves as the aforeſaid Hugh, we wiſh 
that juſtice ſhould be done, we command you 


in this matter that, having made ſearch of 
Books, Charters, Rolls, and other Records in 
our Treaſury and in our Cuſtody remaining, 


you render an Account, on our Behalf, in the 
Lands and Tenements aforeſaid, how, in what 
Manner, and for what Reaſon theſe Lands and 
Tenements came into the Poſſeſſion of Edward 
late king of England our Father, in our next 
Parliament, fairly and plainly, returning to us 
then this Writ upon the Seal of our Exchequer. 


Witneſs ourſelf at Weſtminſter, the 3oth of 


May, in the 8th Year of our ir Reign.“ 


Ir appears from hence, that this buſineſs had 


been in a ſtate of ſuſpenſe, ſo far as related to the 


earl of Devon, from 1293, when the ſaid counteſs 
died, to 1315 when this writ was iſſued. What 


the proceedings, previous to this, were, it does 
not appear; this, however, is of no conſequence 
to the ſubject of the treaty. The reſult of this 
writ, which clearly eſtabliſhed the purchaſe, and 
conſequently confirmed the king's right to it, 
and the evidence adduced, will fully ſhew the pro- 
greſs and concluſion of this long-depending buſi- 
neſs, We ſhall quote it largely from the records 
of the parliament held at Lincoln in the following 

L Ng year 


* 
* 2 2 — <= » — a * * — = . CY * 4 
oo c . YETI AY 32S 2 ae | FED» 


en i 
WS S 3 
. — * 


„15 I — ww — — = . ATE a . - — 
| S 7 * 5 Fl I... — * 
CCC ˙ . 
2 _— — > 2 * 7 7 . 1 - 


&. > — 
2 


- 


142 | HISTORY OF THE 


year of this king's reign; and then we may leave 
the nature of the tranſaction, after two. or three 
obſervations, to the judgment of our readers. 


« EXAMINATIONS of certain Perſons on the 
Concluſion of a Charter or Deed of the Coun- 
teſs of Albemarle conveying to our Lord the 
King certain Lands, of which mention is here- 
after made, and of the ſurrender of the ſame to 
our Lord the King. 

WALTER Biſhop of Litchfield and Coventry 
faith, that the Biſhop of Durham commanded 
him to meet him immediately. at Stokewell on 
the Monday before the Feaſt of St. Martin in 

the Year &c. in Obedience to which Command 
he the ſaid Walter went on the ſame Day to the 
fame Place about-the firſt Hour *, and there by 
the command of the aforeſaid Biſhop of Dur- 
ham made and wrote a certain Chart in a cer- 
tain Garden, which exprefſed that Iſabella de 
Fortibus Counteſs of Albemarle granted and 
ſurrendered to our Lord the King of England 
the Iſle of Wight, the Manor of Chriſt-church 
and Manor of Fauxſhallf with their Appurte- 
nances, and for ever quit Claim, for herſelf and 
her Heirs, to our Lord the King aforeſaid and 
his Heirs. And he delivered this Chart or 
' Deed to the aforeſaid Biſhop of Durham, who 
went with the ſame to the aforeſaid Counteſs 


Probably one o'clock. + Perhaps Vauxhall. 2 
for 


ISLE or WIGHT... I43 


for Confirmation, and afterwards brought back 
the ſaid Chart or Deed to him the ſaid Walter 
ſealed with the Seal of the Counteſs aforeſaid. 
And he faith that afterwards when the Biſhop of 
Durham aforeſaid returned to the aforeſaid 
Counteſs to receive full Power from her, the 
ſaid Walter entered the Chamber where the 
Counteſs aforeſaid lay, about the third“ Hour, 
and heard her talking with the aforeſaid 
_ Biſhop. | 

Buaornnx William of nan ſaith, that 
he was Confeſſor to the aforeſaid Counteſs for 
four years before her death. And that he, at 
the Command of the Counteſs aforeſaid, went to 
a certain Manor of Sutton near Dartford, where 
the ſame Counteſs in coming to Canterbury be- 
gan to be ſick, and was with her continually both 
there and at Stokewell to the death of the ſaid 
Counteſs. And faith that he was preſent on 
the Monday aforeſaid when the aforeſaid Bi- 
| ſhop of Durham came to the Counteſs at Stoke- 
well, and ſaw and heard when the aforeſaid 
Biſhop ſpoke to the ſame upon a certain Diſ- 
courſe formerly had between our Lord the King 
and herſelf concerning the Iſle of Wight, the 
Manors of Chriſt-church and Fauxſhall, with 
the Appurtenances, and requeſted from the ſame 
if ſhe was ſtill in the ſame Mind of conveying 
and ſurrendering the aforeſaid Iſland and Ma- 


. Probably three o'clock, 


143 urs ronr or tis 


nors to our Lord the King as before had been 
diſcoutſed of. She ſaid that ſhe would do what 
was requeſted by the ſaid Biſhop, if he would 
fee that the Deed of Chart was prepared ; 
— he ſaid he would. And then the aforc.. 
ſaid Biſh6p cauſed the afbreſuid Walter to write 
the Chatt of Deed aforeſaid, which being writ- 
ten, the faid Biſhop brought ir back to the 
ſame Counteſs, and that he was before the ſaid 
Counteſs in the Preſence of his Brother Wil- 
liam, Gilbert de Knovill, Geoffrey her Chaplain 
(here he faith as hebelieves) Agnes de Mountrals 
a Domeſtic of the faid Counteſs and many others 
of the Family of the Counteſs. He caufed the 
faid Chart or Deed to be read, and enquired of 
the Countefs aforeſrid, if fhe wiſhed that the 
Deed ſhould be ſeated under that Form; which 
the ſaid ſhe did, and commanded the aforefaid 
Agnes to bring her Seal to confirm the ſaid 
Chart or Deed, which was then done. After 
the ſigning of which in the Prefence of the 
Perſons aforeſaid, the ſaid Counteſs delivered 
to the aforcſtid Biſhop the Chart aforefaid; 
and of her own voluntary Will and Accord fur- 
rendered the Poſſeſſton of the Ifland and Manors 
aforeſaid contained in rhe aforeſaid Chart or 
Dred into the Hands of the Biſhop himſelf, in 
the Name of bur Lord the King, and for the 
 Ofe of the fate, by the Gloves of the. ſaid Bi- 
| ſhop which the ſaid Counteſs held in her Hand; 
flat the ſaid Biſhop had ths retired about the 
third 


181 f or WIGHT. — 1 


third Hour, and the ſaid Counteſs thereupon 


reſted. And the ſame Brother William after- 
wards about the ninth Hour intreated the 
Counteſs aforeſaid, that ſhe ſhould make her 
Will; who anſwered that ſhe was ſo fatigued 
that ſhe was afraid, if ſhe ſhould talk much, 
that ſhe would be much oppreſſed and weakened 
by it. But the ſaid Counteſs afterwards at the 
Hour of Veſpers, being again requeſted by the 
ſaid Brother about making the ſame, made her 
Will, and named her Executors by her Fingers, 
which were, the Abbot of Quarr, the Prior of 
Breamore, the Prior of Chriſt- church, and Gil- 
bert de Knovill, and being fatigued then reſted. 
And ſome time afterwards ſhe cauſed that it 
| ſhould be publiſhed by the ſaid Brother William, 


that ſhe renewed what ſhe had done, and dur- 


ing all the Time aforeſaid was of good and 
ſound Memory ; and afterwards between Mid- 
night and the Morning ſhe expired. 


Wal rex the aforeſaid Biſhop, the earl of 


Lincoln, and the earl of Warren, atteſt, that the 
Biſhop of Durham declared before them that the 
| Deed or Chart aforeſaid was executed in the 
Form aforeſaid, and that the ſurrender to him 


in the Name of our Lord the King of the Iſland 


and Manors aforeſaid with their Appurtenances, 


was made as hath been declared, and with the 


good Will of the ſaid Counteſs; that the ſaid 
Counteſs was of good Memory and of ſound 
Mind. And becauſe it has been faid by ſome 


Perſons, - 


4 
. 
| 
7 
TY 
7 
K. ; 
: 


A 1 « EP —_— 7 EE. 
: BB 2 e 3 "VP! 
© as * F Ws. + £ — 


— SI E 
OT — — 
— — 


r 


* — . — — — 2 — = * = N * 88 

— - * 1 wwe - 1 : : I 

PP 
8 * — —— * 


— >_< 


146 HISTORY OF THE 


Perſons, before the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, 
that the aforeſaid Biſhop of Durham ought to 
have ſaid and known the contrary of the Fact 
aforeſaid ; they have enquired of the ſaid Bi- 
ſhop. if he had ſaid this, who denied it alto- 
gether, nor had he ever any Intention to ſay 
any Thing before the ſaid Archbiſhop or others 
concerning the aforeſaid Iſland and Manors, 
nor did he ſay any Thing but concerning the 
other Lands of the Counteſs aforeſaid, and of 
the Inheritance of Hugh de Courtney, as of + 
Lands of Devon. 
Six Richard de Afton faith, that he was 
Steward of the Houſhold of the aforeſaid Coun- 
teſs, for a long Time before and at the Time 
of her Death, and that for ten Years and more, 
it had been conferred between her and our 
Lord the King, reſpecting the Surrender of the 
aforeſaid Iſland and Manors with their Appur- 
tenances to our Lord the King aforeſaid, for 
four thouſand Pounds; and ſhe ſo conſtantly 
retained that Diſpoſition, that ſhe | purpoſely 
directed her Journey by London, where the 
King then was, in her Way to Canterbury, that 
ſhe might ſpeak with the King upon the Sub- 
ject; that the King anſwered her, it would be 
in ſufficient Time to complete it on her Re- 
turn from Canterbury; and that he was at 
Stokewell on the Monday aforeſaid. All the 
Tranſactions aforeſaid which Brother William 
had ſaid were to be done, and the Manner in 
| which 


TSLE OF WIGHT. 147 


which he had ſaid they were done, were known, 
heard, and ſeen, by himſelf and all the before- 
mentioned Perſons ; and that the aforeſaid Coun- 


teſs was of good and perfect Mind and Memory. 


He ſaith alſo that he heard the ſaid Counteſs 
very often in her Life declaring that ſhe would 
ſurrender it the more willingly by Reaſon that 
her Heirs were ſo remote from her in Blood *, 
that her next Heir might marry her if ſhe wiſhed 
to have a Huſband ; and that upon this Account 
ſhe had ſome Time ſpoke with the Earl Marſhal 
about the Sale of the aforeſaid Lands and others. 
- GitzzrT de Knovill ſays, that the firſt Conver- 
ſation between our Lord the King and Iſabella 
de Fortibus, Counteſs of Albemarle, was at Briſtol 
when the Counteſs de Bares was married, through 
the Biſhop of Durham and Biſhop of Coventry, 
then Treaſurer of the Wardrobe, Mediators, re- 
ſpecting the Iſle of Wight and Chriſt-church 
with its Appurtenances, as well as Faukſhall, of 
which Conference had before been held between 
the ſaid Counteſs and the Earl Marſhal. And 
ſays, that on the Vigil of St. Martin following, 
in the ſame year that the Counteſs died at Stoke- 
well, the before- mentioned Biſhops came, and 
-f the Counteſs aforeſaid, on the Part 
of the King, about the Premiſes, ſo that Agree- 


EKindred were prevented from marrying to a greater de- 
gree of diſtance in thoſe times than at preſent. 


+ Arrenarunt, perhaps means, treated with, &c. 


ment 


1 _ S # 2 # 5 — I — 
Ir * Ms Mts Z 20 io. 4 


r 


— ͤ b). rn.” 


. 
= W 


8} 
; 
"- 

1 


— — . 
. 


— A > © Ras 


>. EW ene IF AAS = Ss... BB 2 2 


25-2: 


148 HISTORY or THE 


ment was made concerning the aforeſaid Lands, 
that the King ſhould pay to the ſame Counteſs 
- fix thouſand Marks for the Lands aforeſaid, and 
the ſame Counteſs on the ſame Day ſurrendered 
into the Hands of the aforeſaid Biſhop of Dur- 
ham the aforeſaid Lands for the Uſe of our Lord 
the King, and remitted and for ever quit Claim 
for herſelf and her Heirs to our Lord the King 
and to his Heirs, as the Chart or Deed which the 
King fince this Time has had doth teſtify. And 
faith that the Money aforeſaid was paid on the 
Feaſt of St. Martin following in the Houſe of 
the Biſhop of Durham at London by the Mer- 
chants of Spina *, ſo as that they after would 
account with the Executors of the ſaid Counteſs, 
whenever they ſhould requeſt. And concerning 
that Time of Surrender into the Hand of the 
Biſhop and of the Confirmation of the Deed or 
Chart, and alfo of the Memory and Good Incli- 
nation, and of the Time of the Death of the 
Counteſs aforeſaid agrecs with the aforeſaid Bro- 
ther William. Beſides he ſaith that the aforeſaid 
Counteſs ſaid, if ſhe had been minded to 
have a Huſband, that on Account of Affinity ſhe 
might well have for her Huſband the aforeſaid 
Hugh de Courtney, if he had been of mature 
Age. And ſaith that at the Time of Surrender 
there were preſent all thoſe before-mentioned, 

Agnes de Mounteals, Joan de Marroys, and Roger 


? Spine, now Spenhamland, then a place of * trade, 


Gardener, 


O 


181 E OF WIGHT, 149 


Gardener, and others, of whoſe Names he is ig- 
norant. 

AnD becauſe the whole Buſineſs was tranſacted 
by the Biſhop of Durham and the- Perſon en- 
gaged by him, and in the Preſence of the afore- 
ſaid Gilbert de Knouill and Geoffrey the Chap- 
lain, as before has been declared; it is neceſſary 
that they ſhould come and be heard to inform 
the Mind of our Lord the King, and in like 
Manner that the Chart or Deed of the Counteſs 
may be ſeen under Seal. | 

Taz above Examination was made in the Pre- 
ſence of William Lord Biſhop of Litchfield and 
Coventry, the Earl of Lincoln, the Earl of War- 
ren, John Berwick, Roger Brabazon, John Met- 
tingham, John Drokensford, Gilbert Roubery, 
&c. Upon which a Writ was ſent to the ſaid 
Gilbert to the following Purport. 

« EDwaRD, by the Grace of God, &c. To 
our beloved and faithful Gilbert de Roubery 
Health. Becauſe we have underſtood that cer- 
tain Writings, Records, and Memorandums, 
reſpecting Lands and Tenements which belonged 
to Iſabel de Fortibus, ſome Time Counteſs of 
Devon, the Iſle of Wight and Manor of Chriſt 
church with their Appurtenances in the County 
of Southampton, which Lands and Tenements 
with the ſaid Appurtenances our beloved and 
faithful Hugh Courtney deſires to be delivered 
to him by his Petition exhibited before us and 
our Council, are in your Cuſtody ; we command 
you. 


150 HISTORY or THE 


you that, having ſearched the hinge Records 
and Minutes which are in your ſaid Cuſtody, 
you deliver to us, together with this Writ, all 
Writings Records and Minutes of this Nature 


any Way relating to the Lands and Tenements 


aforeſaid, to be kept in our Treaſury by our 

Treaſurer and Chamberlains, without any Delay; 

and that you in no Wiſe fail to do it. Witneſs 

_ ourſelf at Thunderley on the fourteenth of May, 
in the eighth Year of our Reign. | 

Axp the aforeſaid Hugh came to the ſame 

Parliament at Lincoln, and preſented at the ſame 


2 Time another Petition to this Effect. 


To our Sovereign Lord the King and his 
Council Hugh de Courtney repreſenteth, that 
ſince he has for a long Time made Suit to divers 
Parliaments for his Rights, and his Claim which 
he hath as well to the Iſle of Wight, as to the 
Manor of Chriſt-church and its Appurtenances 
in the County of Southampton, and to the laſt 
Parliament held at Weſtminſter, in the ninth 
Vear of our Lord the King. It was anſwered 
the ſaid Hugh to his Petition, that a Brief or 
Writ ſhould iſſue to the Treaſurer and Cham- 
berlains of our Lord the King that they ſhould 
cauſe to be ſearched the Books Charts Records 
and other Minutes reſpecting the ſaid Poſſeſſions, 
and being in their Keeping. And that our ſaid 
Lord the King was certified as follows under the 
Seal. of the Exchequer at the next Parliament. 


And the ſaid "oy as much for him as for him- 
ſelf 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 151 


ſelf therefore prays our Lord the King that he 
will command his Counſel to examine the ſaid 
Charts, Records, &c. concerning the King's 
Right, and thereupon to give Order to them 
that the ſaid Hugh may have his Right.“ | 
On the Petition aforeſaid being read before 
the King's Council, and the Writ and Evidence 
above recited being at the ſame Time repeated, 
that the ſaid Buſineſs might be proceeded in 
more certainly it was commanded that a more 
diligent Search ſhould be made as well in the 
Treaſury as in the King's Wardrobe and elſe- 
where, if any Chart or Deed of the aforeſaid 
| Iſabella or any other Writings or Minutes rela- 
tive to that Buſineſs could be found, and that 
the King and his Council ſhould be certified 
thereof, from the Day of Eaſter in fifteen Days 
at Weſtminſter; and upon this Writs ifſued to 
the Treaſurer and Chamberlains and likewiſe to 
the Keeper of the King's Wardrobe, &c. And 
it was then declared to the aforeſaid Hugh that 
he might expect his Day before the King and 
his Council within fifteen Days aforeſaid &c. at 
Weſtminſter. Ar which Day the Keeper of the 
King's Wardrobe ſent to the King's Council at 
Weſtminſter a Deed or Chart by which the afore- 
ſaid Iſabella granted, ſurrendered, and quit 


As this memorial is in old French, we have tranſlated jt as 
nearly literal as poffible; and where we could not do that, we 
have endeavoured to preſerve the ſenſe. The reſt of the roll is 
in old Latin, | N 

| Claim 


162 HISTORY OF THE 


Claim to our Lord Edward the King Father of 
the preſent King the Iſland of Wight and Manor 
of Chriſt-church aboveſaid. Which ſaid Chart 
is here contained in the following Roll in theſe 
words. 

«& To all the faithful of Chriſt to whom the 
preſent Writing ſhall come, Iſabella de Forti- 
bus Counteſs of Albemarle and Devon and Lady 
of the Ifle, Health for ever in the Lord, — 

Know ye that we have granted, ſurrendered, and 
quit Claim, for ourſelves and our Heirs, to the 

Excellent Prince and Lord our moſt dear Lord 
Edward by the Grace of God the illuſtrious King 
of England and Lord of Ireland, and Duke of 
Aquitain, the whole Iſland of Wight in the 
County of Southampton, with the Advowſons 
of the Abbies, Priories, Churches, free Homages 
of free Men, Villenages, with the Villanes hold- 
ing the ſaid Villenages, and their Chattels and 
Effects, namely, whatever we have on the Day 

of the ſigning of this preſent Writing in the ſaid 
Iſle, as well in Demeſne, as in manorial Right, 
without any Reſerve, and all their Appurtenan- 
ces as well within the County aforeſaid as with- 
cut. We have alſo granted and ſurrendered, 
And quit Claim for ourſelves and our Heirs to 
our Lord the King aforeſaid the Manor of Chriſt- 
church of Twynham in the ſaid County, and 
alſo the Manor of Lambeth in the County of 
Surrey together with the Manor which is called 


Faukſhall i in the Pariſh of Lambeth with all its 
Appur- 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 7 


Appurtenances as well within the ſame County 


as without, together with the Homages, Ser- 


vices, Freedmen, Villenages, with the Villains 
holding ſuch Villenages, and their Chattels and 


Effects with all their Appurtenances ; namely, 
whatever we had in the aforeſaid Manors on the 
Day of the ſigning of the preſent Writing, as 
well in Demeſne as in manorial Right, with all 
their Appurtenances, without any Reſerve-to be 
had or held to our Lord the King aforeſaid his 
Heirs or Aſſigns freely and quietly and as his 
Inheritance for ever. So that neither we, our 
Heirs or any Perſon in our Name, in the afore- 
ſaid Lands and Poſſeſſions named or not named 


with their Appurtenances, may or ſhall ſupport 


or make any Right or Claim of any other Thing 
for ever. But for this Grant, Surrender and 
quitting Claim, the aforeſaid Lord the King 
hath given to us fix thouſand Marks with his 
Hands. And that this our Grant, Surrender, 


and quitting Claim may be made firm and ſtable 


for ever we have put our Seal to this Writing in 
the Preſence of theſe Witneſſes, Anthony Lord 
Biſhop of Durham, Sir Richard Afton, Sir Gil- 
bert Knovill, Sir Richard Waldegrave, Sir Jor- 
dan Kingſton, Sir Robert Glamorgan, and Sir 


John Heyne; John Grimſtede, Philip Tangle, 


Roger Gardener, and Walter Langton, Clerks, 
and others. Given at Stokewell near Lambeth, 
on the Monday next before the Feaſt of St. Mar- 
tin in the Winter. In the Year of our Lord 

MM 1293. 


. 
| [ 
oh 1 
q- 
41 
1 
1 
þ 
Ho 
© 
4 


154 | HISTORY OF THE 


1293. And the aforeſaid Hugh came to Weſt. 
minſter before the King's Council within fifteen 
Days aforeſaid and requeſted as before the Iſland 


and Manors aforefaid with their Appurtenances 


to be delivered to him as the next Heir of the 
aforeſaid Iſabella. And upon this John Stoner 
faith for our Lord the King, that from hence it 
appears that the aforeſaid Iſabella Coufin of the 
aforeſaid Hugh, whoſe Heir he is, as he fays, 
granted and ſurrendered the Iſland and Manors 
aforeſaid to our Lord the King Edward Father 
of our preſent Lord the King (from whom the 
faid Iſabella held the Iſland and Manors afore- 
ſaid in Capite) by the aforefaid Chart or Deed, 
and for ever quit Claim for herſelf and her Heirs 
to our ſaid Lord Edward &c. and requeſted 
Judgment for our Lord the King, if the afore- 
ſaid Hugh contrary to the Act of his Predeceſſor 
aforeſaid can claim any Right in the Poſſeſſions 
| aforeſaid. And the aforeſaid Hugh faith that 
the aforeſaid Iſabella his Coufin, whoſe Heir he 
is, died ſeized of the aforefaid Poſſeſſions in 
Demeſne as of Fee, and ſeeks to eſtabliſh this 
by his Country. And becauſe the faid Hugh 
anſwered nothing to the Act aforeſaid it was de- 
clared to the faid Hugh that he ſhould ſpeak 
farther if he had any Thing to be ſaid againſt 
the ſaid Deed, if he thought it expedient ſo to 


do. And the ſaid Hugh requeſted to deliberate 


upon this, and that he might take Advice till 
the next Parliament, and it was granted him 
that 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 156 


that the Bufineſs aforefaid ſhould then continue 
in the ſame State in which it now is; and he 

' was ordered to proceed farther in the nent Par- 
liament, &c. 


Havinc thus given as faithful an account as we 
are able of theſe proceedings, the doubts which we 
confidered as reaſonable in the mind of Hugh de 
Courtney, earl of Devon, and the candour and li- 
berality with which the king met the enquiry to 
ſatisfy theſe doubts, myſt be manifeſt and evident. 
We need only obſerve farther, that the purchaſe 
money was by no means ſo incanſiderable, as it 
may to. ſome of our readers of the preſent day ap- 
| pear; when we conſider the value of land in thoſe 
ages, and the comparative ſcarcity of mgney, which 
made the value proportionably high. Abqut the 
year 1293, when this conveyance was executed, 
the value of land was not worth more than one- 
eighteenth part of what it is at preſent; and it 
muſt farther be obſerved, that money bas dimi- 
nifhed in value fince that time in the proportion of 
fifteen to one. Theſe circumſtances conſidered, 
we may conclude, in the firſt place, that this four 
thouſand pounds was equal to ſixty thauſand ; and, 
in the next place, that as land is proportionably _ 
raiſed in fo very high a degree, the purchaſe ap- 
plied to its preſent improved ſtate muſt be eighteen = 
times this ſum. Hence the purchaſe may be 
_ deemed equal to one million and eighty thouſand 
pounds of our money, which, applied alſo to the 
M 2 number 


156 6 "HISTORY OP THE 


number of acres, about one hundred thouſand, 
will be twenty-five years purchaſe at eight ſhil- 
lings and three pence per acre. Add to this, that 
the religious houſes had large poſſeſſions, and that 
there were other private freeholds in the iſland, 
from which the counteſs could receive no emolu- 
ment, and therefore no power of receiving any 
could be conveyed ; which, with the charge of 
providing a defence for the iſland, decreaſed the 
value of it conſiderably. 
. Ons objection, perhaps, may be raiſed on this 
part of our argument, that money was three times 
the weight by the preſent ſtandard in the time of 
Edward the Firſt, and that conſequently the dimi- 
nution of the value of money ought only to be re- 
garded in a proportion of five to one. We are 
ready to grant the premiſes alledged in the fulleſt 
extent ; but as decidedly deny the application of 
the conſequence. It is ſufficient to note, from 
various deductions which might be made on the 
| ſubject, that ſince the reign of queen Elizabeth, 
when coined money was fixed at its preſent ſtan- 
dard, the value has at leaſt diminiſhed in a quin- 
tuple or five-fold proportion; which poſition alone 
muſt totally ſuperſede all argument in favour of 


the objection. 


Ovr readers will excuſe us for dwelling thus 
particularly on the ſale of the iſland by the coun- 
teſs of Devon. It forms an important era in the 
hiſtory, to note the time when, and the manner in 
which it changed maſters. We muſt now, there- 

n fore, 


ISLE OF-WIGHT. 157 


fore, conſider it in a new point of view, as the 
private property of the monarchs of England; and 
our next chapter will ſnew us that the iſland, in 
changing maſters, had! no cauſe to repent of 1 
conveyance. | 
We have only to add that great part of the pro- 
perty of the ſaid counteſs, which muſt have been 
conſiderable, was probably appropriated to pious 
uſes ; but the contents of her will have not occur. 
red to us, and we think that they muſt be ſearched 


for, amongſt the donations to religious houſes and 


other pious uſes, which, it is likely, may have 
become a wreck in the violent proceedings of 
Henry the Eighth, when the property of thoſe 
houſes was confiſcated and the foundations diſ- 
ſolved. This may be conſidered as a natural in- 
| ference, when it is obſerved, that, as well as the 
deed to convey the iſland to king Edward, her 
will was alſo made on her death- bed; and when it 
is farther added, that three of her executors were 
eccleſiaſtics and -ſupetiors of thoſe monaſteries, 
which had been founded by her anceſtors. It was 


in conſequence of Hugh Courtney's proving him- 


ſelf to be the heir of the ſaid counteſs, and there- 
fore entitled to the third penny of the county of 


Devon, that he was admitted to that earldom, 


without a new creation, at the end of five years 


from the time of her deceaſe. His ſucceſs in this, 


perhaps, might encourage him to proſecute his 
claim to the lordſhip of the iſle of Wight and the 
appurtenances thereunto appending, 


* 13 CHAPTER f 


* 
5 
* 
u 
, 
R. 
* * 
* 
o 
i 
q 
* 

* 

* 
4 
* 

* 

? 

— 

* 
13 
= 
— 

; 
« 

_— 

8 
_. 
-” — 

N 
1 
1 

4 
4 * 
J 1 
44 
9. 
18 
1 
2 

* 
: 

[4 A 

Wo. 
* 

* * 
2 
N j 
+ " 
2.9 
LF 

4 
« 

43 
LY 
4 . 
. 

4 * 

K 
1 

< 1 

1 
* 
2 
| | 

* 

| i 

a 

= * 
n 
1 
j 
2 þ 
1 

2 
oY 
1 
; 

+ 4 

4 

. } 
Wk 
2 8 

1 

* 
„ 

1 
42 al 
© 
he 

. * 

3 

2 


=" = 3 5 V5 ; p — * 
P 


* 


1 #1$roky or THe 


CHAPTER VII. 


or THE CIVIL HISTORY or THE ISLAND AFTER IT 
BELONGED TO THE CROWN. 


E 455 come to a new period of hiſtory, when 
the protection of this iſland became the buſineſs 
of the crown, which before had been indifferent to 
its ſafety. When we come to treat more directly 
of the povernors of the iſland in a ſubſequent 
chapter, we ſhall find that king Edward the Firſt 
Kept it in his 6wn hands to the time of his death 
about fourteen years after; and that he appointed 
Keepers or guardians of it, which he frequently 
changed. 

Boör in the firſt year of king Edward the Second, 

it was granted to his favourire Piers Gaveſton, and 
Kis wife, and the heirs of his Body; and Nicholas 
de Boſco®, who was at that time warden, was 
 Comiinanded to give him poſſeſſion. The nobility 
remonſtrared with the king on this impolitic mea- 
fare ; which gave much offence to many, who 
could not ſubmit to fach à partial indulgence of a 
man every way obnoxious to them, and but ill 
deſerving of the king's confidence. Hence he 
found jt neceſſary to reſume this grant in the ſuc- 
cecding year, to quiet the minds of his inſulted 


* The Lame probably as what is now call:d, Woop, 


nobles ; 3 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 159 


nobles; and, to prevent all competition amongſt 
them, conferred the iſland and the caſtle of Cariſ- 
brooke on his eldeſt ſon Edward, then ſtyled carl 
of Chefter, the ſame who ſucceeded his father on 
the throne of England. 

Tr1s prince governed the iſland and caſtle by 
wardens, during his life, as had before been prac- 
tiſed by his grandfather ; which he commonly ſe- 
lected from the principal gentlemen of the iſland, 

as perſons whom he judged to be moſt fit and 
proper to defend and protect their own poſſeſſions. 
We may give an inſtance of this judicious ma- 
nagement from the rolls of parliament, where, on 
a particular occaſion, he permitted the inhabitants 
to make choice of their own warden; for as he 
ſignified his claim to the crown of France, this 
iſland was frequently attacked by them, as we 
have related in a former chapter in its military 
hiſtory, in this and the ſucceeding reign, and the 
inhabitants were frequently required to exert their 
utmoſt courage in their defence. 

In the beginning of the reign of Richard the 
Second in 1377, the French ravaged the coaſt of 
England from Rye and Haſtings as far as Plymouth, 
and plundered this iſland. In the ninth year of 
his reign he granted the lordſhip of it, with the 
caſtle of Cariſbrooke, to William Montacute, earl 
of Saliſbury, to be held by him during the term of 
his natural life; which William, was the ſon of 
Sir William Montacute, who had been created earl 


of Saliſbury for his ſervice in apprehending Roger 
M 4 Mortimer 


160 HISTORY OF THE | 


Mortimer in the queen's apartment in the fourth 
year of Edward the Third. William, the ſon, was 
equally ſignalized for his military exploits, and 
' deemed one of the greateſt ſoldiers of the age; and 
had been employed by king Edward in moſt of his 
expeditions againſt the French and Scots, wherein 
he had acquired much honour. He firſt married 
Joan, daughter of Edmund, earl of Kent, ſon of 

Edward the Firſt; but it appeared that ſhe had 
before been married to Sir Thomas Holland, who 
Was ſtill living, and thereupon the marriage was 
declared void. After his deceaſe ſhe married Ed- 
ward the Black Prince, though the earl of Saliſbury 
was ſtill living, by whom ſhe became the mother 
of Richard the Second. 

Bur the earl of Saliſbury afterwards took to wife 
Elizabeth, the daughter of John, lord Mohun of 
Dunſter caſtle, by whom he had one ſon of the 
name of William, who was unhappily flain at a 
tournament at Windſor in the ſixth year of the 
reign of the aforeſaid king Richard the Second. 
His will was dated at Chriſt-church Twyneham, 
in the 20th year of the ſaid king, in which he 
ſtyles himſelf earl of Saliſbury and lord of the ifles 
of Wight and Man; and therein directed that his 
body ſhould be buried in the conventual church of 
Burſtleſham, which had been founded by his father. 
He farther directed that ſeventy-five ſhillings 
ſhould be daily and every day diſtributed to three 
hundred poor perſons, until his corpſe ſhould ar- 
rive at the place of interment ; and that twenty- 

| four 


ISLE OF WIGHT. I61 


four poor perſons, each dreſſed in a gown of black 
cloth, with a red hood, ſhould bear torches of 
eight pounds weight on the day of his funeral. Ir - 
was therein alſo directed that there ſhould be nine 
wax lights, and three mortars of wax about his 
body, and banners of his arms placed on every 
pillar of the church. Thirty pounds were alſo 
directed to be given to the religious to ſing tren- 
tals, and pray for his ſoul ; and his executors were 
enjoined to lay out and expend five hundred marks 
in finiſhing the building at Burſtleſham, and in 
erecting there a tomb for his father and mother, 
and another for himſelf and his ſon. He died in 
the ſame year, but left no ifſue; and his large 
poſſeſſions were inherited by his nephew, Sir John 
de Montacute. This was in 1397. 0 
. EvpwaRD, earl of Rutland, grandſon of king 
Edward the Third, being the ſon of Edmund de 
Langley, who was the fifth ſon of that king, created 
duke of Albemarle, obtained the grant of this - 
iſland and of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke in tail male, 
after the death of the earl of Saliſbury. The iſlands 
of Guernſey and Jerſey were alſo given to him for 
life. He was alſo appointed warden of the New 
Foreſt in Hampſhire, chief juſtice of the foreſts 
ſouth of Trent, conſtable of Dover caſtle, and war- 
den of the cinque ports; and was afterwards ap- 
pointed conſtable of England. All theſe honours, 
which were ſo ſpeedily heaped upon one perſon, 
demonſtrate that he was highly eſteemed and ca- 
reſſed by king Richard the Second. 


— P a a. - Foy 1 , Y 


—_ 125 5 ' - 
"I" Ae : OY r 12 
2 5 > 
r &- 8 — —ñE3—ĩ— ee —— — — 
COPE 7 ts — * % Þ . > 5 * . — 2 


r * 2 n * . 


— 


FEAR OE CHEZ A ies.” EN Iv hear” | . 


. 3 


Bur 


4 

" 
1 
2 
4 

Us 

9 

** 


5 
_ 
— 
2 
1 * * 


162 ©. HISTORY or THY 


Bur his diſpoſition and character were by no 
means of an amiable caſt, from an unbridled pro- 
penſity to comply with every capricious and licen- 
tious humour which his ungoverned paſſions ſug- 
geſted. For he was not only privy and conſenting 
to the murder of his uncle, the duke of Glouceſter, 
but alſo ſent his cook to aſſiſt in it; a ſervice 
which was ſo highly valued by the king, that he 
uas rewarded with a grant in tail ſpecial of ſeveral 
manors and lands and other effects belonging to 
the duke, as the wages of his iniquity. He had 
alſo ſome of the manors of Richard, earl of Arun- 
del and Thomas earl of Warwick, who _ been 
attainted in parliament. | 

Tuxsk large poſſeſſions were not of 3 conti- 
nuance ; for his fortunes changed with thoſe of 
Richard, whoſe depoſition ſoon after followed. — 
When Henry the Fourth was eſtabliſhed on the 

throne, this Edward was degraded from the duke- 

dom of Albemarle; which was ſo diſpleaſing to 
him, that, together with the dukes of Surrey and 
Exeter and the earl of Saliſbury, he formed a con- 
ſpiracy to kill the king at Windſor on the twelfth 
night. But he had ſufficient addreſs to procure 
the king's pardon and a reſtoration of his lands, 
by diſclofing the whole plot; and he afterwards 
gained the king's confidence ſo much as to procure 
an appointment of lieutenant in the dutchy of 
Aquitain. 

Hrs father died on the firſt of Auguſt 1401, when 


he had livery of all his lands ; he was alſo reſtored, 


1SLE OF WIGHT, 163 


in che parliament held in the ſeventh year of that 


reign, to his hereditary title of duke of York. 
Axrrtr Henry the Fifth ſucceeded to the crown, 
in the ſecond year of the king's reign he was con- 


ſtituted juſtice of South Wales, and warden of the 


Eaſt Marches towards Scotland. In the following 
year, he attended the king to France, and obtain- 


ed leave to lead the van at the battle of Agincourt; 


but his fat and unwieldy ſize occaſioned his death, 
for he was thrown down and ſmothered in the 


throng, on the twenty-fifth of October 1415,— — 


His body was brought to Fetheringhay, the col- 


legiate church of which he had built; in the choir 
of which he was interred under a flat marble flab, 


upon which was his effigy on a plate of braſs. He 
had veſted ſeveral eſtates and churches in the hands 


of truſtees for finiſhing and endowing it; and his 


obſequies were celebrated with great pomp, at 
the king's expence, on his return to England. 

In regarding the courtier, wherein his obſe- 
quiouſneſs was certainly too glaring, and not very 
conſiſtent with honeſty and ſincerity, we muſt not 
forget his gallantry as a ſoldier; his character in 
that reſpect muſt have been known, or Henry 
would never have confided to him ſuch an honour- 
able and important ſtation. He married Philip. 
pa, the third daughter and coheir of John, lord 
Mohun, baron of Dunſter, but left no iſſue. 

Taz ducheſs of York was the next perſon who 
obtained the grant of this iſland for life, in the 


third year of Henry the Fifth, together with the 


caſtle 


2 +. W 3 FE 7 . 
T 


11 
if 
1 

9 
| 
| 


> EE 


Y 


164 HISTORY OF THE 


caſtle and manor of Cariſbrooke, the manor of 
Bowcombe, and the church of Freſhwater. At 
the time of her death in 1430, after holding theſe 
flifteen years; ſhe alſo died ſeized of the manors of 
VNiton, Whitfield, Pann, and Thorney, with the 
foreſt of Bordwood, in the ſaid iſland, which ſhe 
enjoyed as a ſatisfaction of dower *. 

IT was not till the ſeventeenth year of Heory 
the Sixth, in 1439, that Humphrey duke of Glou- 
ceſter, ſon of Henry the Fourth, ſucceeded to the 
lordſhip of this iſland, by virtue of a grant of the 
-reverſion of it, after the deceaſe of the ducheſs of 
York. He is ſuppoſed to have held this iſland to 
the time of his death, which was accompliſhed by 
the favourites of the queen, who carried all before 
them ; fince we find that Henry Trenchard was 

"inveſted with the office of conſtable of Cariſ- 
brooke caſtle, by a grant from the king, commen- 
cing from the death of the ſaid duke Humphrey, 
in the twenty-fifth year of the ſaid king Henry the 
Sixth. This duke has by ſome hiſtorians been 
called the good duke, but with what propriety is not 
altogether agreed; though it is certain that he was 
not only a brave man, but a very zealous promoter 
of learning. | 

We muſt not in this place paſs over the cir- 
cumſtance of the duke of Warwick s being crown- 


* From this grant to Philippa, ducheſs of York, the PU of 
the caſtle of Cariſbrooke is ſpecially and particularly excepted, in 
the record of the tenth of December 1 in the third year of Henry the 
Fifth, | 
| ed 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 165 


ed king of the iſle of Wight, in conſequence of 
a patent of the twenty-fourth of Henry the Sixth, 
two years before the death of Humphrey. This 
duke was Henry Beauchamp, ſon of Richard, earl 
of Warwick, late regent of France. It is more- 
over certain, that king Henry in perſon aſliſted 
at the ceremony, and placed the crown on his 
head. But this was no more than a titular ho- 
nour, and conveyed no regal authority ; for the 
king had no power whatever to transfer the ſo- 
vereignty of any part of his dominions, and it 
is probable that he did not even poſſeſs the lord- 
ſhip of the iſland, as no ſurrender appears from 
duke Humphrey, who was then living, and had 
a grant of it for life, as we have already noticed. 

Wirn what views king Henry was incited to 
confer this mock honour, contrary to the laws 
and ſtatutes of the realm, or the duke ſubmitted 
to accept what could be of no value to him, 
does not appear. Perhaps it was a very fortu- 
nate circumſtance, and might be a means of 
preventing much miſchief, that he died without 
male iſſue ſoon after theſe deluſive honours were 
conferred upon him, in the twenty-ſecond year of 
his age, at his caſtle of Henley in Worceſter- 
ſhire, whilſt duke Humphrey was ſtill living. 
Hence the regal title expired with him, and the 
lordſhip of the iſland, on the death of ae 
reverted to the crown. 

Wurrukx duke Henry might be W to 
wait till this latter event happened, in order to 
purſue 


— 
ce 


166 HISTORY OP THE 


_ purſue his ſuppoſed claim by virtue of this grant 
and honour, is not fufficiently manifeſt. Had he 
furvived the duke of Glouceſter, the king might and 
probably would have inveſted him with the lord- 
ſhip of the iſland, without any difficulty. It 
would have been left to ſucceeding times to dif- 
pute the legality and authenticity of ſuch an honour; 
for if this duke Henry had left iſſue male, they 
might have been induced to contend for the ſuc. 
eeſſion as a matter of inheritance, and the crown 
to reſume its rights by retaining it in their hands, 
er conferring it upon ſome other perſon. Hence 
civil conteſt might have taken place, eſpecially 
if the influence of the titular king was ſtrong and 
powerful; hence, too, when the conteſt had been 
terminated, with the loſs of much blood and trea- 
ſure, confiſcations, impriſonments, &c. &c. might 
have enſued, and the ifland depopulated and laid 
waſte. Such, we think, might have been the pro- 
bable conſequences of this ill-judged honour; 
which we deemed right to lay before our readers, 
juſt as they occurred to us. We have already 
faid, that theſe were fortunately prevented by his 


premature death *. 
| War 

From the ittje notice which has been taken by our hiſtorians | 
of this event, many doubts have been entertained if ſuch a circum- 
ſtance ever exiſted. It is certain that this duke was buried in the 
church of the monaſtery of Tewkfbury in Glouceſterſhire ; and L- 
LAND, in his itinerary, mentions the coronation, and his appointment 
to be premier earl of England, as facts ſufficiently known, and after 


wo years as being created duke of * on" the ibo of 
the records of that — | 
Perhaps 


ISLE OP WIGHT, 167 


Wnar Mr. Selden ſays, in his titles of honour, 
does by no means remove our apprehenſions, that 
ſuch might have been the conſequences. Speak- 
ing of the title of king of Man, he obſerves, that 
it was like that of king of the iſle of Wight, in the 
great Beauchamp, duke of Warwick, who was 
crowned king under Henry the Sixth; but, we 
think, the great danger alluded to is not ſyper- 
ſeded by this remark, becauſe the title of king of 
Man was hereditary in the lords of that iſland, 
which is the very caſe we. have ſuppoſed in the 
deſcendants of the titular king of the ifle of Wight. 
Neither is it certain, from this obſervation of Mr. 


Selden, either that the duke of Warwick or his 


ſucceſſors, if he ſhould have had ifſue, did or 
would have conſidered it as merely titular and ho- 
norary, or that the legality and authority by which 
it was conferred would then have been called in 
queſtion. Lord Coke, in his inſtitutes, has indeed 


conſidered this tranfaction very fully, and decided 


Perhaps it may be ſaid, that theſe repreſentations or au thorities 
are not always to be confided in implicitly ; becauſe the monks 
were uſually diſpoſed to magnify and extol the grandeur and anti- 


| quity of the families of their patrons, This is readily admitted; 
but does not effect ſuch collateral evidence, as the ravages of time 


and the mercileſs hands of ungoverned reformers have, in their fp- 
rious zeal, left to us. To this purpoſe, therefore, we add, that in 
an ancient window of the collegiate church at Warwick was a re- 
preſentation of this duke, with an imperial crown on his head, and 
_ ſcepter before him; which is a ſtrong preſumption that ſuch an 


event really occurred. We are not certain whether this window 


ſtill remains in its former original condition; the figure as in 3 
kneeling poſition, with the ſurcoat of his arms. | 


N. 


— — > LC <z 2 Bar * ata Das WH Od - — 


——  — —— 


— 


E n 


*. 2 "IE 
— LES 2 


168 ' HISTORY or THE 


it as illegal and unauthorized ; but this is no 
ground for aſſerting that, in ages of arbitrary or at 
leaſt ill- defined power, the ſame ſentiments ſhould 
affect men, as in this great lawyer of a ſubſequent 
period were ſo predominant. Beſides, it was not 
very cuſtomary for kings or other great men of 
thoſe times, to hearken to advice, or ſubmit to 
meaſures, which abridged their power and autho- 
rity; theſe conſequences were ſeldom produced 
but from neceſſity and force, when they found it 
expedient ſometimes to relinquiſh a part, to ſave 
and preſerve the,reſt. But to return. 

AFTER the death of Humphrey, duke of Glou- 
ceſter, we are left to infer from circumſtances his 
ſucceſſor as lord of this iſland. Theſe circum- 
ſtances it is our duty to relate in the manner they 
occur to us. We have already repreſented to our 
readers in a former chapter, in ſpeaking of the an- 
_ cient protection and defence of the iſland, that 
two petitions were ſent from the inhabitants, about 
the year 1449, one of which was addreſſed to the 
King, and the other to the parliament. Theſe 
petitions we there introduced forthe ſa- | 
tisfaction of our readers“, and deduced * See p. 52-59- 
ſome inferences which the tenor and 
circumſtances of theſe petitions ſuggeſted. From 
theſe we have ſufficient evidence, as we there 
obſerved, that Richard Plantagenet, duke of York, 
and father of Edward the Fourth, was at leaſt one 
of the lords of this iſland ; becauſe it appears ma- 


nifeſt from the ſecond petition, that he there ex- 
| erc ĩſed 


ISI OF WIGHT. | 169 


erciſed ſuch acts of government, as only could be 
done and exerciſed by a perſon who was veſted 


with ſuch authority. It appears from thence, that 


John Newport had been appointed his lieutenant 
and ſteward, and diſplaced for miſconduct in his 
office; that he had conferred that employment on 


Henry Bruin; that the aforeſaid Newport, though 


he was diſmiſſed from this office, took advantage 
of the relaxed ſtate of government, and committed 


great outrages on the inhabitants both by land 


and ſea, as it is pathetically exhibited and repre- 
ſented in ſuch petition; and that he was, at the 
very time of his committing theſe depredations 
and exceſſes, negociating with the king for his 
being again eſtabliſhed in the ſubordinate govern- 
ment of the iſland. But the king and parliament, 


ſuch was the confuſion of public affairs at this 


time, were too much engaged in more important 
matters, to afford the inhabitants that relief and 
protection which they ſo much wanted, both 
againſt foreign foes and domeſtic invaders. The 


duke of York, too, had his eye upon the crawn, 


which occupied all his attention another way. 

In conſequence of the king's increaſing weak 
neſs, added to his natural imbecility, which had 
left the government entirely in the hands of 
Margaret of Anjou, his queen, and her party, the 
duke of York was declared protector by the voice 
of the people, againſt the wiſhes and endeavours of 
the queen's miniſters. But it was ſoon after an- 


nulled, on the recovery or pretended recovery of 
| N the 


SOT SET 2 


— 


(| 


———— k— 


y 
| 
x 
* 
i 
1 
* 
1 
| 
* 
N 
7 
#4 
1 


170 HISTORY OF THE 


the king from his late indiſpoſition ; and the duke 
having reaſon to believe that the queen's favour- 
ites would not content themſelves with barely de- 
- priving him of his power, to enſure his own per- 
ſonal ſafety, aſſembled a body of troops, and there- 
with attacked and defeated the royal army at St. 
Alban's and made king Henry a priſoner. Hav- 
ing thereupon cauſed himſelf to be reſtored to the 
protectorſhip, he did not think it ſafe to raiſe his 
claims any higher; though it is more than proba- 
ble, that, if he had boldly declared the incapacity 
of Henry to govern the kingdom, and aſſerted his 
own right and title to it, in conſequence of ſuch 
incapacity, the people would unanimouſly, a few 
favourites excepted, have proclaimed him king. 
Edpu up, duke of Somerſet, who had married 
the ſiſter and coheir of Henry, duke of Warwick, 
already mentioned as king of the iſland, was of the 
queen's party. He had before ſupplanted the duke 
of York in the regency of France, and had alſo 
obtained a grant of this iſland and of the caſtle of 
Cariſbrooke to himſelf and the heirs male of his 
body, as a pretended ſatisfaction for certain ſums 
of money due to him from the king's exchequer, 
and for the duties of petty cuſtoms in the port of 
London, which formed a part of his inheritance. 
But he was ſlain in this firſt battle of St. Alban's, 
in the thirty-third year of king Henry the Sixth ; 
and was ſucceeded in the lordſhip of this ifland by 
his, ſon Henry, duke of Somerſet, who quitted the 
royal party on account of ſome diſguſt, and went 


Over 


ISLE OF WIGHT» 171 


over to that of the duke of York. Changing ſides 
a ſecond time, and returning to the king's ſervice, 
he was taken priſoner by the Yorkiſts at the battle 
of Hexham, in the ſixth year of Edward the Fourth, 
in the year 1464, and there beheaded. 

THis open quarrel having thus commenced, the 
duke, conſidering the violence and turbulent tem- 
per of the times, acted with too much moderation. 
After an interval of four years, in all which period 
the intriguing and enterprizing ſpirit of the queen 
and her adherents had been at work, to which the 
protector ſhould have directed a jealous eye, ſne 
aſſembled an army of ſufficient force to march 
againſt him. After the battles of Bloreheath and 
Northampton, ſhe attacked the army of the duke 
of York at Wakefield in 1460, wherein the pro- 
tector and his ſon were ſlain, with the young earl 
of Rutland who was then but ſeventeen years of 
age; whoſe heads, with that of the earl of Saliſ- 
bury, were ordered to be fixed on the gates of 
York, a paper crown being fixed on that of the 
duke, in deriſion of his pretended title. 

Ir is not our province at preſent to purſue the 
various events of this quarrel, as they are detailed 
at large in the general hiſtory of the kingdom; 
but only ſo far as the principal parties were con- 
_ nected with, and therefore naturally form a part 
of the hiſtory of this particular iſland. We are 
only concerned to remark, that Anthony de Wyde- 
ville, or Woodville, lord Schales, who was uncle 
to Edward the Fifth, had the grant of this iſland ; 

*- oY after 


172 HISTORY OF THE 


after whoſe death his ſon, earl Rivers, was ap. 
Pointed to it, with the caſtle of Cariſbrooke, and 
all other rights to the ſaid lordſhip appertaining, 
or in any ways belonging, with remainder to his 
heirs male. But after the king's deceaſe, he was 
confidered as an obſtacle to the ambitious views 
of Richard, duke of Glouceſter, which was a ſuffi- 
cient motive in thoſe times to ſecure him ; where- 
upon he was ſeized without delay, and, without 
the leaſt legal proceſs or pretence of juſtice, be- 
headed in Pontefract caſtle. 0 
Wurd Henry the Seventh came to the crown, 
in 1485, Sir Edward Wydeville, brother of the 
before mentioned Anthony, earl Rivers, was ap- 
pointed captain of the iſland; who, in the fourth 
year of that reign, undertook with a force which 
he had raiſed in the iſland, to aſſiſt the duke of 
Brittany againſt the king of France. For Sir 
Edward imagined that the king ſecretly favoured 
the duke's intereſt, though he did not openly eſ- 
pouſe his cauſe, being at that time engaged as a 
mediator between the contending parties; and 
though, to ſave appearances, as was preſumed, he 
had refuſed the requeſt of Sir Edward for permiſ- 
ion to engage in that cauſe, he concluded that a 
private attempt in the duke's favour would be 
agreeable to the king. Hence he repaired to the 
| ifland,'and convened the inhabitants by a general 
muſter. . He then propoſed his intentions to 
them, and added moreover that it would be an 


e ſervice to the king, and the higheſt 
| honour 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 173 


honour to themſelves; that it would manifeſt, 
beyond all other conſiderations, their ſpecial re- 
gard to him, the remembrance of which muſt be 
for ever fixed and imprinted on his mind. He 
farther obſerved, that he would not only employ 
his whole fortune to requite them for the part 
they ſhould take in-this expedition, but that he 
would alſo exert and uſe his influence and intereſt 
with his ſovereign in their favour. 

ArrE he had enlarged and ex patiated ontheſe and 
other ſimilar motives, to induce them to cloſe with 
his propoſals and embrace his offers, he proceeded 
to enforce the juſtice of the cauſe, in which they 
were about to engage; repreſenting that the am- 
bitious views of the king of France were to 
poſſeſs himſelf of the whole dukedom of Brittany, 
and alſo of the duke's daughter who was the law- 
ful wife of Maximilian king of the Romans. But 
if theſe deſigns were ſuffered to ſucceed, and 
ſhould not be checked in ſeaſonable time, that a 


dangerous and troubleſome neighbour would: be 


at their doors, inſtead of their ancient and good 
ally, the duke of Brittany. 
Having effectually addreſſed them in this pa- 


thetic ſtrain, great numbers of the inhabitants 
joined his ſtandard, and prepared themſelves to 
join in this expedition; out of whom he ſelected 


about forty gentlemen, and four hundred of the 
ſtouteſt of the commonalty, with whom he em- 


barked in four veſſels at St. Helen's. Their dreſs 


conſiſted of a white coat, with red croſſes; and fif- 


N 3 teen 


1 HISTORY OF THE 


teen hundred of theduke's forces were dreſſed in the 
fame uniform, which was deſigned to deceive the 
enemy, and to make the auxiliaries appear the 
more numerous. The battle of St. Aubin's in 
Brittany unhappily decided the fate of theſe he- 
| Foes; for the duke's forces were defeated, and Sir 
Edward was ſlain. All thefe valiant men, except 
one boy, who brought home the melancholy ti- 
dings, periſhed in the conteſt, though worthy of a 
better fate; and this iſland had long caufe to 
mourn the difaſtrous event of this expedition, 

fince there was ſcarce a family in the iſland, which 
did not loſe ſome relation. Sir Edward died un- 


married, and conſequently without any heirs. 


As the laws and ſtatutes of this kingdom have, 
from time to time, arifen out of unforeſeen evils 
or accidental advantages, this expedition was pro- 
ductive of a ſtatute, which had in view the popu- 
lation of the iſland ; the purport of it was, to pro- 
Hibit the inhabitants from holding farms, lands, 
or tithes, of the value of more than ten marks an- 
nually. But fuch a ſtatute could not poſſibly re- 
main in force for any confiderabe period of time; 
from the continual fluctuation of the value of 
money; and it has been greatly doubted, whe- 
ther ſuch reſtrictions ha ve anſwered the purpoſes 
for which they were deſigned. Others have alfo 
_ ſuggeſted, that to make any law of this nature 

permanent, the quantity of land ſhould be con- 

fidered, rather than the rent; which may perhaps 
be liable to fewer objections, * cannot be ap- 
plied 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 175 


plied without many and various inconveniences 
to general practice. 

IT may not be unpleaſing to ſome of our readers 
to notice in this place, though it neither occurs in 
order of date, or immediately relates to the ſub- 
ject of this chapter, the ſerious evils which this 
principle produced at the time of the reforma- 
tion in the ſucceeding reign of Henry the Eighth. 
Many of the churches belonging to the abbies 
and priories were then ſtripped ſo extremely, as 
to be reduced to an annual ſtipend of ſix, eight, 
or ten pounds, more or leſs, excluſive of almoſt 
every other means of augmentation. If ſuch a 
pittance was then barely ſufficient to maintain a 
ſtipendiaty curate, let any one judge what pro- 
portion it now bears to ſuch a maintenance. By 
the act of queen Anne, ſome ſmall relief has 
been obtained for theſe lamentable effects of re. 
formation; but before that time they had remain- 
ed in that unhappy condition for about one hun- 
dred and ſeventy years, in which interval the value 
of money had been greatly diminiſhing, and the 
ſtate of moſt of them is very far from enviable, 
and ſcarcely competent, with the effects of that 
act, to ſupport an incumbent in due character. 

Our readers will excuſe this ſhort digreſſion 
from the main ſubject, to which we have been na- 
turally led from the nature of that ſtatute of king 
Henry the Seventh, and the misfortunes it was de- 
ſigned in future to prevent. Sir Edward Wydeville, 
the unfortunate projector andleader of that fatal ex- 

N 4 pedition, 


176 | HISTORY OF THE 


pedition, from the influence he had with the in- 
habitants, was probably lord of the iſland, and 
perhaps the laſt who enjoyed that title; for we 
have no accounts that it was ever given away from 
that time. The king at this period had peculiarly 
in view the reduction of the power of the barons, 
who had on ſo many occaſions demonſtrated their 
influence in raiſing, fomenting, and maintaining 
civil commotions, to the great' diſtraction of the 
kingdom; and he reſolved, probably, never in 
future to throw into the hands of any of his nobles 
| ſuch a power, as the lordſhip of this iſland af- 
forded. 

Wr are from this time, therefore, to 1 
this iſland as remaining in the hands of the crown, 
and never transferred to any ſubject. From hence, 
then, we muſt date properly the commencement 
of captains and governors; as we ſhall proceed to 
ſnew in the next chapter. | 


CHAPTER 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 177 


CHAPTER. v. VIII. 


QF THE CIVIL HISTORY, AFTER IT WAS RETAINED 
| BY THE CROWN. 


Have ſtated the reaſons, which induced 


king Henry the Seventh to reſerve the juriſ- 


diction of this iſland to himſelf, it is next to be 


conſidered, that in the tenth year of his reign, 


which was about fix years after the aforeſaid ſta- 


tute was paſſed for limiting the extent of farms, 
and rendering thereby a greater number of inhabi- 
tants neceſſary for occupying the lands, Sir Regi- 
nald Bray obtained a leaſe of the iſland, with the 
caſtle or honour of Cariſbrooke and its appurte- 
nances. Beſides theſe he had all the crown lands 
in the ifland, with the manors of Swinſton, Brix- 
ton, Thorley, and Wellow, lately poſſeſſed by 
George duke of Clarence, ſubje& to the annual 
rent of three hundred and ſeven marks reſerved 
to the crown. This Sir Reginald had been a 
ſervant to the counteſs of Richmond, and was ex- 
tremely uſeful to the king in his negotiations, 
as well before as after his acceſſion to the crown. 
He was one of the knights of the garter, and juſ- 
tice of all the foreſts ſouth of Trent; beſides 
which, he had divers valuable N of land. 
He died without ifſue. 

. Sis Nicholas Wadham, grandſon of Sir John 
Wadham, was the next governor or captain. Sir 
John 


178 Mis roRT OF THE 


John was of an ancient family in Devonſhire, and 
married one of the coheirs of Stephen Popham; 
by which the manors of Avington, Shide, and 
Northwood, and ſeveral other eſtates in the iſland, 
came into his poſſeſſion. Theſe deſcended to Sir 
Nicholas. He married two wives; of which 
the firſt was daughter to Robert Hill, eſq. of 
Antony, by whom he had ifſue, the noted Nicholas 
Wadham, founder of Wadham college in Oxford, 
being his grandſon by this marriage. He marricd 
afterwards Margaret daughter of John Seymour of 
Wolf-hall in Wiltſhire, who was the ſiſter of Jane 
Seymour that was afterwards married to King 
Henry the Eighth. A handfome monument was 
_ erected for her on the north wall in Cariſbrooke 
church, where ſhe was buried, whercon is the 
figure of a lady in a kneeling poſture, but without 
any inſcription. The family coat is impaled 
with that of Wadham, who quartered the arms 
of Popham. Sir Nicholas died in the third year 
of Henry the Eighth. 

To underſtand more immediately the nature of 
a grant, which was conferred on the ſucceſſor. of | 
Sir Nicholas in the government of the iſland, we 
think it incumbent on us in this place to preſent 
our readets with 
« An Annual State of the Crown Lands in 

the Iſle of Wight, 23 Henry VII. 1507. 
Inſula Vecta. The Extent and clere valewe 
of all the Manors, Lands, Rents, Fines, and 
all other "os growing there from the Feſt of 
Saint 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 179 


Saint Michell tharchangell in the xxiij Yere of 
the Reyne of our Soverayn Lord King Henry 
the vijthe, above all charges, unto the ſame 
| Feſt of Saint Michell in the xxiiijthe Yere of 
our ſaid Soverayn Lord, that is to ſay by the 


Space of oon hole Vere. 


Fyrſt the Maner of Wroxſale xxj l. XJs. vd. 
The Maner of Whytefelde x111j/. 1xs. iijd. 


The Ferme of Bordewode lxvjs. viijd. 
The Ferme ofBowcombe iii“. 
The Ferme of Thorneß viihl. 
The Ferme of Nyton xvijl. xs. viijd. 
The Ferme of Frtsſhe water xxxj/. xiijs. iiija. 
TRE Ferme of Panne vijl. xiijs. viyd. 
XX 


The Maner of Swaynſton iiijvl. ths. xjd. 


* 


The Maner of Bryxton xxxvJ/. xvjs. iiijd. ij 


The Maner of Thorley xxx/, vijs. vd. 
The Maner of Wellowe xvl. xijs. 
The Fee Ferme of the Towne 

of Newport XXiit/. ijs. ijd. 
The Fee Ferme of the Towne THR 

of Bradyng liijs. Hijd. 
The Fee Ferme of the Towne 175 

of Yernemouth XXs., 


The Juſtement of the Foreſt liijs. iiija. 
The Ferme of the Conyes at 

Urreys Grove ii. 
The Liberte of the Iſland xviij/. xvijs. iijd. 


The 


180 


The Rent of Whytehedd's 


HISTORY OF THE 


lands there, 


Ward to the king which is by the 
Yere ix/. xvijs. nowe being in the Hands 


of my Lord of Cantbury. 


The Rent of Grace Hay- 
nowe's Lands, Ideot 


vil. ts vijg. 06. 1j. 


Sm. tolis. ccccvijl. vs. vjd. 


— 


Payments in the ſaid Vere. 


Fyrſt to the Steward and Re- 
ceyvor for his Fee there 


XXI. 


Itm. to Richard Weſton Rn- 


ger of the Foreſt there 


VI! xiijs. iiijd. 


Itm. to Thomas Darell (Ilxs.) 
and William Clyfton (xls.) 


Kepers of the Foreſt 


Itm. to the Keper of the 


King's oold Parke there by 
the Yere 
' Itm. to Stephyn Bulle hs: 
per of the Caſtell there 
Itm. to Thomas Moreyne 
firme Bayly 
Itm. the Auditor's Fee 


Itm. for Mete and Drinke 


of Grace Haynowe Ideot 
for lij Wekes every Weke 


CS. 


Ixs, 


151 10 ys: viijd. 


"oY 
XXF, 


xijd. for the ſaid Grace 


Haynowe 


lijs. 
| Itm. 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 181 


Itm. for kyrtylles Smokks 
and Kerchowes and other 
neceſſarie Gere for the ſaid 
Grace Haynowe | xiijs. iiijd. 
Itm. for the Repacons of tre 
Caſtell with the Expences 
of Sr. Amys Pawlet and 
other the King's Comi- 
ſſions. in the ſaid Ile this 
Yere as hit appereth by 
divs. pcelles in a Quer 
hereunto annexed | xxvl. 14. ob. 
Itm. delived. to the ſaid Sr. | 
Amys Pawlet by the Hands 
of Thomas Moreyn firme 
Bayly of the Iſle as apper- 
eth by a Bill in dented here- 
unto annexed bering Date 
the xxixthe Day of Jule, 
the xxiij Yer. of the Reyne 


of our Sovayn. Lord King 10 
Henry the vijthe vil. xiijs. uid. 3; 
Irm. payed unto Sr. Amys 41 
Pawlet forſaid by the Hands 4, 
of the Ryve of Swaynſton _ 959 Ir 
of the Law Day Money | i 
there holden at Hoktyde 3 
laſt paſt to the King's Uſe Ll 


with a Fyne of xs. xxiijg. iiijd. 
Itm. for the Coſts in the 17 
Tyme 


182 HISTORY Or THE 


Tyme of Declaracon of 


the Accompts xIvjs. viijd. 
, XX | 
Sm. of the Payments iiijx“. iiijs. ixd. 96, 
Reſteth due cccxvijl. viijd. 0b. 
— — 


Memor. of a Scape of a Fellon by the Con- 
alte. of the Towne of Yernemowth which 
reſteth uppon theym as appereth in the 
Court Rolles.” | Cs, 


Sik James Worſley was next appointed captain 
of the iſland, in 1511. He was keeper of the 
| king's wardrobe, and a younger brother of a very 
ancient family of that name in Lancaſhire, and 
had been many years page to Henry the Seventh. 
His grant of captain of the ifland was for life, with 
a ſalary of ſix ſhillings and nine pence a day for 
himſelf, two ſhillings for his deputy, and fix pence 
each for thirteen fervants. He had alſo a rever- 
ſionary grant of the office of conftable of Cariſ- 
| brooke caſtle, when it ſhould become vacant, and 
by the ſame commiſſion was appointed- captain of 
all the forts in the ifland. He was alſo ſteward, 
ſurveyor, receiver, and bailiff of all the crown 
lands; and was allowed to retain his ſalary from 
the monies he received, or to take the ſame from 
the king's receiver in the county of Southampton. 
Befides theſe appointments, he had the following 


honourable and confiderable privileges conferred 
| | on 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 183 


on him; as keeper of Cariſbrooke foreſt and park, 
with a fee of two ſhillings per day, and warden 
and maſter of the duckcoy, ſometimes corruptly 
called decoy, of wild fowl, not only within the 
ſaid park and foreſt but throughout the whole 
iſland. He had alſo power to leaſe the king's 
houſes, demeſne lands, and farms, either by leaſe 
of years, or by copy of court roll for lives, where 
the lands had been paſſed uſually in that mode, 
reſerving always the old rent in all ſuch leaſes and 
copies. On him alſo was conferred the power and 
authority of ſheriff and the office of coroner in the 
iſland, with return of all writs, execution of pro- 
ceſs, and other acts to that office appertaining, to 
the ſole excluſion of the ſheriff of the county or his 
deputy, except in caſes of default of the faid cap- 
tain. He was alſo the clerk of the market of the 
borough of Newport. 

PzRHaes we ſhould have add that Sir James 
had lately married the daughter and heireſs of Sir 
John Leigh, when he was firſt appointed captain 
of the iſland; who had been indulged with a diſ- 
penſation to hold the manor of Appuldurcombe, 
with the the priory of Cariſbrooke, &c., though 
pointedly and expreſsly contrary to the act of par- 
lament already alluded to in the preceding chap- 
ter, which limited poſſeſſions to the 
value of ten marks annually.“ It is in“ See p. 174. 
old Latin, with all thoſe abridgments, 
abbreviations, ellipſes, &c. &c. which were ſo 
generally in uſe in thoſe times; and though we 

cannot 


184 HISTORY OF THE 


cannot do juſtice to it, by giving a fac ſtmile copy, 
we fhall endeavour to give as faithful a tranſlation 
ol it as poſſible, for the information or ſatisfac- 
tion of our curious readers. From hence we ſhal] 
ſee the means by which the fine manſion of the 
priory of Appuldurcombe came into the hands of 
the Worſley family, its preſent poſſeſſors. 

« A Diſpenſation granted by Henry VII. to 
Sir John Leigh, &c. to hold the Manor of Ap- 
puldurcombe, the Priory of Caretbrooke, Cleve- 
land, and Whiteſhall, by Leaſe, at the ſame 
Time contrary to an Act of Parliament. Dated 
at Weſtminſter, 3d. Nov. 20 Henry VII. A. D. 

: T505%. | | N 
HENRY by the Grace of God King of Eng- 
land and France and Lord of Ireland ro all to 
whom our preſent Letters ſhall come Health 
WHEREAS John Leigh alias Sir John Leigh 
of the Iſle of Wight in the county of South- 
ampton and Agnes his Wife and Joan Fry the 
Daughter of the: ſaid Agnes have poſſeſſed and 
held and do poſſeſs and hold the Manor or 
Priory of Appuldurcombe with its Appurte- 
nances within the ſaid Ifland for the Term of 
thirty-five Years not yet complete and ended 
from the Surrender and Conceſſion of the Ab- 
beſs and Convent of the Monaſtery of the Order 
of Saint Clara without Aldgate in the City of 
London the Date of which Surrender and Con- 
ceſſion is recorded to be on the Feaſt of Saint 


Michael the Archangel in the fourte-nth Year 
of 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 185 


bf our Reign AND whereas the ſaid John Leigh 
alias Sir John Leigh and Agnes his Wife have 
| alſo held and poſſeſſed and do hold and poſſeſs 
the Priory of Cariſbrooke within the ſaid Iſland 
with all and all Manner of Manors Lands and 
Tenements Services to be rendered Meadows 
Paſtureand Liberty of Paſture Franchiſes Recto- 
riesabroad Penſions Portions Tithes Oblations to 
be made and Emoluments with all and fingular 
the Advantages and Appurtenances whatſoever 
as well within the ſaid Iſland as without to the 
ſaid Priory of Cariſbrooke in any Way belong- 
ing or appertaining Advowſons of Churches 
only excepted for the Term of twenty and five 
Years not yet complete and ended from the 
Surrender and Conceſſion of the Prior and Con- 
vent of the Houſe of John of Bethlehem of 
Shene in the County of Surrey of the Order of 
Carthuſians the Date of which Surrender and 
- Conceſſion is recorded to be on the twenty third 


Day of the Month of June in the nineteenth 


Year of our Reign AND whereas the aforeſaid 
John Leigh alias Sir John Leigh and Agnes his 

Wife and the aforeſaid Joan Fry have alſo held 
and poſſeſſed and do hold and poſſeſs a certain 
Paſture called Cleeveland within the ſaid Iſland 
with its Appurtenances for the Term of their 
Life and the longeſt Liver of them in Demeſnes 
which came from the Surrender and Conceſſion 
of Thomas Cooke and Joan his Wife John 
Gilbert Eſquire and Joan his Wife and Robert 


. Oo Gilbert 


126  _nrsrToRY or THE 


Gilbert the Son and Heir apparent of the ſaid 
-Johnand Joan of which ſaid Surrenders one Sur- 
render was dated, viz; of the aforeſaid Thomas 
Cooke and Joan his Wife on the ſeventh Day 
of March in the twenty firſt Year of the Reign 
of King Edward the Fourth and the other Sur- 
render, viz. of the aforeſaid John Gilbert and 
joan his Wife and of the aforeſaid Robert Gil- 
bert is dated on the Feaſt of Saint Michael the 
Archangel in the ſecond Year of the Reign of 
King Richard the Third AND whereas the 
aforeſaid John and Agnes and the ſaid Joan 
Fry have held and poſſeſſed and do hold and 
poſſeſs two paſtures called Southale, Wabaruys 
with their Appurtenances within the ſaid Iſland 
as Tenants at the Will and Pleaſure of Edward 
Waite Gentleman and Jeffery Gryme and Alice 
his Wife of the aforeſaid Iſland KNOW ye that 
we of our ſpecial Grace and of our own certain 
Knowledge and free Motion have given Licence 
and granted by theſe Preſents for ourſelves and 
our Heirs unto the aforeſaid John Leigh alias 
Sir John Leigh or by whatever other Name he 
may be known and to Agnes his Wife and to 
the ſaid Joan Fry that they and either of them 
together or ſeparately may in their own Right 
have hold enjoy and poſſefs the ſaid Manor or 
Priory of Appuldurcombe and the faid Priory 
of Cariſbrooke with the Appurtenances and 
other Premiſes and the aforefaid Paftures with 
all and-fingular of their Appurtenances accord- 


ing 


ISLE OF WI CHT. 187 


ing to the Manner Tenor and Effect of the 
aforeſaid Surrenders and Conceſſions by them 
or any of them before the Date of theſe Preſents 
made ſurrendered and taken without Fee or Re- 
ward for or by Reaſon of the Poſſeſſions of the 
aforeſaid Lands or any of them to us or our 
Heirs due or to be ſatisfied for during the 
Terms aforeſaid although they exceed the Value 
of ten Marks annually contrary to the Tenor of 
a certain Act of Parliament paſſed at Weſt. 
minſter on the thirteenth Day of January in the 
fourth Year of our Reign any Declarations or 
Summonſes thereupon publiſhed or iſſued or 
any other Act Statute or Ordinance retroſpective- 
ly made or Penalty impoſed Before theſe Times 
to the contrary notwithſtanding. IN Witneſs 
whereof we have cauſed theſe our Letters to be 
made Patent. WITNESS ourſelf at Weſt- 
minſter the third Day of November in the 
twentieth Year of our Reign. 

Given by the King himſelf and with the Au- 
thority of Parliament aforeſaid.” “ 


On the death of Sir James, in the twenty-ninth 
year of Henry the Eighth, his ſon Richard Worſ- 
ley, eſquire, was honoured with the office of 
captain of the iſland. A curious order from the 
king to this Richard has been preſerved, reſpect- 
ing the game in the royal demeſnes of this ifland ; 
and as he afterwards paid a viſit to the captain of 
the iſland, and was entertained by the ſaid captain 

| O 2 at 


188 | HISTORY OF THE 


at Appuldurcombe, it was probably. deſigned to 
operate as a preſervative of the game, that the 
king might have the more ſport and diverſion in 
the exerciſes of hawking and the chace. For its 
tenor and form we preſent it to our readers as a 
matter of curioſity, not unworthy of their atten- 
tion. 

ORDER from Henry VIII. under his ſign ma- 
nual to Richard Worſley, Eſq. Captain of the 
Iſle of Wight, to prevent any Pheaſants or Par- 
tridges being killed in the Ifle of Wight. | 

e TRUSTY and welbeloved we grete yo" 

| well and being. crediblye enfourmed that y- 
Games of Partriche, and Feſant wi. in that o* 
Iſle of Wight is muche decayed by the Pmiſſion 

and Sufferaunce of ſuche lewd Pſons as for their 
pryvate Lurres contrary to our Lawes and Plea. 

ſure doo dailye w*. Netts and other Engyns 
take the ſame. Yo" ſhall undreſtande that 
mynding to havie the ſayd Games of Ptriches 
and Feſant cheriſhed wi. in our ſayde Ifle as well 
for our Diſporte and Paſtyme if we ſhuld 

chaunce to repayre thither. As for our Furni- 
ture at Sundry our Hono®*. Manors and Houſes 
which from Tyme to Tyme We entende to re- 
pleniſhe wi. the Score of the ſame Iſle as Nede 
ſhall requyre Our Pleaſure and Commaunde- 

ment is that yon ſhall not only uppon Monicon 
to be by you hereof gyven to the Inhabitaunts of 
the ſayd Iſle have diligent Regarde and Vigilant 


Eye that no Man of no Degree or Condicon 
kill 


ISLE OF WEGHT. - 189 


kill any Feſant or Partriche wi. Net, Engyne, 
or Hawke on any our propre Lands in the 


ſame Iſle, taking the Netts and Engyns of all 


ſuch as ſhall attempte the contrary and fur- 


ther puniſheng the Ptyes ſoe offending as to 


your Wiſdom ſhal be thought convenyent. 
But alſo that yo“. ſhall adviſe all the reſt of 
the Owners and Inhabitants there at or Con. 
templacon alſo to ſpare the ſame Games in 


their owne Grounds, ſpeally abſteyning to take 


or ſuffer to be taken any Feſant or Partriche 
wi. Netts and ſuch Engyns as totally deſtroy- 
eth the Brede of the ſame wherein yon. ſhall 
doo unto us acceptable Service. And thieſe 
our Lres ſhall be your ſufficient Warraunt and 
Diſcharge in that Behalf. Geven undre our 
Signet at or. Mano". of Otland the 19". Daye 
of Decembre the 32 Yere of of. Reign.” 


Tur king accordingly repaired to the iſland, 


as he propoſed, and was there attended by his: 


favourite the lord Cromwell, who was at that 
time conſtable of Cariſbrooke Caſtle. When his 
lordſhip was attainted and afterwards executed, 
this office was alſo conferred on Mr. Worſley, 
who had, as we have obſerved, before been ap- 
pointed captain or governor. of the iſland. He 
continued to hold theſe. offices till the death 
of Edward the Sixth, and was one of the com- 
miſſtoners for the ſale of church plate on the ſup- 
preſſion of religious houſes during that reign, and 


O3 conſe- 


"EP - 2 — — - - PE 


F Se or . 


4 , 8 4 * 2 8 © 2 pl 7 _ 2 = 
— — + oi era ak r — 0 oy 
KK OY OE SE 2 BI PPE 

— 4 - - E \ * 


n 
"Y 8 * 
ES 

. = 


6 hot. ” e 

AG _ 2 2 * * YT 
at » * ö 
a% 


N © — — 
2 8 . 
2 4 
l — — 
I”. = - — —- - E = v2 
2 3 = 2. Cate 2 nf 9 — — . 8 
2 — *** ER a ns 20 aj mw 3 5 Sg n 


" FE. ha . 
. — = 7 _ 
DOT 2 8 
Er SES. ab. at " 


_ 
IT *: 


6,3 
E oe © — 


3 2 
1 
. 
q 
4 
«i 
4 * 
"WE 
of 
4 
4, 
1 ut 
Ws. 
fl 171 
Ms 
melt” 
Ul 
4 
th 
I : 
_ 
wat 
1 
Ver 7. 
WW 
"= 
0 
4 * 
= i 
is . 
"Mn 
7 on ] 
<4 vo 
- * 
"= 
8 7 
-£:3 
l 
2 
„ 
50 
cg 
41 
WO 
l 1 
7 
% 
1 2 
1 we 
To 
\ of 
# 
7 


1 
18 

2% 
4 


n - 
— XY . i 


*. Ic * 
Ei I 5 


A 
Ae 


281 
Ah, ag er 


ge - = 


— 


2 


4 
1 
3 
; 
* 
* 
E 
4 


— 


166 nis rok OF THE | 


eotiſequently an active member in promoting the 
reformation. Theſe circumſtances pointed out 
that his conduct muſt be obnoxious to queen 
Mary, and therefore he very prudently reſigned 
his offices on her acceſſion. 

By the appointment of captain Girling as his 
ſucceſſor in the government of the iſland, it may 
be inferred, though no particulars are recorded of 
him, that he was no way averſe to a feſtoration of 
the Romiſh religion; but this is all Which can be 
ſaid reſpecting his conduct. 

Ox the death of queen Mary and the Aeehon 
of queen Elizabeth in 1558, Richard Worſley was 
reinſtated as captain or governor of the ifland and 
conſtable of Cariſbrooke caſtle. As a prelude to 
this appointment, he accompanied lord Chidiock 
Paulet, ſon of the marquis of Wincheſter, and go 
vernor of Portſmouth, in a joint commiſſion to 
ſurvey and repair the fortifications there; he was 
alfo jointly commiſſioned with a gentleman of the 
name of Smith to put the forts in the ifland in a 
ſtate of defence, to repel or at leaſt to check the 
progreſs of a French invaſion which was at that 
time apprehended, Four months after this he 
received his commiſſion as captain of the ifland ; 
which we are ſorry that our limits in this place 
will not permit us to introduce, 
Auoxds r other inſtructions Which this com- 
miſſion contained, the uſe of harquebuſſes was 
ordered to be introduced; and if, in any reſpects 

he ſhould hereafter find that his legal authority 
| was 


191 


was deficient, and inſufficient for the due admi- 
niſtration of juſtice and the good government of 
the iſland, he was ordered to ſignify the ſame to the 
queen's majeſty and her council. But his affability 
and prudence rendered ſuch appeals unneceſſary; his 
directions were readily complied with; his ſug- 
geſtions eagerly purſued to defend the ĩſland againſt 
any enemy. Whatever he deemed neceſſary, was 
immediately adopted; and the proviſion of field 
pieces by the different pariſhes, of which we have 
already taken notice, demonſtrates their alacrity 
in ſeconding his plans of defence. 
— Bxs1Des theſe ſervices, we alſo find him em- 
ployed by the queen in fortifying the ſea coaſts ; 
and he was afterwards ſent with Sir Hugh Paulet, 
captain of the iſland of Jerſey, and others, to ſur- 
vey and order forts for the protection of that iſland 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 


and Guernſey. In his more particular department 


as captain of the iſle of Wight, he was very aſſidu- 
ous in bringing the people to the uſe of fire arms; 


and for this purpoſe he introduced an armourer 


into Cariſbrooke caſtle ; and eſtabliſhed him there 
to make harquebuſles, and to keep them in order. 
He held the command of this iſland till his death 
in 1565. | | 
Or his particular ſervices in the preparation of 
forts, and the defence of the iſlanders againſt the 
French, when they made a deſcent upon the 
iſland, we have already treated in ſome preceding 
chapters. 
Evpwarp Horſey, Eſq. who ſoon after received 
O4 the 


2 2 * ws 7 * — 2 
1 WES S 0 . 2-99 
I rn why od Bs . > 
59 8 2 5 S. — 


he ” * OR 2 n po 
"1 * * 8 1 4 2 22 D 2 
A IE, YE. rs. bo ET I WG IR 

. > 222 — 5 = CT” ors 2 == 


— — 3 3 
2 "27 Fo A — — 


. - 


192 | HISTORY OF THE 


the honour of knighthood, of an ancient family ar 
Melcombe-Horſey in Dorſetſhire, was the next 
who ſucceeded to the command of the iſland. | As 
a naval commander he had done his country moſt 
eſſential ſervice, by clearing the channel of the 
enemy's ſhips, which had greatly annoyed various 
parts of the coaſt, and injured commerce; and he 
had moreover the favour and confidence of the earl 
of Leiceſter, who repoſed in him the greateſt con- 
fidence on many occaſions. One inſtance may 
ſuffice to demonſtrate the favourable ſentiments of 
this earl, that he had received the hand of lady 
Douglas Sheffield from the hands of Sir Edward; 
though the marriage was performed ſo ſecretly, 
that the crafty earl found means'to elude it, when 
a freſh amour tempted him to deny the engage- 
ment he had entered into. 
Six Edward was very attentive to the defence of 
the iſland, and at the ſame time lived on the beſt 
terms and in perfect harmony, with the gentlemen 
in it. He was particularly anxious that it ſhould 
be well ſtored with game, and fuch was his care 
to increaſe it, that to his attention it has ever 
ſince had the character of affording an abundant 
. ſupply. It has been ſaid, that he gave a lamb for 
every living hare which was brought to him from 
the neighbouring countries; a circumſtance which 
ſtrongly indicates an uncommon attention to this 
object. He died in the year 1582, and was buried 
in the chancel of the church at Newport, where 
his yirtues are celebrated on his monument. - 
| SIR 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 193 


Six George [Elrey was the next who was ap- 
pointed to the command of this iſland. He was a 
near relation of queen Elizabeth, his father, Henry 
lord Hunſdon, being the nephew of queen Anne 
Boleyn. He held the office of lord Chamberlain of 
the houſhold, was a knight of the garter, and one 
of her majeſty's privy council. It was in the be- 
ginning of his government, that the ſeveral caſtles 
and forts of the iſland received a thorough repair, 
as we have ſtated already in the fifth 
chapter*, under the reſpective heads, * See p. 8g, &c. 
He afterwards ſucceeded to the title 
of lord Hunſdon. 

Tur conduct of Sir George was far leſs accom- 
modating than that of his predeceſſors, and no way 
_ agreeable to the gentlemen of the iſland. Accuſ- 
tomed to a ſociable and amicable intercourſe, they 
viewed his ſtern manners with a jealous eye, and 
watched his actions on that account, perhaps, too 
ſtrictly for their ſatisfaction. Hence aroſe various 
cauſes of diſagreement, and every proceeding, not 
fully ſanctioned by the example of his predeceſſors, 
was conſidered in the moſt unfavourable point of 
view. Every ſtep of this nature was beheld as an 
undue ſtretch of authority. They ſuſpected an 
intention of his wiſhing to render them ſubject to 
military power; and the circumſtance of a ſyco- 
phant miniſter of Newport having ſtyled him go- 
vernor in his prayer before ſermon, which had 


never before been aſſumed by any perſon com- 


andi! in the iſland though v we have frequently 


expreſſed 


—— . 
: . + 

- : | — P 

; Ede Set A 
_ l MS. Rn En A oo 


— — 
n Ie = — =. | i ** 
— InIrmeng nn 


TOTES 


— 
. 


g — Ya 
a ' Hunt — 
= 3 23 


194 HISTORY OF THE 


expreſſed the word captain or governor indifferent. 
ly, in the ſenſe of civil governor only), and his 
avowing it ſoon after, excited their alarm. 

Wur this unfortunate miſunderſtanding com- 
menced, the invincible Armada of Spain was pre- 
paring, with the avowed deſign of invading Eng- 
land. On this account a general alarm was ſpread 
throughout the whole nation, and particularly in 
this Hand, which, it was apprehended, from its 
_ expoſed ſituation, might have juſt cauſe to fear an 
hoſtile attack. We have already related in what 
manner the queen provided for its defence; and 
we muſt not omit to notice in this place, that 
Thomas Worſley and John Dingley, Eſqrs. were 
appointed by her majeſty's privy council to ſuper- 
intend and conduct the buſineſs of the reparation 
of the forts and caſtles in the iſland. At this time, 
therefore, it 1s not to be doubted, that the council 
thought them well affected to the queen and the 
government of the nation; a conſideration which, 
in point of argument, ſhould have ſome weight to 
determine the motives for Mr. n future 
conduct. 

Tus advantages which were ſeized by Sir George 

Carey for extending and increaſing his authority, 
as captain of the iſland, were ſuch as the ſtate of 
the times ſuggeſted, and conſiſtent with the prin- 
ciples and ideas of a military government; but 
directly adverſe and hoſtile to the ſentiments of a 
people, who had always been ready in caſes of 
danger, to repel an aſſaulting and:invading enemy. 

In 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 


In point of political prudence, it was a conduct 
extremely injudicious ; and reflected ſuch an opi- 
nion of their fidelity and allegiance as could not 
eaſily be forgot. It was in this view that the gen- 
tlemen of the iſland conſidered his conduct; and 
therefore the utmoſt jealouſy was excited, and a 
general diſſatisfaction immediately ſucceeded. 


Had Sir George, on the contrary, condeſcended 


to conſider, or allowed himſelf time maturely to 
weigh, the prevailing temper of the inhabitants; 
it can ſcarcely be doubted, that he might have 
induced them chearfully and readily to ſupport his 
views of defence. Their ſituation was ſuch as ma- 
nifeſtly pointed out the neceſſity of providing 
means for ſuch defence; which a little urbanity 
and familiarity on his part, would immediately 
have led them to adopt. But his rank and affinity 


to the queen gave a certain pompous and aſſuming 


deportment, which was highly diſagreeable; and, 


regardleſs of their approbation, and conſcious of 
ſupport from government, he adopted the meaſures 


which had been formerly taken in the reign of 
king Edward the Third for the defence of the 
iſland, without conſidering that the inhabitants at 
that time had fully conſented to the orders iſſued 
out upon that occaſion. The following remon- 
ſtrance was, therefore laid before the lords of the 
council, which will ſufficiently explain the jealous 
and watchful temper of the people at this time. 
Demaunds by the Gentelmene of the Iſle of 
Wight for Reformation of a certain abſolute 


Government 


195 


3 


. 5 « diva 2D *s A 3 
. 4 wn — * > | PIN * — — 28 „ 
... Irmo eb: 


2 1 bo 
= > 
- 
* 2 & ag Y 
: <A Sp 4 
mad ax 8 = - rene % > * 


196 HISTORY OF THE 


Government latelye aſſumede by the Captayne 
there, tendinge to the Subvertione of the Lawe, 
and tothe takinge awaye of the naturall Fredome 
of the Inhabitants there. 

« Firſte, we demand the Benefitte, Protection, 
due Courſe, and common Good of her Majeſties 
Lawes, frelie to be had and enjoyed, withoute 
any private Licenſe of the Captayne for the ſame 
to be firite obteyned and gotte ; that is to ſaye, 
ſerving of common Proceſſe, Execution of Writs | 
after Judgment, as well in Actions reall as per- 
ſonall, and all other Benefitte and Protections 
of the Lawe, the which we are born inheritable 
unto, and heretofore have enjoyede within this 

Iflande, and all other hir Majeſtie's Subjects 

within his Realme nowe do uſe and enjoye. For 

by Meanes of the Stop of the due Courſe of the 

common Lawe, and by Reaſon of the Protection 
of ſuch as itt ſhall pleaſe the ſaid Captayne to 
fivore in that Behalffe, there enſueth, not onelye 
the common Diſcreditt of the Countrie, as with 
whom no othere of hir Majeſtie's Subjects will 
willinglie meddle or trade, in buyinge, ſellinge, 
or lendinge, to the generall Staye of all our 

Commodities, and to the utter Wekeninge and 

Impoveriſhmente of the ſaid Iſland, but alſo the 

aboliſhinge of the uſual Trade of bargaininge of 

Eſtates in Land, and all other Chattels and 

Goods, where Payment in Parte or in Whole, is 

for any Tyme to be forborne, and the neygh- 

bourlie Courteſey of lendinge betwene Man and 
gs | Man 


ISI OF WIGHT. 197 


Man in the ſaid Iſlande: ſeeing the Meanes of 
having and Recoverie agaynſt ech Man's Due 
and Righte, is tyed to the Pleaſure of the ſaid 
Captayne, and therefore we demand herein 
Redreſſe. 3 
Item, whereas of late Tyme, againſte all 
Right, there hathe byn cauſeleſſe Reſtraynte 
made by the ſaide Captayne of ſellinge, utter- 
inge, or carryinge into the mayn Land of all 
other Commodities, viz. Fateware, Lambes, 
Corne, Buttere, Cheeſe, Woode, and ſuche liek 
Provifion, to the common Decaye of the Coun- 
trie, Breache of the uſuall Trade betwene us and 
others, in the ſaid mayne Land hade, and pry- 
vate Gayne of ſuch particular Perſons as it hath 
pleaſed the ſaid Captayne to licenſe agaynſte 
the Reſtraynte aforeſaid : now we demand that 
we maye, withoute anye ſuch Licenſes of the 
ſaid Captayne freelie tranſporte all our ſaid 
Commodities into the ſaid mayne Land, as in 
Tymes paſte of Righte we have done. 

Item, we demande that we may have our 
Markets frelie to be uſede, for all hir Majeſtic's 
good Subjects to reſorte unto, to buye, ſell, and 
carrie awaye ſuch Commodities as are there to 
be hade, withoute the ſaid Captayne's Licenſe : 
_ unleſs hit be uppon ſome ſpeciall and apparent 
knowen Cauſe to the contrarie. 

Item, we demand our free Paſſage over the 
Water into the mayne Land at all Times to be 
hade, without the ſaid Captayne's Licenſe, as 

in 


198 HISTORY OF THE 


in Tymes paſte we have always hade, unleſſe it 
be reſtrayned upon ſome ſpeciall Cauſe for hir 
Majeſtie's Service. 
« Item, whereas of late the Countrie -hath 
byn in ſome Sorte commanded by Authoritie to 
carrie with there Carts unto the Caſtell of Careſ- 
brooke greate Stoore of Woode for the ſaid Cap- 
tayne's Proviſion, leavinge their owne Buſynes 
undone, to the greate Hyndrance of the meanere 
Sorte of Men ; we demaunde that we maye nott 
be compelled thereunto by Commandement 
agaynſte the good Will * Fredome of the 
People. 

« Item, we PRE that there maye not be 
anye Impoſition or othere Conſideration taken 
or demanded by the ſaid Captayne, or anye of 
his Servants or Deputies, for the tranſporting 
of Corne, but that the Commoditie thereof may 
come and redounde whollie unto the Sellers, 
unto whome of Righte it dothe appertayne, and 
as heretofore it hathe byn uſed: and that Li- 
cence for the ſame maye be had at ſuche Tymes 
as the Proviſion of this Countrie will ſuffer hitt, 
and the general] Trade between hir Majeſtie's 
Subjects and Forreners unto whome it ſhalbe 
tranſported, ſhalbe open and permytt the ſame. 

« Item, we demand the Goode and honeſte 
Intreatie of all trew Merchants, beinge hir Ma- 
jeſtie's Friends, that ſhall happen to come unto 
anye Roade, Porte, or Cryke, within this Ifland 
for that greate Benefytt unto the Contrie here- 

5 tofore 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 199 


tofore hathe enſewed therebye ; and we demand 
that Pyracie, Robberie, and ſuche licke, tend. 
inge to the uttere Diſkreditt of the Contrie, and 
the Diſpleaſure of Almightie God, * be 
aboliſhed. 

« Item, we demand that there maye nott be 
anye unlawfull and unjuriouſſe Prohibitions, or 
Denyall made by the ſaid Captayne to impeache 
any Perſon of this Contrie to ſell or buye anye 
Land, which tendithe to the Overthrowe of the 
free Eſtate of the Inhabitants of this Iſland. 

_ _ *« Ttem, we fynde ourſelves muche greved with 
the gready and inſatiable Deſire of ſome Perſons 


to gett our Lands and rightfull Poſſeſſions, un. 


der Pretence and Colour of concealed Lands, 
which by the Purchaſeinge of the late Com- 
miſhon of Concealements, and the indiſcrete 
Dealinge therein, is apparentlie manyfeſted: 


whereas there is noo Doubte nor Colour of anye 


unjuſte witkholdinge of anye Lands within this 
Iſland from hir Majeſtie to oure Knowledge. 
Thomas Worſley, John Baſkett, 


Anthonie Lyſle, John Ryce, 
Thomas Hobſon, Thomas Meuies, 
John Mewys, William Oglander, 


Thomas Dennys, Edward Richards, 
Robert Dyllington, George Baſketr, 
Thomas Booreman, John Earleſman, 
John Lyghe, Edward Scotte. 


Ir may not be improper to remark as we pro- 


ceed, that theſe claims were leſs exceptionable in 
their 


* 
gs 
©) 
1 
* 
99 
4 4 
1 
Ty L 
7 
4 1 
1 
. 
17 
1 
Wt » 
1 
1 
* + 
1 1 
3 U 
wy © 
+ 
** 1. 
4 44 
hi. 
© 
_"—_— 
; 1 
BY ot 
1 1 
— 
+ v8 
WT, 
Pp 4: 

. _— 
0 "= A 
yo 
£28 

iN - 
128 

d $3 
V. 

Va 

1 

= - * 

: mF 

þ i 

c 4 

+8 J 

1 k 

1 

x 

4 

b o 
p 1 

» i 
- 

: "r{ 
of 
.- 
Ned 

1 

43F7 6 

=. 

: . 

1 
£1 

v PL. +44 
v7 

ey 

1 

1M | 

'' 

: TAY 

1 5 

1 . 4 

1 
. © 

708 
_ "BY - 
1 

19 af 

SY 
"* 

3 2 
1 + 

3 EF 


— 
— 3 
+ 


8 5 — — — cw Ry 
— S mn 
- ID a. 1 r 4 
* T> «4a Pen, — —— 2 * N : 
— * _—_ Lew © _ my & ©. 4 — 
rr 4 . = 3 
1 2 <<. ow 2 1 IJ — . 7. z s 


200 HISTORY OF THE 


their matter than in their manner, and perhaps, 
conſidered in the former point of view, were no 
more than what they were juſtly entitled to. The 
manner indeed is not equally defenſible, compared 
' with the language of the preſent age, though pro- 
bably at that time not ſo liable to be excepted 
againſt. But the ſeaſon was certainly as improper 
on their fide, as the conduct of the captain was 
injudicious on his part; and this circumſtance af- 
forded him an opportunity of miſrepreſenting them 
as diſaffected perſons, and inimical to the happi- 
neſs and proſperity of the ſtate. Mr. Dyllington 
was more peculiarly the object of Sir George Carey's 
reſentment, whom he accufed of a combination, 
together with the Papiſts, to diſturb the govern- 
ment ; and imputed to him the crime of fomenting 
and exciting a ſpirit of diſſatisfaction among the 
_ gentlemen of the iſland, to render him odious to 
the queen's council. He proceeded. ſtill farther to 
accuſe him of having uttered many threatening 
and alarming expreſſions ;. ſuch as, that he neither 
could nor would ſubmit to Sir George Carey's go- 
vernment ; that he had ſeditioufly exclaimed, 
Liberty! Liberty! and that if the abuſes com- 
plained of were not redreſſed, he would ſeek a re- 
medy with his poniard. | 
Mx. Dyllington, in conſequence of theſe charges, 
was ſummoned to appear before the privy council, 
which ſummons he complied with; and, on being 
interrogated on the ſubject of the accuſations, he 


acknowledged that he felt himſelf in a very uneaſy 
and 


ISLE OB WIGHT, 201 


and uncomfortable ſituation under the arbitrary 
proceedings of the captain; that the reſt of the 
gentlemen who had ſigned the repreſentation were 
equally uneaſy as himſelf; that they conſidered 
the tenor of the demands therein exhibited as 
their juſt and proper right; but he as ſtrongly de- 
nied, that he had ever threatened to have recourſe 
to a poniard, or that he had ſeditiouſly exclaimed, 

Liberty! Liberty! to excite the people to an in- 

ſurrection. 

Tas reſult of this examination before the coun- 
eil, was, that Mr. Dyllington was committed to 
the Fleet Priſon. But this did not ſubdue the 
ſpirit of the inhabitants, who thereupon addreſſed 
a letter to the lord chancellor, Sir Chriſtopher 
Hatton, and at the ſame time ſent another to Sir 
George Carey. As theſe letters will much better 
ſpeak the ſentiments of the iflanders, than any 
general repreſentation can do, we ſhall here ſub- 
join them in their own words. The firſt is that 
addreſſed to the chancellor. 

. With all humble Ductie ſubmytting e our- 
ſelves unto your Honour; whereas we under- 
ſtand by Mr. Robert Dyllington, that att his 
Appearance before yowe, and others of hir Ma- 
jeſtie's moſt honorable Privie Counſayle, he was 
commytted to the Fleete, and thinketh the 
Cauſe thereof to be for that he was charged to 
have ſollicited the articulatinge for the Libertie 
of the Iſle in a dangerous Tyme, as alſo that he 


was ſo deſperatelie mynded that he was redie to 
Ne. | POS „ uſe 


202 Hs rok OF THE 


uſe force therein. Theſe are to reſolve your 
Honour that the Tyme was taken when the 
greateſt Soare amongſt others (which was the 
Impeachment of the Sale and Byenge of our 

Lande) was greene, being certaynlie perſwaded 
that our Neighbour, Mr. Dyllington, would not | 
ſo much as thinke any Thinge agaynſt our moſt 
happie and bleſſed publick Eſtate of this Realme, 
and moſte afſured that he ſhould offer us great 
Wronge, which ſhould conjecture that we were 
to be labored to any ſuch Diſcontentment. And 
for any Force mente agaynſte our Captayn, al- 
though it pleaſeth him to objecte it, he hath 
byn ſufficientlie reſolved by us to the contrarie, 
and held himſelf therewith ſatisfied. For any 
Untrewth conteyned in the Articles wherewith 
we are charged, the Proffe thereof doth att your 
- Honours Pleaſure reſt upon the Creditt of thoſe 
that have ſubſcribed their Names thereunto. 
| Wherefore we humblie defire your Honours, as 
well for the Diſcharge of our Neighbour his 
Impriſonment, as alſo for that good Regard of 
our ſmall and poore Countrie to be hadd, that 
it may enjoye ſuch Freedome and lawfull Bene- 
fytt, as all other hir Majeſties Dominions doth. 
By which your moſt godlie and charitable Care, 
yowe ſhall bynd the Inhabitants thereof daylie 
to praye God that he will beautifie your moſt 
noble Mynd with ſuch Graces and Vertues, as 
ſhall cauſe Encreaſe to greater Honour, and 
thus commything the Trewth and Equitie of 
our 


IsIE OF WIGHT. 203 


our Cauſe unto God and your honourable 
Judgement, we leave any further to troble your 
Honour, this xviij of November, 1588. Your 
Hanours moſt humble att 


Commandment. 
Thomas Worſeley, William Meauſe, 
Anthonie Lyſle, Thomas Mewies, 
Edward Richards, John Rice, 
John Ligh, William Oglander. 


Edward Scott, 

In a few days after the above letter had been 
addreſſed to lord chancellor Hatton, the following 
was ſent to Sir George Carey, and ſigned, with. 

the change only of two names, by the tame per- 
ſons as the preceding. 

« Sir George, our Dutie remembred, whereas 
we underſtand by Mr. Robert Dyllington, he 
was commytted to the Fleete at his Appearance 
before hir Majeſties Counſell, for that yowe 
have enforced agaynſt him that he principallie 
ſollicited the articulating for the Liberties of 
the Iſland, and cauſed Mutenie in a dangerous 
Tyme, wherein we fund ourſelves greved to be 

thought Men to be labored to ſuch Diſcontent- 
ment, and whereof we knowe yowe were” reſolved 
otherwyſe. Nowe, notwithſtanding theſe Tro- 
bels, contrarie to your Promiſe, upon him fallen; 
as in the Begynnynge we offered yowe to be 

Judge of our Griefs, we contynew the like Cur- 

teſie to graunt yowe the Determination of the 

Cauſe, ſo that yowe releaſe our Neighbour his 

I , :, M_ 


204 | HISTORY OF THE 


Impriſonment, and contynew. the grauntinge 
not to impeach our Liberties heretofore enjoyed, 
which good Order of Dealing if yow. refuſe, as 
we hope yowe will not, yowe ſhall enforce us to 
that Courſe, that it ſhall ſtand upon our Creditt 
nether to confeſſe ourſelves ſo ſimple as to ſub. 
ſcribe to Untrewthes, nor for any Miſlike to be 
ſo blinded as-to demaund that which we were 
never denyed ; wherefore we deſire ſuch End as 
may content yowe, and warrant our Liberties, 
and commytt yowe to God's Protection. The 
Exxiij of November, 1588. 


Yours to command. 
Thomas Worſeley, John Leigh, 
Anthony Lyfle, Edward Scott, 


Thomas Dennys, John Erleſman, | 
Edward Richards, William Meux. — 
William Oglander, 


To this ſpirited letter, which neither breathed 
a culpable diſſaftection or a timid and unmanly 
remper, the following unpleaſant and uncouth 
reply was ſpeedily returned; and was little calcu- 
lated to quiet the apprehenſions or allay the diſ- 
contents of the inhabitants of the iſland. Allowing, 
however, for the natural diſpoſition of the captain, 
which had been manifeſted towards them, the lan- 
guage was probably more to be attributed to a 
deſire of getting rid of it without a degradation of 
his character, than to a wiſh for farther altercation 


or intention of future oppreſſion. We ſhall firſt. 
preſent 


ts1E or WIGHT. 205 


preſent our readers with his reply; and, after the 
conſideration of a few facts, leave them to infer the 
propriety of our conjecture. 


SIR GEORGE CAREY's REPLY. 

« Your Letter of the xxiij, I receyved the 
xxvi of this Inſtant, the which being myngled 
with a Curteſie carienge an incloſed Conſtrainte, 
and charginge of Surmiſes withowte Profes, 
contryved by the Cunyng of ſome of you, and 
conſented unto by the careleſs Regard of others, 
in briefe I thus anſwere. | 

© To that yowe charge me that before the 
Lords I enforced agaynſt Dyllington that he 
principallie ſollicited the articulating, and cauſed 

| a Mutenie in a daungerous Tyme, wherein yowe 
fynd yourſelves greved to be thought Men to be 
labored to ſuch Diſcontentment, if he have wryt= 
ten ſo, and yowe ſo credulous to beleve him, 
the Lords her Counſell is able to diſprove you 
bothe. Bur that he principallie ſollicited the 
articulating, and ſought what in him laye to 
breede a Mutenie betwixte ſondrie Gentlemen 
of the Iſland and me, beſides ſlaunderous Un- 
trewthes made in his Reports to my Diſcreditt 
to the Lords, I did affirm, and will juſtifie the 
ſaid Affirmation trewe, to his Shame that ſhall 
dare to ſaie the contrarie. Wherein what ſmall 
Cauſe any of yowe hadd to be agreeved, and 
what great Cauſe I have to diſdayn your taking 
Parte with him, I wiſh their Lordſhips may be 
Fy - Judges. 


= * 90 
F 
Ci 
* 
þ | 
— 
il 
1 # 
i | 
4 + 
ü 
w » 

* 

7 
Eo 
: * 
＋ 5 
CH 

* 

* 
It 
„ 

þ ** 
WY 
48] 
on 5 
Wo 
7 * 
138 
1 
1 
£ = 
A 4 
TW 
93 
$1 . 
N ; 
3 
£5 "Tl 
" 
—— 
* 4 
* 
a 
— 
e 
1 
a 
, — 
* 
7 
1 
1 
"= 
N 

9 

4 * 
Ss 
1 
EN 
7 +. 
"1 
1 
-” 

U 4 
1 

: 2 
1 
Fa 

* 1 
72 

f 

wi 4 
_*M 
I 
= 
2 
H. 
1 
© 
ng 4 
_ 
WH . 
PF 
b 
RT. 
* . » 
g F. 
1 * 
F 
* 10 % 
= 
1 7. 
Ft 
4 
1 
2 
9. 
E 
4.8 

* 

1 is 

F * 

1 

. 

* 

bs 
= 
1 
7 - 
"Lil 
17 
'* Ill 
wp 

"mg 

bs 
8 1 
z FF. 
« 8 
it by 
6% 
5 i 
; 4 
| * 

1 1 

= - 

e 

at 
x" 1 
"el 
i} 131 
+48 9 
. b 
9 
n 
72 
. 4 
© - * 
en 
N 
1 
74 
þ | 
WW 
Ts 
© as 
£2 
iP 
. ; 

6 __ 

4 1 

i 
1 „ 
\ * 7 
" 5 
1 4 
8 
» 3 
7 
3-39 
bs 

. 

Fn N 

1 « 

3 5 

55% 
31% 
. 
8 
y 

. 2 l 
73 
t 1 
Wal; 

Bd 

wrt 

. 

8 

$ 

. 144, 5 

1 

. 1 

* 1 

87 

2. 

* 1 

AE 

y i.” * 

1 

N a 

"0 

* 

a 

J 

* 


206 | HISTORY OF THE 


Judges. In another Parte of your Letter yowe 
deplie charge me, that contrarie to my Promiſe, 
theis Trobles are fallen upon him, which is no 
lefſe untrewe then you ſo wryting undiſcreet 
and to be diſproved : for I knowe yowe cannot 
forgett that I wold never accept him into the 
Reconcilement made betwixt yowe and me; as 
knowinge his ſundrie private Injuries offered 
me, unleſſe his Submiſſion ſhould be ſuch as ſixe 
of yowe ſhould think fytt for me to receyve, 
which none of yowe can faie to have byn ſithence 
performed, and therefore your Aſſertion verie 
injurious to laie Breach of Promiſe where none 

hath byn made. Thirdlie yowe offer that as at 
theBeginnyne yowe offered myſelf to be theJudge 
of your Greeves, that yowe will contynewe the 
like Curteſie to graunt me the Determination 
of the Cauſe, ſo that I releaſe your Neighbour 

of his Impriſonment, and contynewe the graunt- 
ing not to impeach your Liberties. If the firſt 
Parte of your Offer hadd not been yoked with a 
Condition of Conſtrainte, yowe had offered me 
a Matter worth Thanks, and but what in Rea- 
ſon I have deſerved at all your hands, but for 
the Conditions of your Obligation, I thus an- 
ſwere them, Dyllington, upon the full hearing 
and debating of his private and all your generall 
Cauſes at large, being heard what he could al- 

lege before the Lords of hir Majeſties Counſell, 
was by them commytted to the Fleete, and en- 
joy ned to what they thought fytt for him to be 
performed, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 207 


performed, in whoſe good Pleaſures his Libertie 

or Conſtreinte lyeth. Burt if it laye in me to 
| diſcharge him, aſſure yourſelves he ſhould there 
remayne untill the moſt gallant amongſt you 
ſhould dare to come upp to trye whether he were 
not fytt and likelye to kepe him Companie. To 
contynewe my Graunt not to impeach your Li- 
berties, 1s but what I have ever performed, and 
therefore determyn not to denye what I never 
thought fytt to refuſe yowe. Hir Majeſtie and 
the World may wyttenes the Care and Love that 
I have borne to the Countrie and People; pro- 
teſting that I hadd never Intent to extorte or 
injurie the meaneſt of them, defyeing his Mallice 
and chalinging him to the Tryall that thinketh 
I have done eyther more than I might, more 
than was fytt for me, or what I did not avow to 
be lawfull; and if anye of yowe ſhall dare to 
charge me with the contrarie, let him come up 
to ſpitt his Venome here in the Place of Indif- 
ference, and I doubt not but to retorne the Poyſon 
thereof to himſelf, and prove him eyther a Papiſt 
or a Miſliker of the preſent State. And becauſe 
yowe ſhall knowe howe clere I know myſelf 
from Towch of Reproof, in Dillington's Pre- 
ſence before the Lords, I recyted the Articles 
of your pretended Grieffs, whoſe Cenſure and 
Viewe of my Patent approved all my Actions, 
as himſelf can wytnes unto yowe. But if any of 
yowe ſhall inſiſt in the Demaunds of theſe fry- 
volous ſuppoſed Wrongs, I ſhalbe moſt gladd 
8 P 4 l that 


208 IrSToRX OF THE 


that he will come upp to open the ſmothered 
Surmiſes thereof; where, if I have injured yowe, 
yowe may ſone be releved, and if yowe have 
Injured me yowe may be reformed. Your Fa- 
vours to forbeare me in any Reſpecte as I deſire 
not, fo what any of your private Malice can do 
againſt me, I feare not; and whereas not an- 
ſwering your Demaunds yowe threten to take that 
Courſe that ſhall ſtand upon your Creditt not to 
confeſſe yourſelves ſo ſimple as to ſubſcribe 
Untrewthes, I with your Simplicities hadd not 
byn ſuch as it hath appeared, or that the lewde 
Perſwaſions of ſome fewe could not have drawen 

ſo manie of yowe to buyld your Opinions upon 
their Conceits and Malice. To conclude, that 
yowe may knowe what to expect during my Go- 
vernment in that Place, think and believe that 
what hath byn given me in Charge by hir Ma- 
jeſtie, what is warranted by my Patent, and 
what I ſhall fynd to be good for the Benyfytt or 
Strength of the Countrie during my Tyme, I 
will not forbear to execute withowte Reſpecte 
of anye. And ſo I commytt yowe to God. This 
xxvjth of November, 1588. 

Your Trynde, if fryndlie uſed, 

15 _ GEORGE CAREY.” 
To Thomas TWorſeley, Anthome Iyſke, 
Thomas Dennys, Edward Richards, 
Wilham Oglunder, ohm Leigh, Ea- 
ward Scott, John Ee leſnan, and 
Milliam Mewes, Gentlemen, or to 


any of them gyve this. 
| As 


— 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 209 


As no former inſtance occurs of averſion in the 
inhabitants to provide for their own ſafety and ſe- 
curity, and to co-operate in any meaſures which 
had heretofore been propoſed for the protection of 
the iſland againſt invaders; it is certainly reaſon- 
able to infer, as we have already intimated, that 
the whole of this miſunderſtanding originated in 
Sir George's unpleaſant and unaccommodating 
conduct. The iſlanders had hitherto not only 
_ concurred in every act recommended to them by 
government, but had almoſt conſtantly anticipated 
every requiſition for that purpoſe. If Sir George 
had coolly reflected on their late exertions, in 
providing a train of artillery for the general de- 
fence of the iſland, perhaps he would have deemed 
it prudent to make the meaſure he propoſed a 
matter of favour or general acquieſcence rather 
than of compulſion or neceſſity. The very ſame 
thing would have thereby been readily and agree- 
ably obtained, with mutual harmony and affection, 
which was thus obtruded and impoſed upon them 
by force. But as we have ſpoken to this already, it 
will be leſs neceſſary to enlarge here. So that from 
all theſe circumſtances taken together, it appears 
that they were more offended with the manner 
than the matter of his conduct; that diſtruſt and 
diſlike thereupon enſued, which affected their 
judgment and opinion of all his proceedings ; 
that ſuſpicion and alarm were ever upon the 
watch overall his actions; and that imaginary dan- 
gers preſſed forward to the view in all the public 

| tranſactions 


210 | HISTORY OF THE 


tranſactions of his government, from an unhappy 
bias and tincture of the mind, which led them to 
regard every thing, with a jaundiced eye. Per- 
| haps in this reſpect the mind of Sir George was 
not leſs tinctured with jealouſy and diſtruſt. 

TuxRx is little room to doubt of the effect of 
this remonſtrance, notwithſtanding the lofty tone of 
Sir George's reply to it. A better temper ſeems to 
have ſucceeded to this uncomfortable and unplea- 
ſing one already mentioned. It does not appear 
that Sir George or his ſucceſſors ever claimed 
afterwards the powers which had been ſo ſtrongly 
objected to; concluding, moſt probably, that the 
experiment would be dangerous, and ſubverſive 
of the public welfare in a time of common danger. 
The people, alſo, might be induced to reflect a 
little to what dangerous extremities a perſevering 
conduct might reduce them. If Mr. Dyllington, 
alſo, was ſoon after releaſed, of which we are not 
certainly informed, it would have much influence 
in effecting an accommodation of differences, or at 
leaſt of inducing the parties to its laying dor- 
mant, and tacitly conſigning it to oblivion. Sir 
George's government and his life expired with 
the queen's deceaſe, which ps about five 
years after. 

Brok we quit his hiſtory, which forms a diſ- 
tinguiſhed æra in the account of this iſland, we 
' ſhould not omit laying before our readers a curi- 
ous anecdote, which demonſtrates his great power, 
and at the ſame time ſhews his averſion to a claſs 


of 


SIE or WIGHT. 211 


of profeſſional men that has ſince increaſed to ſuch 
an alarming extent. We give it, on the autho- 
rity of Sir John Oglander's memoirs, and there- 
fore conſider it as genuine and authentic. * I 


« have heard,” ſays the Writer, “and partly 


e know it to be true, that not only heretofore there 
« was no Lawyer or Attorney 1n oure Iſland, but 
« in Sir George Carey's Time, an Attorney Com- 
« ing in to ſettle in the Iſland, was by his com- 


« mand, with a Pound of Candles hanging at his 


« Breech lighted, with Bells about his Legs, hunt- 
« ed owte of the Iſland; inſomuch as oure An- 
0 ceſtors lived here ſo quietly and ſecurely, being 
« neither troubled to London nor Wincheſter, ſo 
te they ſeldom or never went owte of the Iſland; 

« inſomuch as when they went to London (think- 
c ing it an Eaſt India Voyage), they always made 


NY 


Is the ſame memoirs, it is alſo recorded, that 
he reſided much at the caſtle of Cariſbrooke, and 
was very hoſpitable to thoſe who reſorted thither; 
that the iſland, in the time of his government, was 

in a moſt flouriſhing ſtate, and far exceeded that 
of any preceding period. 


We ſhall only add, that Sir George ſucceeded 


his father in his title of lord Hunſdon, and in the 
office of lord chamberlain, and was alſo a knight 
of the garter. He married Elizabeth, the daugh- 
ter of Sir John Spencer of Althorp in Northamp- 


tonſhire, and died in one thouſand ſix hundred 


and three. : 
Hexnary 


- 
J 
= 
' 
1 
* 
Is 
#214 


their Wills, ſuppoſing no trouble like to travaile.”” 


.. Tube < ro panned _—_ — cn — bn — — 


— 


212 | HISTORY OF THE 


Hrxgv, earl of Southardpton, was the next who 
was appointed captain of the iſland in the firſt 
year of king James the Firſt. He was a priſoner 
in the tower at the death of queen Elizabeth, and 
had been attainted for taking up arms with the 
earl of Eſſex. But on the acceſſion of king James, 


an act of parliament was paſſed, to reſtore him in 


blood, and he had a new patent of creation to the 
title of earl of Southampton, and was alſo made a 
knight of the garter. He was governor and captain 
of all the ifle of Wight, captain of the caſtle of 
Cariſbrooke, and all other caſtles and fortreſſes 
in the ſaid iſle, and conſtable of the caſtle of 
Cariſbrooke ; he was alſo warden of the - foreſt 
of Parkhurſt, and ſteward, ſurveyor, receiver, 
and bailiff of all the lands, woods, revenues, 
&c. of the crown, within the iſland. The 
moſt remarkable occurrence during .his govern- 
ment is the liſt of freeholders of the iſland, 
dich was preſented to king James at Bewley 
in the new foreſt, by ſpecial command, by 
Sir William Oglander, high ſheriff of the 
county of Hants, dated the third of February, 
one thouſand ſix hundred and fix. As it will 
afford matter of information to ſome, and of enter- 
tainment to others, we ſhall preſent to our read- 
ers a copy of that liſt, as hereunder is men- 
tioned. | 


ISLE OF WIGHT. ary 


« A Noate of the:Freeholders in the Iſle of 
Wight, 3 Februarii, anno 1606. | 
John Leigh, Knight. Thomas Worſley, Gent. 
John Mewes, Knight, John Somers, Gent. jan 
Richard White, Knight. àxoris. | 
William Lyſley, Knight. John Serleof Witcombe, 
William Oglander, Knt. Gent. | 
Richard Worſley, Eſq. William St. Croſſe, Gent. 
Thomas Bowreman, Eſq. Thomas Lovibond, Gent. 
William Mewes, Eſq. Edward Faden, Gent. 
Barnabie Leigh, Eſq. Alexander Weight, Gent. 
Thomas Cheike, Eſq. Richard Champion, Gent. : 
Thomas Hobſon, Eſq. William Shambler, Gent. 
Edward Richards, Gent. Emanuel Bad, Gent. 
Edward Dennys, Gent. Stephen March, Gent. 
John Dingley, Gent. Edward Loveing, Gent. 
Bowyer Worſley, Gent. Alexander Harvy, Gent. 
Edward Cleike, Gent. Edward Harvy, Gent. 
Robert Dillington, Gent. Michell Knight. 
Richard Baſket, Gent. John Fitchett. 
Barnabie Colnett, Gent. Henry Knotte. 
John Harvy, Gent. James Byſhop. 
George Faſhion, Gent. William Rive. 
John Rice, Gent. Henry White. 
Thom as Erliſman, Gent. William Facey. 
Thomas Erliſman, jun. Henry Joanes, jure uxoris. 
Gent. William Elemen. 
Thomas Budden, Gent. Edward Harbard. 
JohnSerleof Coſhin, Gent Peter Garde. 
George Serle, Gent. Michaell Holbrooke. 
Thomas Urrey, Gent. Joha Serle, of Sanham. 
William 


214 HISTORY OF THE | 


| William Colman. Robert Goodale. 


Richard Colman. John Goodale, 
William Howe. David Urrey. 
William Peare. John Dore, of Freſhwate,, 
William Nutte, John Godfrey. 
Thomas Legge. Richard Godfrey. 

Nicholas Newman. John Hancock. 
William Newman. William Broade. 
Stephen Blake. John Collens. 
John More. - Henry Godfrey. 

Peter Wadford. Richard Galpin. 
John Leach. William Temple. 
Thomas Bruſe. David Lacey. 
Andrew Legge.) jure uxo- William Lacey. 
ris. William Boye. 
John Rydge. _ Thomas Younge. . 
John Kyngeſwell, jure Richard Arnold. 
uxoris. Thomas e of Comp- 

John White, of Bockham. John Urrey, ton. 

William Meadmore. Thomas Bull. 
Edward Hay les. William Salter. 
John Cole. David Wavell. 
Edward Medmore. Thomas Wavell. 
John Dagwell. William Jackman. 
Thomas Dore, of Wel- William Bynches. 
low. Edmund Puckford. 


William Urry. 
Thus far is the liſt of freeholders i in this FR, 
in 1606.“ 
Tus earl of . continued to hold the 
government till December, one thouſand ſix hun- 


dred 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | 215 


dred and twenty-five; of whom it has been trans- 
mitted to poſterity, that he was juſt, affable, and 
obliging in his deportment to all; that he was 
univerſally eſteemed by all ranks of people; that 
the iſland was raiſed to a flouriſhing ftate by his 
mild and condeſcending deportment ; and that 
many gentlemen of great affluence and hoſpitality 
were induced to reſide there. during this period. 
An ordinary was maintained twice a week, on 
Tueſday and Thurſday, on St. George's down, 
| where thirty or forty knights and gentlemen fre- 
quently aſſembled to play at We with the 8 
vernor. | 
Jon, lord Cy, Sasse to the govern- 
ment of this iſland, after the death of the earl of 
Southampton. Whilſt he was captain of the iſle, 
the king conferred upon him, in leſs than ſix months 
after, the important office of ſecretary of ſtate, and 
he was afterwards appointed preſident of the coun-- 
cil. Theſe offices prevented his reſidence in the 
iſland, and therefore he appointed two lieutenants 
to govern it under him; which were, Sir Edward 
Dennis and Sir John Oglander. He died in the 
ſixth year of king Charles the Firſt, and was ſuc- 
ceeded as captain of the iſland by Richard, lord 
Weſton, who was two years afterwards created 
carl of Portland, and died in one thouſand fix hun- 
dred and thirty-four. oj 
Tur ſucceſſion of captain of the iſland was 
granted to his fon Jerom, earl of Portland, who 
preſided with much reputation and credit till the 
year 


— 


216 UTISTORY OF THE 


year one thoufand fix hundred. and forty-2wo, 


when the fatal diſſenſion between the king and 


parliament of England had riſen to a crifis. Our 
noble hiftorian, whoſe authority we may juſtly 


conſider as of the greateſt importance, has thus 


deſcribed the offence, which that virtuous body 
thought fit to entertain againſt his hoſpitable and 


ſociable deportment. He tells us, that“ the par- 
;* liament threatened the earl of Portland, who, 
« with extraordinary vivacity croſſed their expee- 
* tations, that they would remove him from his 


charge and government of the ifle of Wight 


(which laſt they did de facto, by committing. 


him to priſon without affigning a cauſe), and 


to that purpoſe objected all the acts of good 


« fellowſhip, all the waſte of powder, and all the 
_« waſte of wine, in the drinking of healths, and 


*« other acts of jollity, which ever he had been at 
in his government, from the firſt hour of his 
entering upon It,” 

Ws cannot have a more ſatisfactory. Ae 
of the high eſtimation in which this earl was re- 
garded by the inhabitants, than by the petition 
which they preferred to the parliament on this 
occaſion. A copy of it is here ſubjoined for the 
Information of our readers. 

«To the Honourable the Knights, Citizens, 
and Burgeſſes, of the. Houſe of Commons, aſ- 
ſembled in Parliament. 

The humble Petition of the Deputy Eilegds- 
nants and J uſtices of the Peace, the Mayors and 

Corporations 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 217 


Corporations of Newport, Newtown, and Yar-' 


mouth; and of the reſt of the Inhabitants of the 
Iſle of Wight. 


Preſenting to your gracious Conſideration 
our generall Griefe for the queſtioning of Jerom, 


earl of Portland, our noble and much henoured 
and beloved captayne and governor. 
The principal imputation, as we are given to 
_ underſtand, being a Jealouſy of his | Lordſhip's 
Inclination to Popery. 
For ourſelves, we have a pregnant Teſtimony 
amongſt us of his pious Aﬀection and Love to 
the reformed Religion, by a conſtant weekly 
Lecture at Newport, to which his Lordſhip is a 
principal Benefactor. So are there on the other 
Side, ſo ſmall Effects to be ſeen, of his Lord- 
ſhip's Diſcourſe or Practice that Way tending, 
that amongſt all the Inhabitants of this Iſle, we 


have not one profeſſed Papiſt, or, to our Know- 
ledge, popiſhly affected, ſo rare a Bleſſing, in 


theſe Times, as we ſuppoſe cannot be boaſted 
in any Tract of Ground of this Extent | in all the 

Kingdom of England. 

Some other weake Aſperſions uppon his Lord- 


| ſhip, we thought not worthy of our owne Re- | 


gard, much leſs dare wee preſume to remember 
them to ſo grave and wiſe a Senate; wee do 
therefore, at once, with this Petition preſent 
our humble and gratefull Acknowledgement to 
this greate and good Aſſembly, of the Care tha; 
is taken of our Weale and Safety, which we 
„ 8 | conceive 


Wo” 
A 7 
1 

1 
71 
q 


TEES 


te: Hud 


— 


. 


z r 
T7 3 
82 ME « 3 2 


— — n 2 — E — - 
FORE LO OE ICDL Sw . iy ee 
* — — — — 2 >> — a A . 

= 44 Das 4-6 * 4 4 5 - 


n 


-y - — 


218 HISTORY OF THE 


conceive can no Waye be better advanced and 

continued uppon us, than by your juſt Appro- 

bation of the Vigilance and | Fidelity of our pru- 
| dent and able Governor.“ 


Couranns the language of this petition, with 
the ſubſequent conduct of the inhabitants of the 
iſtand, it is not perhaps too much to infer, that, 
whilſt it fo ſtrongly approves the conduct of the 
earl of Portland, it concludes in ſuch a ſtrain, as 
not to militate with an attachment to the other 
party, if they ſhould afterwards prevail. The ex- 
preſſions of the laſt paragraph have a ftrong 
tincture of that fulſome adulation, which ſo 
| ſoon became the predominant characteriſtic of 
the age. 
Tuts petition was unavailing, and the earl of 
Ten hd was actually deprived of the government 
of this iſle by this uſurping authority. They had 
caſt their eyes on Philip, earl of Pembroke, whom 
they had reaſon to conſider as a nobleman better 
diſpoſed to ſupport their views and intereſt; and 
he was ſubſtituted to ſupply his place. Sir John 
Dingley had been deputy governor of the iſland, 
and on that account was ſuppoſed beſt to know 
its ſtate and condition. To him, therefore, appli- 
cation was made by the earl of Pembroke, to diſ- 
cover by his means whatever was thought to be 
intereſting or advantageous to the government of 
the. ſame; and Sir John, in anſwer to his requeſt, 


returned the following letter. 
« March 


 ISLE OF WIGHT, 219 


« March, 3 iſt. An. Do. 1642. 

4 n to your Lordſhip's Command, 

I have thought of the State and preſent. Condi- 
tion of the Iſle of Wight, moſt part of which is 
of my own Knowledge, the reſt from good 
Hands. The King hath the diſpofing of the 
Caſtles following, and conſequently hee that 
is choſen Captaine hath the ordering and diſ- 
poſing of the ſame. A Land Caſtle, or Fort, 
called Caſe-brook Caſtle, which ſtands near the 
middle of the Ifland, belonging to it is a 
Porter, and diverſe Gunners and Waiters, to 
| what Number I doe not well know; and withall 
there is an Armory for diverſe hundreds of 

Men, but the true Number I know not; and in 
that Fort is the Iſlands Magazine of Powder, 
both for itſelf and all other Caſtles, for all Ser- 
vices and Accomodations his Majeſty ſhall ap- 
point it; and by the Way I thought good to 
lett your Lordſhip know, that ſince Sir Henry 
Knowles, of the Green Cloth, got the Fee 
Farme of the Manor of Bucham, and what 

other Thinges I doe not well know, hee then 
gott away the Stables, Meadows, and Lands, 
worth 40 if not 50 Pound P. An. that always 
appertained to the Captaine of that Caſtle, which 
Stables, Land, &c. were called by the Name of 
Frognoll ; ſince which Time there hath bin, a 
poore homly Stable built up with a few Boards 
in the midſt of the Caſtle, adjoining to the 
Garden Wall, which muſt needs be very noyſome 


Q 2 and 


220 HISTORY or THE 


and unfitt to be in that Place. There is a Park 
alſoe belonging to the Captaine, which is 3 
Miles about; and there is alſoe a Common for 

the whole Country to putt in Horſe or Beaſts 
without Stint, which is called by the Name of 
Parkhurſt Chace; the King and conſequently 
the Captaine hath Fallow Deere in it, and doth 
keepe a Keeper and'a Rainger to keepe them 
and to looke unto them, that they do not ly in 
Mens Inn-grounds, which hath bin very much 
abuſd, by ſuffering the Deere to ly out and ſoe 
they are allmoſt quite deftroyd, and in my Tyme 
the Country hath quite deſtroy'd the Woods 
and Buſhes, and alſoe ſome have made Encroach- 


ment and have taken in ſome of the Common 


for private Uſe. Another Fort there is, called 
_ - Sandam Caſtle or Fort, to which belongs a 
Captaine“, and a Livetenant, and Gunners, and 
Waiters, but to what Number I know not, and 
ſince the Kinge new built it, he hath added 

more Waiters, how many I cannot fay, but 1 
believe, if it be well lookt into, it is but poorly 
man'd ſtill; conſidering this Fort is of greater 
. Conſequence than any other, for that it lies 

open uppon the maine Sea betweene France and 
us; tis requiſite there bee a ſpeciall and ſpeedy 


Care taken of it. There is another 


Fort, called Cowes Caſtlef over « + Cap. Tur- 
againſt which nes a Caſtle, called ney.” 


* * Who now ts one Buck,” 


3 | . Caylſhott 


ISLE OF wienr. 222 


Caylſhott Caſtle*. Theſe Caſtles Cap. 
lie for the ſafe coming to and fro James.“ 
between the Iſland and the mayne 
Land, and ſerve to keepe the Enemy from land- 
ing within the Iſland; but they are not of ſo 


greate Conſequence as the forementioned Fort; 


to theſe Caſtles belong Gunners and Waiters, 
but I believe 'tis very weakly man'd. 

There is another Caſtle, called Var- t Cap. 
mouth Caſtle f, which ſerves for Burley.” 
the ſame Purpoſe as Cowes Caſtle 

doth, and to it belongs Gunners and Waiters, 
but I believe *tis not much better man'd than 
Cowes. There was alſo a Sconce built in K. 
Harry the 8th's Time, called Worſley's Sconce, 


which was oppoſite to Hurtt Caſtle, which 


Sconce, when my Lord Conway was Captaine 
of the Ifland, and my old Lord Portland Trea- 


ſurer, was, by Order from him, taken down: 


ſoe by it, the Iſland is much | 
weakened; and I heare that Hurſt + «« Whoſ: Cap. is 
Caſtle f is in a weak Condition, my Lord George.“ 
I wiſh your Lordſhip would take | 
Care of it. 

« My Lord, as for the 7 Bande, which 
(next to the Caſtles) is the Strength of the Iſland, 


it is much weakened and decayed, and if there 
bee not a ſpeedy Courſe taken, will be dayly 


worſe and worſe, by Reaſon the Lords of the 
Mannors take in theyr Tenaments or Copy- 
holds, and alſo Farmers lay together as many 


Q 3 Farmes 


— 


Wt 
a7 
1 


= 
= 
1 * 
l 
} . » 
U 
* ii 
i 7 
= 
It 
i 
44] - 4 
18 
154. 
0 fl 
e 
e 
J; * 
. 1 
We 
9 
1 19 
"YZ 4 
. 
$4 l 
1, us: 
$112 
4 WH, & 
+ Hy 
i 175 % 
" I 4 D 
445 
Ul 7 
"of N 
1 
1 
q N 
'S 
'1 
N 
4 3 
. 
q q 
© Rs 
. 
* 4 
4 
Ni 
140 
Xt 
H f 
. 
* 
+ 
p * 


. 9 = 


—— 


. Reb hn II==- >= 
_ * 


” 
——— SD ns ot OE CE Auk —— »“) 
- => = . = 7 Sr EI. . — 
* S.-H) 
2 ER = I. Y © B 
* 22 Fiend 7 2 * 


1 0 
r — 2 — — — o 
= Xx . —— 


woah > 


122 HISTORY or THY 


Farmes as they can gett ſoe, by this Meanes 
the Ifland is much depopulated and weakened, 
and the moſt Part of thoſe Men that are in the 
Country lives in Cotages or empty Farm- 
houſes, and live either upon keeping Daries, 
or elſe by dayly Work, ſoe that they are very 
poore, that if an Enemy ſhould invade the 
Country, tis to be fear'd they would ſoon run 
away, and there are good Laws if they were putt 
in Execution to remedy all this. Since the 
Coming of K. James, there is a Town in the 
Ifland (called Newport) made a Mare- town, 
which heretofore was only a Bayly-town, and 
then the Livetenants and Juſtices had the ſame 
Power there they had in the reſt of the Coun- 
try; but now they have gotten a Charter to 
be a Mare-town and have Juſtices, a Recorder, 
Aldermen, &c. which the other two Mare- 
tons have not, as Yarmouth and Newton, they 
will not be governed as thoſe two Mare-towns, 
and the reſt of the Ifland are; which is very 
prejudiciall to the Country, and I wiſh it might 
be regulated. And in that Town of Newport 
the Captaine of the Iſland is Clark of the 
Markett, and hath the ordering of the Coun- 
try; this Town notwithſtanding will take the 
Power to themſelves, and hinder Men from 
buying and ſelling at theyr Pleaſure; I hope 
your Lordſhip will look into it. My Lord 
the Clergy of the Iſland, for the moſt Part, 
are looſe and idle Livers, and negle& they: 


Charge, 


ISLE OF WIGHT, | 223 


Charge, I wiſh your Lordſhip would take it 
into your ſerious Conſideration. 
« My Lord, there hath bin of late Yeares 


diverſe goodly mannors of the King's ſold 
(which I have heard is Crown Land) and 


greateſt Part of them is very well wooded, 


which wood did ſerve for the mending, repay- 


rine, or the building of his Caſtles there, or 
any Uſe his Majeſty hath of Wood, and now 
they are ſold, there is ſcarce a ſtick for any 
ſuch Uſe, un leſs very little in the Park : his 
Majeſty and the Country ſuffer much by this 
Sale. And as for the Men of Quality, I think 
it fitter to acquaint your Lordſhip of them by 
Word of Mouth, and for the preſent leave you 
to your worthy Employments and Reſt. 
Your humble Servant to command, 
JOHN DINGLEY.” 
To the Right Honourable the Earl | 
of Pembroke, Captain of the 1/le 
of Wight. 


Tuts letter as well as the preceding petition, is 
not without a ſpice of that leaven, which was fer- 
menting to produce the ſerious conſequences 
which enſued. Our readers will be of opinion 
with us, that it contains ſome remarks, little ſuit- 
ed to conciliate the good affections of the people; 


but directly adapted to impreſs an unfavourable. . 
opinion on the mind of the governor, of certain 


deſcriptions of men in the iſland, The ſtorm was 
Gy gathering 


— — _ - — om 
8 „ — * 


—— . — 


8 


3 
1 
if þ 
5 
* 
« 4 
th. 
1 " 
15 
1 
W 
"B41 
"i 
11 
! i 4 
b& 
ue | 
"E108 
* 
* 
1 
„ 
1 
vr” 
q T 
a 1 
bY. 
ana 
. 
+ 
- 168 
* if 
> „. 
. % 
* Fs 
N 1 
Fat 
Lo 
1 
f . » 
LES 
. 
n mM 
& 
F 
0 ng 
* be 
. 
il 
. 
1 . 
4 fg 
1 
4 
* 
11 
"6 
. 
& 
« t 
$5.37 
1 
" TT 
; "14 
1 
F 
f , 
4/3 
$94 
488 
11 
1 | 
\A 3 
4 * 
1 x 
at 7 
1 
$3 ©. 
0:3 
% 
1 a 
. 
MEL 
£ " 2 
771 
A 
7 . 
174 
CW 
7 
* ; 
4 -” 
ny 
| 7 
64 
& 
2 1 
Vs 
1 
Tia 
© 4 
i 
> 
i» 4 , 
. 
4 
1 6 
* 1 
4. 
. 
''4 * 
1 
{at 
"14 
__— 
4 
1 
1 
WS! 


a7 | 
WT 
„ 


„ — —— 
x. el 


wY — n 4 


224 HISTORY OF THE 


gathering, the clouds were accumulating ; and this 
letter has all the appearance of a temporizing 
and ſubtle manceuvre. 

Waen the national affairs began to aſſume a 
more ſerious aſpect, and the foundations of an open 
rupture between the king and parliament were 
more viſible, this iſland was in ſome degree af- 
feed by it. From its diſtant and detached ſitu- 
ation, it was not ſo immediately expoſed to the 
depredations of the contending armies ; but it was 
ultimately much concerned in the ſubſequent 
events, and at intervals had ſome ſhare in the pre- 
vious hiſtory. of the times. It was a ſubject which 
intereſted all men, and much inteſtine animoſity 
was every where excited by the general com- 


motion. 


W hn already cart, that the inhabitants 
of different parts of the ifland had petitioned in 
favour of the earl of Portland. Many of the gen- 
tlemen alſo ſigned a declaration, that they would, 
with their lives and fortunes, ſupport the proteſtant 
religion, protect the peace of the iſland, and 
« admit no forreyn Power, or Forces, or new Go- 
«« vernment, except his Majeſty, by Adviſe of his 
« Parliament, uppon Occaſione that may ariſe, 
*« ſhall think itt neceſſary to alter it in any Parti- 
e culars, for the Good and Safety of the Kingdom.” 
This' was dated the 8th of Auguſt, 1642, and ſub- 
ſcribed by the following gentlemen. 
John Oglander, John Leygh, 
William Hopkins, William Oglander, - 
AG | John 


18 IE OF WIGHT. 45 


William Booreman, Humphrey Fourney, 
Stephen March, Bar. Leigh, 
Thomas Leygh, Hugh Leigh, 


Bar. Burley, Robert Dillington, 
Edward Leigh, John Meux, 
Jeromie Brett, Henry Knowles, 
Robert Dillington, Nicholas Weſton, 
John Rychards, Edward Denys, 
Brutus Bucke, Edward Cheeke, 


Edward Worſley, John Burlygh. 


Socn were the petition and declaration of the 
inhabitants, to ſupport a government, which ac- 
| knowledged the king as its ſupreme head, and 
profeſſed the ſtrongeſt veneration for the eſtabliſhed 
proteſtant religion; declaring againſt the admiſſion 
of any new government, and proteſting againſt the 
introduction of any foreign force or power. | 

Bur theſe ſentiments of loyalty and attachment 
to the conſtitution were of very ſhort duration.— 
The people no ſooner found that their petition in 
favour of the earl of Portland was of no avail, than 
they trimmed about, and prepared to join the moſt 

powerful party. When the carl of Portland was 
diſplaced, the king had by a commiſſion to that 
purport given the cuſtody of the caſtle of Cariſ- 
brooke to colonel Brett. Art this time one Moſes 
Read was mayor of Newport, a man of an intri- 
guing and reſtleſs diſpoſition, and actively aſſiduous 
to procure the favour of the parliament, which 
now began to aſſume unuſual powers. On the 

| | ſtrength 


226 HISTORY OF THE 


ſtrength of the petition in favour of the earl of 
Portland, the counteſs and her five children had 
taken refuge in the caſtle, accompanied by her 
huſband's brother and ſiſter. This was a circum- 
ſtance which did not eſcape the turbulent ſpirit of 
Read, who determined to diſlodge and remove all 
thoſe whom he ſuppoſed friendly to the king; and 
as her preſence in the caſtle might operate in his 
favour, by occaſioning its holding out for the king, 
this obſtacle to the intereſt of the parliament was 
repreſented to them as militating againſt the peace 
of the town of Newport. Its ſafety he declared to 

be doubtſul and uncertain, ſo long as colonel Brett 
and the counteſs continued in the caſtle ; and 
conſequently that, in ſuch a fituation, he could 
not be reſponſible for its fidelity. 

Tar1s artful infinuation was fully productive of 

the effect he wiſhed for. The captains of the ſe- 
veral ſhips in the river were directed to aſſiſt him 
in any meaſures which he might deem expedient 
for the ſafety of the iſland; and from them he 
procured four hundred auxiliaries, with whom, to- 
gether with the militia of the town, he marched 
againſt the caſtle, as we have | 
already related“. * See chap. 4. p. 74, &c. 


CHAPTER 


181k or WIGHT. 227 


CHAPTER IX. 


or KING CHARLES'S HISTORY FROM HIS ARRIVAL 
IX THIS ISLAND TO HIS EXECUTION. 


IN the chapter to which we have juſt now refer. 
red, it has been obſerved, that the inhabitants of 
this iſland, by“ complying ſo fully with the views 
« of the prevailing power, ſecured a quiet and 
« undifturbed poſſeſſion during the enſuing com 
* motions, till, by an ill-fated meaſure, the king 
« unhappily ſought here an aſylum.” It would 
far exceed our bounds to recite at large what the 
noble hiſtorian, who has ſo copiouſly deſcribed the 
tranſactions of thoſe times, and other writers, have 
recorded; but our ſubje& requires us to take no- 
tice of ſuch parts of his hiſtory, as relate to the 
occurrences which happened in the iſland. 

On the king's firſt arrival in the iſland, he was 
accommodated with apartments by colonel Ham- 
mond in Cariſbrooke caſtle, not as a priſoner, but 
as a gueſt. No reſtraint was put upon his actions; 
no kinds of amuſements were refuſed to him. He 
rode out for his recreation both when and where 
he pleaſed ; his faithful ſervants were at all times 
permitted to have acceſs to him ; all perſons, with- 
out diſtinction, who defired, were admitted into 
his preſence ; and many perſons, who, from reſpect 
or any other motive, had a wiſh to expreſs their 
dutiful regard, or to indulge a ſpirit of impertinent 

„ curioſity, 


228 : HISTORY OF THE 


curioſity, were indiſcriminately gratified. It may 
ſuffice to ſay, that it was about the twelfth of No- 
vember, one thouſand ſix hundred and forty-ſeven, 
when the king firſt arrived in the iſland. | 
Tux firſt inſtances of reſtraint which the king 
was compelled to ſubmit to, were manifeſted in 
refuſing him the ſervices of his chaplains ; the 
noted Dr. Henry Hammond, uncle to the colonel, 
who had the cuſtody of the king, and Dr. Sheldon, 
being no longer permitted to exerciſe their func. 
tions. But the king had no difficulty of ſupplying 
this loſs in a good meaſure, by his private devo- 
tions, in which he was particularly exerciſed ; and 
on the Lord's Day, he conſtantly employed him- 
ſelf in reading the ſcriptures and other pious books, 
having no reliſh or deſire to attend to thoſe 
preachers, who made uſe of the directory then ge- 
nerally adopted. 
Tus liberty was, ſoon after, ſtill farther dimi- 
aithed. by the order to diſmiſs ſome others of his 
faithful companions in affliction. About the mid- | 
dle of F 'ebruary, not more than three months from 
his firſt arrival, the attendance of Mr. Aſhburnham, 
Mr. Legg, and his other ſervants, who had been 
with him at Oxford, was conſidered as improper ; 
and therefore the colonel either had or pretended 
that he had received orders no longer to permit it. 
At this information the king was ſurprized, and 
expreſſed much concern; he declared to Mr. Aſh- 
burnham and to the other perſons whom this or- 
der chiefly affected, that he did not expect ſuch a 
cCircum- 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 229 


circumſtance, and that it was by no means con- 
ſiſtent with the aſſurances he had received from 
ſome conſiderable perſons, but did not name them. 


After the king had dined on the following day, 


theſe gentlemen came together, and proſtrated 
themſelves at his majeſty's feet; and, after they 
had offered up their prayers to God for his preſer- 


vation, and Kiſſed his hands, they departed in 


much agitation. 


Hex was now ſoon convinced af his real ſituation. 


On the following day, he was denied the liberty 
of riding or walking into the country, and in every 
ſenſe was now made a cloſe priſoner. The colonel 
ſtill pretended to have a particular reſpect for him; 
and, as a place of recreation, converted the bar- 


bican, a ſpacious area, which was uſed as a parade, 


into a bowling green, and at one fide of it erected 
an agreeable ſummer houſe for the king's amuſe- 


ment. Here the unfortunate monarch paſſed many 


of his vacant hours. As the caſtle had no gallery, 


room of ſtate, nor ſo much as a garden, the morn- 


ing was conſtantly employed in walking on the 
ramparts, and the afternoon on the bowling green. 
It muſt not however be forgot, that the king never 
ſuffered theſe exerciſes to interfere with his ſtated 
hours for writing and devotion. 

YET was he not ſolely deſtitute of attendants, 
being waited on by Mr. Harrington and Mr. Her- 
bert. The charge of his books was committed to 


the latter, of which he himſelf preſerved a cata- 


logue. . Amongſt others, he took much delight in 
- 8 | the 


— 
—— 


. 

j 

4 
1 
1 


þ; 
| 
f 
+ 
2 
4 


230 HISTORY OF TE 


the following, and frequently exerciſed himſelf in 
peruſing them; as biſhop .Andrews's ſermons, 
Hookers eccleſiaſtical polity, Dr. Hammond's 
Works, Villalpandus upon Ezekiel, Sandys's para- 
phraſe on David's pſalms, Herbert's divine poems, 
Taſſo's Jeruſalem, in Italian, with Fairfax's Eng- 
liſh tranflation, Arioſto, and Spencer's fairy queen. 
He is ſuppoſed to have wrote his Suſpiria Regalia 
during the time of his confinement; the manu- 
ſcript having been found amongſt thoſe books, 
which the king committed to the charge of Mr. 
Herbert, in his own hand writing. 

From the manner and nature of the king's con- 
finement, it is obvious that there could be no great 
difficulty in gaining ſuch an acceſs to him, as 
was conſiſtent with any requeſt which any one 
might have to offer. Many perſons preſented 
themſelves to his majeſty, at the times of his walk» 
Ing within the lines or outward works of the caſtle, 
to be touched for the diſeaſe, known by the name 
of the king's evil. At the time when the king 
dined, the officious Troughton, chaplain to the 
governor, a young man of much vanity, and poſ- 
ſeſſed of moſt of the arguments which have ever 
been urged againſt epiſcopacy, uſually attended in 
the preſence chamber ; and the king uſed com- 
monly after meals to walk about with him for an 
hour, and engage in familiar converſation on thoſe 
ſubjects. For want of better company, theſe ar- 
guments were not unacceptable to the king ; but 


though Troughton on ſuch occafions was urgent 
to 


| 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 231 


to convince his majeſty of the truth of his opinions, 
the king, who greatly excelled him as a logician, 
and was much better acquainted with controverſial 
divinity and hiſtory, had always a decided advan- 
tage over him. 

_ WailsT we are on this ſubject, it may not be 
unpleaſing or improper to relate an anecdote, which 
actually occurred during his confinement in the 
caſtle. The king and Troughton, as on many for- 
mer occaſions, were one day cloſely engaged in a 
warm argument on theſe favourite ſubjects; when 
the former ſuddenly took a ſword from the ſide of 
one of his attendants, and, by his drawing it haſ- 
tily out of the ſcabbard, put the young chaplain 
in a terrible fright. His apprehenſions on this 
head were, however, ſoon appeaſed by the inter- 
_ poſition of a gentleman who was preſent, and much 
better underſtood the king's intentions. This was 
Mr. John Duncomb, who had come into the iſland 
tor the purpoſe of concerting meaſures to effect the 
king's eſcape; who kneeled down at his feet and 
there received the honour of knighthood, the king 
at the ſame time informing him, that he was not 
poſſeſſed of any other means of acknowledging his 
ſervices. After the reſtoration of king Charles the 
Second, it may not improperly be noted in this 
place, that Sir John Duncomb was made chancel- 
lor of the exchequer. 

In a note ſubjoined to Sir John Dingley's letter, 

a captain Burley is mentioned as the captain of 
Yarmouth caſtle. From compaſſion for the king's 
unfortunate 


3 HfSTORY OF THE 


unfortunate ſituation the captain was diſpoſed to 
exert his utmoſt endeavours to procure his deli- 
| verance; but unhappily the plan miſcarried, either 
from a defect in the plan itſelf, or from ſome miſ- 
management in the arrangement, or choice of the 
perſons ſelected to execute it. The fact is, that 
it was diſcovered to Hammond or ſome of the 
patty, and the captain was thereupon apprehended 
and executed; which, no doubt, was of extreme 
© prejudice to the king's intereſt, in the ſituation of 
affairs at that time, and probably might occaſion 
the orders which were received by the captain of 
the caſtle for a more watchful eye to be had on his 
motions. - At this time, too, the army and parlia- 
ment were ſtruggling with each other, to gain 
fingly that aſcendancy over the king and friends 
of royalty, which they had jointly acquired ; but 
it was equally intereſting and eſſential to both, 
that the king's perſon might be ſecured in a place 
of ſafety. Hence it was their joint concern to 
prevent his eſcape, and may probably account for 
the ſubſequent rigour of his confinement. It muſt 
not be omitted, that the king came to the iſland 
on the twelfth of November, and that Burley's 
attempt was to have been exccuted near the cloſe 
of December. | . 

From the very minute accounts which have been 
related by Mr. Henry Firebrace, one of the pages 
of his majeſty's bedchamber, we are enabled to 
prefent our readers with the following circumſtan- 
tial particulars. - This gentleman*was known to 

255 e 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 233 


the king, on account of ſeveral occurrences, which 
had happened during the treaty of Uxbridge, and 
on ſome other occaſions. The king, who had ſome 
confidence in him on theſe accounts, requeſted him 
to haſten to him in this iſland, and to collect all 
poſſible intelligence from his faithful friends in and 
near London for his information. To this purpoſe 
he applied for permiſſion to attend his majeſty, as 
one of the pages of his bed-chamber, which he 
obtained from the ſpeaker. of the houſe of com- 
mons, and other commiſſioners; making uſe of 
this precaution to prevent every reaſonable ground 
of ſuſpicion, and that the king might be aſſiſted 


by his ſervices, without reſtraint or apprehenſion 


of interruption. 

He was accordingly charged with many letters 
on this occaſion ; and his firſt object was to diſco- 
ver or deviſe ſome method of delivering them 


ſafely into his majeſty's hands. A convenient and 
private place was perceived in his chamber, where 


he had an opportunity of depoſiting them without 
obſervation; and having done this, he informed 
the king, by a note which he ſlipped into his hand 
as he was retiring to reſt, of what he had performed 
for his ſervice. This was acknowledged by the 
king on the following morning, and his full ap- 
probation of the meaſure expreſſed ina note which 
the king depoſited in the ſame place. This mode 
of correſpondence, by the king's direction, was 
continued, and perſevered in, for ſome weeks; for 
as Firebrace had eſtabliſhed a good channel of com- 
+100. 6, R munication, 


—_——— — E 2 . ¶ » 2 PL "£7, tb 2" > wm)" . > 
A 4 — 2 . — — — = — — 1 — 1 wt 
4 F 5 * q * a 


| 
L 
1 
ö 
| 
| 
| 
| 
1 


* 

80 

* 

[ 
b 
f 
n 
ny 


=_ — —— - 


* 3 , : — — - — 2 — : 
. 8 — : 2 - A — STI 5 — 7 - ASE 4 7 K — Par. EE Aa Am = r 27 — as - — HOY 
— * n 8 . * — +> nn gs : . x ==> 2 - - 
rs IE - — — h — n PR. 29 32 b xz P 2 * By” < _ — . 2 5 7 — — - ** 
—— 8 — — — W bs * L \ 2 4 — 3 8 = 2 . 
— 7 * 5 — a — 7 — : £ 3 — — - = x * 1 * * 4 8 _ '— 
A — — r bb. 


— 8 
- 6 2-4 * 


_— - 
— 3 7 — * < — 

— — — = * . 

£4 — - 


— 


— — 
—— . 


, 

e — 
* 1 9 — 
>. fs 5am 


— — 


1 
—— 


234 Us rok or THE © 


munication, before he left London, with the friends 
of the king in and about the metropolis, he had 
the beſt intelligence poſſible, by means of two 
truſty friends, who were conſtantly paſſing to and 
fro, of whom not even the ſmalleſt ſuſpicion was 
entertained. Such were the meaſures which con- 
tinually produced information from the queen, the 
prince, and many of his friends, at the very time 
when the vote took place which prohibited any 
more addreſſes to him. | 
To accompliſh, if poſſible, the object of his 
views, he had alſo the addreſs to procure the fa. 
vour of thoſe perſons, who by turns were appoint- 
ed to watch the king by day at the two doors of 
his bed-chamber, and at night to ſleep in beds 
placed cloſe againſt the doors. By the opening of 
theſe outwards, it muſt be obvious, that till theſe 
beds were removed, the doors of the chamber 
could not poſſibly admit any communication. 
As the king uſually retired to his bed- chamber 
immediately after ſupper, it was propoſed one 
evening by Mr. Firebrace to ſupply the place of 
one of the guards at the door which opened to the 
back ſtairs, whilſt he might have an opportunity 
and leiſure to eat his ſupper. On this occaſion it 
was pretended by Firebrace, that he had no appe- 
* tite, and conſequently ſhould not ſup that night. 
The offer was accepted, from the confidence which 
was placed in him, who was conſidered by the 
other party as a fpy upon the king's actions; be- 


cauſe he had letters of permiſſion for this viſit to 
4 the 


ISLE OF Wũ1onr. 235 


the iſland, as we have already mentioned. This 


gave them an opportunity of converſing together, 


and the king was greatly conſoled by this freſh 
demonſtration of Firebrace's attention to him; and 
it was agreed, that the ſame means ſhould be 
adopted as frequently as could be done with ſafety. 


Ix occurred to this friendly man, that a ſu rprize | 


might endanger the cauſe he was engaged in, if 
the door ſhould be found open by any one ſuddenly 


and unexpectedly entering the room, when theſe _ 


important converſations might throw them off 
their guard. To prevent this, a ſlit was cut through 


the partition behind the hangings, which could be 


dropped on the leaſt noiſe, without any cauſe of 


ſuſpicion, As the king's ſituation was now become 


intolerable, we need not be ſurprized to be inform- 
ed, that theſe deliberations were deſigned to eſta- 
bliſh ſome plan for accdmpliſhing the king's eſcape. 
Ox of the meaſures which Mr. Firebrace pro- 
poſed, was to get out of the chamber window. It 
uas at the ſame time ſuggeſted, that the bars might 
render the paſſage too narrow, and therefore muſt 
be cut with a ſaw; but as this operation would 
endanger a diſcovery, from the noiſe it would ne- 
ceſſarily occaſion, the king objected to this part of 
the plan, in confidence that he could get through 
the window in its preſent ſtate. His reaſons for 
this were, that he had tried with his head, and 
that the body would follow where the head would 


paſs. Every thing elſe was therefore prepared, by 


the king's defire, for eſcaping from this confine- 
R 2 ment ; 


a 
1! 
1 


| 
' 
| 
1 
4 
| 
1 
1 
| 


q 
It 
1 
j 
1 
5) 
1 


236 HISTORY OF THE 


ment ; and Firebrace was engaged to communicate 
the plan to ſome truſty friends, and to digeſt the 
particulars of the plan of operation. 

Two of the letters which the king wrote upon 
this occaſion to Mr. Worſley, are ſaid to be ſtill 
extant ; and we are credibly informed, in a man- 
ner which leaves us no room to doubt that they 
are genuine, that the originals are in a ſmall neat 
hand. The following are exact copies. 


* 16 May, 1648. 


2 I finde ſo 0 Fruits in the Paines that 
you take for me, that againe I muſt put you to 
a little more Troble (aſſeuring you that you ſhall 
finde me thankefull to you for altogether and 

that not in a meane Way) it is that you would 
goe to Southampton to one Mrs. Pit's Houſe, 
where you will finde W: and deliver to him the 
encloſed weh. you will find directed to him, and 
alſo adviſe with him, where I ſhall take the Boat 
and where land and the Watch Word as ſoone 
as you can: the other is to 395 weh. I deſyre you 
ſend ſafely and ſpeedely to him: but I would 
not have any Bodie know that I have written to 
him. Sol reſt, 
your moſt aſſeured Frend, 
Leaſt you ſhould not underſtand & 7 
The Cypher ; the thin Letter is for him, for 
whom I ſent you one, upon the fifth of this 


Month: to Weh. (I thanke you for your Care) 1 
ä have 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 237 


. have had-an Anſwer and nowe this is a Reply to 

- that. If I knew certainely that you had the 
Cypher out of won. I have written this Name, I 
_ would wryte more freely than I now care.” 


Tur king, it is obvious, muſt have been ſatis- 
fied that Mr. Worſley was in poſſeſſion of a key for 
decyphering his correſpondence, from the follow- 
ing letter which was wrote but a few days after, 


« 22 May, 1648. 


9 . I am verrie well ſatisfied with the 
diſcreete and carefull Account that you have 
given me of my Buſineſs and particularly that 
you did 208: 343: 294: 74: 9: 45: 86: 18 

96: 1: 40':- 82: 3905: 0 272 207 JOE 
388 : 45: 36: 4: 11 75igp3 „ 
248: now 1t will be 36: 19: 5: 32: 39: 12 
37: 8: 97: Ideſyre you to enquyre whether or 
not 396: 213: 365: 204: 28: 21: 363: 257: 
64: 36: 46: 9: 32: 395: 42: 35: 14: 53; 
38: 23: 18: 50: 88: but for this 236: 308: 
267: 356: 282: 96: 62: 86: 205: 17: 356: 
66. 60: 97: 206: 231: 248: 38 15 20085275 
230: 388: 46: 36: 257: 208: 86: 25: 268: 
9: 32 fo: 240: 6: 31: 2: 6, yt"; 
9: 68: 45: In the meane Tyme lett me know 
+379 tgc 20> :2:4345% 354: the 
18: So I reſt 

Your aſſeured R 


R + | . * 


238 HISTORY or THE 


Ws have thought it our duty to lay the preced- 
ing letters before our readers; though the latter 
muſt be totally unintelligible to them, as well as 
to us. But it ſerves to ſhew, that the king was 
not entirely deſtitute of friends, even in this laſt 
extremity, and that meaſures were taken to ac- 
quaint the king with what was paſſing for his ſer- 
vice. It may be valued by ſome as a curious ſpe- 
cimen of ſecrecy, to prevent the effects of any let- 
ters being intercepted. 

MR. Edward Worſley, a gentleman of the iſland, 
who was much eſteemed, and afterwards knighted 
for his ſervices on this occaſion; Mr. Richard 
Oſborne, a gentleman who had been appointed by 
the parliament to attend the king; and Mr. John 
Newland, of Newport, were ſelected as proper per- 
ſons to promote ſo deſirable an event. All theſe 
_ gentlemen, we are informed, proved themſelves 

. worthy of this confidence. TE, 

| Havins fully concerted the plan of operations, 
and the time being fixed when it was to take ef- 
fect, the appointed ſignal was made, that all was 
clear. No ſooner had Firebrace thrown up ſome- 
thing againſt the window of the king's chamber, 
as agreed upon, than the king prepared to execute 
his part of the buſineſs, but unfortunately failed 
in the attempt. He found at this time, when it 
was too late, that he had argued upon falſe pre- 
miſes, and that though the window afforded an 
eaſy paſſage for his head, he ſtuck faſt between the 


breaſt and ſhoulders, and was for ſome time de- 
prived 


* 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 239 


prived of all power either of advancing or retreat- 
ing. It was only at the inſtant preceding this at- 
tempt, that he began to doubt if he had judged 
right of the practicability of this mea ſure, and 
that he had then taken the precaution to tie a piece 
of cord to the bar of the window, to force himſelf 
back again, if the affair miſcarried. 

Ar this time Firebrace was ſo near the king as 
to hear him groan, without being able to afford 
him the leaſt aſſiſtance. With much difficulty he 
at laſt releaſed himſelf from the window, which 
he had no ſooner effected, than he placed a candle 
in it as a ſignal that his attempt was fruſtrated, 
It is extremely probable, that if this unfortunate 
impediment had not happened, the judicious ar- 
rangement of the plan would have almoſt enſured 
its ſucceſs. a 

Fos the meaſures taken to forure * retreat 
from the iſland were well concerted. As ſoon as 
the king had cleared the window, he was to let 
himſelf down by a cord which had been prepared 
for the purpoſe, where Firebrace was ſtationed to 
conduct him acroſs the court, under favour of a 
dark night, to the main wall of the caſtle. . From 
| thence, by means of another cord, with a ſtick faſt_ 
ened acroſs it, and intended to ſerve for a ſeat, ſimi- 
lar to what we have already mention- 
ed on another occaſionꝰ, he was again * See page 8, 9. 

to deſcend into the ditch. Beyond 
this wall was the counterſcarp ; but as it was low 
it might eaſily be aſcended. Near this place it 
R 4 was 


240 HISTORY or THE 


was agreed, that Mr. Worſley and Mr. Oſborne 
were to be ſtationed, both of them ready mounted, 
 _ with a ſpare horſe and piſtols and boots for the 
king. At the ſea-ſide Mr. Newland was ſtationed 
with a large boat, which was deſigned for the 
conveyance of his majeſty to ſome place of ſecu- 
rity ; but this plan, on which ſo much depended, 
was rendered abortive as we have juſt related. 

Tuosk who were waiting without the walls of 
- the caſtle, were informed of this diſappointment 
by Mr. Firebrace. The only means he had of 
doing it, at this critical juncture, was by throw- 
ing ſtones from the top of the wall from whence 
the king was to have deſcended, to the place 
where they were ſtationed; this effectually ſuc- 
ceeded, and they went away quietly, without 
having cauſed any alarm, 

Tux next conſideration was, how to remove the 
cauſe of this obſtruction; and no means occurred 
of ſo ſuitable a complexion, as to procure files 
and aqua fortis, wherewith to corrode or cut 
through the bars. But the ſeaſon was paſt, and 
the opportunity once loſt was not to be re- 
trieved. A letter was received by colonel Ham- 
mond from Derby houſe which directed him to 
keep a watchful eye over the perſons who were 
about the king, by means of whom the king re- 
ceived intelligence; but no particular perſon was 
mentioned, which induced Hammond to employ 
his emiffaries to make ſuch diſcoveries as they 


could, relative to this buſineſs. In conſequence 
| of 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | 241 


of theſe ſteps, ſuſpicion began to fall upon Fire- 
brace, who was accordingly examined on the ſub- 
ject; but no material diſcovery reſulted from this 
proceeding, and the reaſons which induced. the 
governor to this conduct were at the fame time 4 
declared to him. | 1 

Bur this did not wholly remove the ads of 
ſuſpicion; and ſome time after the colonel again 
ſent for Firebrace, when he informed him, that 

more letters had been received of ſuch a nature 
as would compel him. to diſmiſs ſeveral of the 
king's attendants, and amongſt others that he 
muſt alſo prepare for his departure. He gave 
him leave indeed, as an act of friendſhip and in- 
dulgence, to remain there, if he pleaſed, three or 
four days longer ; but as Firebrace ſaw through 
the motive of this pretended favour, which was an 
intended ſnare, he guarded againſt it with his 
uſual prudence and ſagacity, and at the ſame time 
* availed himſelf of the permiſſion to concert mea- 
ſures of future correſpondence with the king, and 
to convince him of the ſuſpicions he entertained. 
It was in conſequence of this judicious conduct, 
that his majeſty received intelligence from his 
friends, and had his diſpatches forwarded with the 
ſame ſucceſs as before, notwithſtanding the mea- 
ſures of the governor and the prevailing en to 
prevent it. 

Tuovon the laſt attempt for eine the king's 
eſcape had failed, and the king's ſituation was 
daily more and more diſtreſſing; yet we learn 

from 


% 
7X. IAC 
— 


9 ———— 


rr 


= . 4 * — _ 4 
r iy _ > Le Re 


J — L © 
CH AE, 
* — — 


— 


: 
0 
7 
t 


. — 
——ů— — . ——— 
* — 0 

— — e 4 
1 * d C y + © 
A”. Vs os - 


3 


8 a 2” - 1 
** ads * ” 
1 nne 
= 7 2 rs 
4 * 


= — — 1 — 


1 — ——_ * 
2 8 „ 
hs PILES A 4 7 
— , iS > 4. 8 I 
* © ASE >, 4 * 
- — 
* 


242 „ HISTORY or THE 


from the accounts which are given by lord Cla. 
rendon and from ſome other authorities, that 
another unſucceſsful attempt was made to the 
ſame purpoſe, after Mr. Firebrace's diſmiſſal, by 
his remaining aſſociates. At the moment of its 
execution, the bar, which had before obſtruct. 
ed the egreſs, being now removed, the king, 
as he was coming through the window, diſco- 
vered more . perſons under it than he expected. 
He thence concluded, that his intention had 


been betrayed, or from ſome circumſtances de- 


tected; which induced him to lay aſide the 
defign, ſo that he ſhut his window and retired 
to bed. But the governor himſelf came into his 
chamber ſoon after, and, as he had been probably 
directed, examined the window, and perceived that 
the bar had been eaten away, with a view to faci- 

litate the king's eſcape. | 
As the king's ſuſpicions of diſcovery were but 
too well grounded, the nature of it appears to 
claim our firſt attention. Major Rolfe, an officer 
of the caſtle, had inſinuated himſelf into the con- 
dence of Mr. Oſborne, whom he had deceived 
with the hopes of his being friendly to the plan; by 
which means he was made privy to the whole 
plot, and prepared by the moſt ſhocking mea- 
ſure to prevent its taking effect. He had re- 
ſolved to kill the king as he came through the 
window; and Hammond, who was alſo acquainted 
with what was paſſing, had cauſed muſketeers to 


be poſted near the places where the gentlemen 
| muſt 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 2143 


muſt of neceſſity paſs, though, in riding off, they 
fortunately eſcaped the fire, and got ſafe to the 
veſſel which lay in readineſs to carry off the king. 

Tut maſter of the veſſel, finding that they had 
not brought the king, as he had been inſtructed 
to expect, refuſed to take them on board, ſo that 
they were obliged to leave their horſes on the 
ſhore, and to ſhift for themſelves. Several days 
they concealed themſelves in the woods, and found 
means during the night, by the aſſiſtance of a 
kinſman of Mr. Worſley's, to procure ſome ſuſte- 
nance; and a veſſel was ſoon after procured for 
them to take them off from the ſouth ſide of the 
iſland. 

By theſe repeatedly unſucceſsful attempts, 
which ſerved as pretences to. render the king's 
confinement ſtill more and more rigorous, his 
ſpirits were quite broken, His fervants were no 
ſooner removed, than he threw aſide all care of 
his perſon, and ſuffered his hair and beard, which 
were grown to an extraordinary length, to hang 
diſhevelled and neglected. A decrepid old man, 
who was employed to kindle his fire, was, for 
many months, the beſt company he enjoyed; 
which he declared to Sir Philip Warwick, ſome 
time after, when he ſhewed this humble compa- 
nion to him. 

We now approach the period, which procured 
to the king a temporary reſpite from his rigorous 
confinement, This was at the notorious treaty 
of Newport, when the king was ſo far releaſed as 

| to 


244 HISTORY or THE 


to be a priſoner at large on his parole; which 
liberty he firſt obtained on the eighteenth of Sep- 
tember. The vote of the commons, that had 
prohibited any more addreſſes to him, was previ- 
ouſly repealed, as a preliminary to introduce the 
treaty, which vas appointed to be at Newport; 
it was ſtipulated that here the king was to enjoy 
the ſame ſtate of freedom as when he was laſt 
at Hampton Court, and to be attended by ſervants 
of his own appointment, and on the other hand 
the king engaged not to go out of the iſland dur- 
ing the treaty, nor for twenty days after, without 
the conſent of both houſes of parliament. 

Tur army, which had long felt their own impor- 
rance, were at this time actively .engaged in ſup- 
preſſing the remaining royaliſts; and though they 
in fact held the ſword over the heads of their no- 
minal maſters, the houſe of commons, by relaxing 
in the particulars juſt ſtated, hoped in ſome mea- 
| ſure to preſerve their own authority in counter- 
acting the views and deſigns of the army, Hence 
their negociations with the captive monarch were 
revived, and the treaty commenced ; but it was 
carried on with ſo much languor, and the artifices 
of the independents were ſuffered to prevail ſo 
much, that it was ſpun out to an unreaſonable, 
length, till the army had every where ſuppreſſed 
the inſurrections, and were now at liberty for fur- 
ther operations. 2 855 

Falxrax, who had 1 the ales of this 


treaty with an unfavourable eye, was now deter- 
mined 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 245 


mined to put an end tot it by a deciſive meaſure, 
as he had hitherto protracted it by means of his 
emiſſaries. Accordingly he was no ſooner re- 
turned to Windſor, than he ſent colonel Ewer 
on the twenty-fifth of November, with a commiſ- 
fion to ſeize once more upon the king's perſon, 
and to terminate all negociation. Hammond was 
alſo commanded to attend him at head quarters. 
On ſuch an intereſting occaſion, our readers 
muſt conſider themſelves as entitled to every poſ- 
fible information, which we ſhall Rate to them 
nearly as follows. 

Ir was on the evening of the s of 
November, when the king had reaſon to ſuſpect, 
that his ſituation was leſsſecure than it had hitherto 
been ſince his enlargement from the caſtle in Sep- 
tember. One of the king's ſervants had been ſent 
for by a perſon in diſguiſe, to whom it was related 
that the army had fixed upon that night for ſeiz- 
ing his majeſty, and had no ſooner communicated 
the information, than he left him abruptly, as 
fearful probably of being ſuſpected; which cir- 


cumſtance being told to the king, the duke of 
Richmond, the earl of Lindſay, and colonel 
Cooke were ſent for, who were at that time alto- 


getherat the duke of Richmond's lodgings. From 
thence they waited on his majeſty immediately, 


and the lords went into the inner chamber, whilſt 


the colonel remained without for orders; after 
which, when the king had informed them of the 
natu:e of the information received, colonel Cooke 

| | Vas 


r — ũ ͤ k K 2 233 


1 
In! +4 
it 
1 
"85 
* 
1 4 
'F 


— © — 


r X but ' 
. * 122 " 
— - 
4 n . 


1 
— jp RR 


. 


— a * 
SOON — — — 1 — —W. —— — 
PPP ts ho dC HPC > 2 FG ge; ret ns. -2 1 ee; 
*T 8 *. 24 . 2 8 1 F po 
L wtf * # * * 2 - AY 
— 9 ol I. PR. A Pf ET I 3% " 
N * 
FP ” 1 


"> lt 


. 1 r 5 , * — e 1 
Dr rere 2 BY A 
5 * of * - 2 * —_— 


< 4 60Iṽ Rs TS CG 


2 Rx 


246 HISTORY or THE 


was called in, and queſtioned by his majeſty as to 
any rumour which might have been ſpread, whe- 
ther the army deſigned that night to ſeize him. But 
the colonel anſwered, that he had not ſo much as 
- heardany thing tending towards it ; andadded, that 
he would ſurely have informed theking of it, ifany 
fuch intention had come to his knowledge. The 
king communicated his reaſons for ſuch an en- 
quiry, and thereupon directed him to find our 
major Rolfe, of ſavage memory, whom we have 
ſo lately mentioned, who had been left by colonel 
Hammond as deputy governor. On colonel 
Cooke's application to him in his chamber, he 
communicated the king's meſſage, and preſſed 
him as to his knowledge of ſuch a deſign; which 
he ſtoutly denied, and added, you may aſſure the 
king from me, that he may reſt quietly this night, 
for on my life he ſhall have no diſturbance this 
night. 8 g 
From the manner of expreſſion, it was con- 
cluded by colonel Cooke, that all was not as it 
ſhould be; upon which he preſſed him further to 
declare, if there was any ſuch deſign at all, to 
which Rolfe pauſed, but at laſt anſwered, that it 
was impoſſible for him to know the purpoſes of 
the army at ſo great a diſtance, but- that he had 
received no ſuch orders. This led the colonel to 
urge the matter till farther, by ſaying, if you 
ſhould hereafter, ſhall I be ſo timely acquainted 
with them, that the king may not be ſurprized 
v hen they are pat in execution; which he ſeem- 
ingly 


ISLE OF WIGHT." 247 


ingly conſented to, in the expreſſion, that it was 
but a reſpect due to the king. 

Wiru this punctual account of circumſtances, 
| colonel Cooke returned immediately to his majeſty. 
In this interval, the king had alſo been farther in- 
formed, that a conſiderable number of the army 
had that very evening landed on the iſland ; where- 
upon the colonel was ſent back to major Rolfe to 
learn the truth of the report, who anſwered that 
he knew of ſome freſh troops which were ſhortly 
expected to relieve thoſe then on duty there, but 
that he had received no information of their arrival. 

Tur colonel was not long abſent, on this ſecond 
embaſſy, but the king was in that interval farther 
acquainted, that two thouſand foot were drawn up 
round Cariſbrooke caſtle. At this intelligence he 
was much agitated, and exclaimed, that there muſt 
ſurely be ſome extraordinary buſineſs in hand which 
could. occaſion ſuch a body of men to be ſo ſecretly 


landed, in ſo bitter a night as that was, and ex- 


poſed to the extremity of the weather; for the 
wind was at that time blowing very hard, and the 
rain likewiſe falling very faſt. Theſe circumſtances 
pointed out the neceſſity of receiving ſome certain 
information reſpecting theſe motions, and could 
only lead to ſome fears of being deceived by major 
Rolfe; upon which colonel Cooke once more of- 
fered his ſervices for that purpoſe, the acceptance 
of which was at firſt ſtrongly declined by the king, 
who was unwilling to expoſe him any more to the 
ſeverity of the weather. But as the colonel per- 

ceived 


DEC oC. OY 


— 


; — 


TY 


—_ — 


— — _ = — 2 I rag nan regs hen reſ — 
"+ 7 7 F by”. 2 N : . ; uy 7 — . | 
2 pay WoW ES = 98 


Pp oats i wn 
1 : % 1 2 2 
* a 1 


to * "7 © P 7 * 
by” . Wa "$25 2 _ io * 6 U — 
* * o E . » & * * a » * « 2 1 * 
— 2 — nn —_ I 7 "AF — . * 
7 5 F WW" - 


8 _— 
= — 


"a Yor I.” * r 


— OR 


-_ — 


* 
— — — 


— 3 — — 
r * — r 


— 
Lr 2 : 


VB — — 
„ 
— 


| 
4 
£ 
+ 
1 
+ 
4 
' 


248 | HISTORY or THE 


ceived no other expedient to ſatisfy the king, he 
preſſed the neceſſity of it ſo ſtrongly as to obtain 
permiſſion at length to go thither a third time; 
the king at the ſame time expreſſing his hopes that 
no prejudice would be received by the colonel from 
this ſervice, as he was young and healthy. 

Arrr the colonel had mounted his horſe, in a 
night extremely dark, he found his way to the 
caſtle with great difficulty. He rode entirely round 
it, but without meeting any troops, and then ſhel. 
' tered himſelf under the gateway, to be defended 
from the violence of the weather, He then recol- 
lected that captain Bowreman, a gentleman of the 
iſland, with whom he was well acquainted, com- 
manded a company of militia there ; whereupon 
he ſcent in a meſſage, deſiring to ſpeak with him, 
and, before he received an anſwer, diſcourſed with 
the ſoldiers, to try if he could learn any thing from 
them. But they belonged to a company which 
had- been newly marched in, and were entirely 
ignorant of what was paſling ; for the two army 
companies which had before been in garriſon here 
were drawn out into the town of Newport, proba- 
bly to ſtrengthen the guards which were at that 
time doing duty there. It was not till after a long 
ſtay, that the meſſenger returned with an anſwer 
to colonel Cooke, that the captain could not con- 
veniently come out to him, but defired that he 
would walk in; an invitation which the colonel 
accepted. | 


Warn 


ISLE OF WIGHT. — 249 


Wurx he entered the 1 he was ſurprized 
with the ſight of more than a dozen officers of i he 
army, moſt of whom he was not unacquainted with. 
Mutual falutations having paſſed, the colonel, 


attentive to the object of his miſſion, defired ro 
ſpeak to the governor in private, who was obſerved 


to aſk leave of thoſe officers. The meaning ot 


ſuch an application was of ſome importance, which 


he enquired of captain Bowreman ; who plainly 
fold him that he was little better than their pri- 
ſoner in his own garriſon, and was threatened with 
immediate death if he ſo much as whiſpered to any 
of his ſervants. What the cauſe of it was, he was 
| Wholly at a loſs to imagine; but he was induced 
to think that there was ſomething extraordinary 
going forward, though he could not conjecture 
what it might be. He ſaid that, according to ſome 


information he had received, the captain of the 


horſe i in the iſland was in the ſame fituation with 


himſelf, and that his lieutenant had the command 


of the troop. What the cauſe for ſuch treatment 
of either of them could be, it was impoſſible to 
deviſe, unleſs it was ſuſpected that they were too 
much attached to the king. Such an intimation 
afforded the colonel an opportunity of enquiring 
particularly, whether he had heard of any intention 


to ſeize the king that night ; to which captain 


Bowreman anſwered, that it was not improbable 
if ſomething of that nature was in agitation, but 
as to himſelf he was s wholly ignorant of 1 it. 


ae vo w ws - 


ie 6. 6 Tas 


* 
— > Pt” Gr" I wt Ven K „ 
— 


7 


11 
+ 11 
1 
19 
. 
8 
1 
k 
- 
Lo 
: 
5 
7 
7 
*; 1 
1 
i 
1 
\ 1 
Hot 
. 
x 1 
1 
1 
1 
7 
4 
— 4 
17 
It q 
i] 2 
4 ö 
7 
: : 
+ i 
4} 
l 
1 
» 
«+ 
* 
4 
no 
: U 
bi: 2 
4 
10 


- — — — - 4. - 
Se # 


* 
—— —ͤ —ꝛ——ũwZœ-—U 
—— 7 , ao —ů—— 2 cp — —— ee 2 
. _ . T” YT * * __ * * - + > X 
J 7 W EC 31 
4 5 U wow * 1 . "* . 
© —F. . ... 


250 HISTORY OF THE | 


Tus face of: affairs was Welly changed, * 

he returned to Newport. Not only the king's 
lodgings were ſurrounded with guards, but every 
window was watched, and centinels were even 
placed at his chamber door, almoſt ſuffocating him 
with the ſmoke of their matches. When he found 
matters wearing ſo ſerious an aſpect, he haſtened 
back to complain to major Rolfe, who was at that 
time in bed, as it was near twelve o'clock, of the 
rudeneſs of the ſoldiers; from whom he had an 
anſwer, that he was far from intending to incom- 
mode the king, but that the two companies had 
been drawn out of the caſtle ſo late, as to render 

it impoſſible to provide them with quarters that 
night. The only expedient which had occurred 
to him of obviating this inconvenience was, to 
double all the guards, in order to diſpoſe of them 
for the preſent, and that he had not foreſeen the 
conſequence complained of; he promiſed to ſee 
every grievance redreſſed in the morning, and ex- 
preſſed his confidence that if the colonel would 
ſpeak to the captain of the guard, he would remove 
thoſe men who had been ſo offenſive, and farther 
authorized him, if neceſſary for that purpoſe, to 
make uſe of his name. The colonel made the ap- 
plication, and ſo far prevailed, that the centinels, 
whoſe matches had annoyed the king, were remo- 
ved to a greater diſtance. 

From the ſeveral events of the night, which the 
colonel related to the king and his attendants, and 
the various circumſtances that had occurred, it 

| was 


— 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 2851 


was concluded by every one, that the army were 


certainly commiſſioned to ſeize ſuddenly upon the 


king's perſon... What was to be done in conſe- 
quence of this determination, as there appeared 
but very little time to deliberate upon it, was to be 
| reſolved ſpeedily ;. for as the caſe ſeemed to be a 
deſperate one, nothing ſhort of a remedy adapted 
to counteract the e deſign wholly « could be adequate 
to the purpoſe. ED 

Tux duke of Richmond and the earl of Lindſay 
. ih the king's s eſcape immediately, as the 
only chance he had left to accompliſh his wiſhes of 
an union with the parliament. They urged it as 
the ſpeedieſt means of procuring a perſonal treaty 
with them; and as the only one by which his per- 
ſon would be protected from danger. But the 


King did not ſuffer them to proceed to deviſe the 
means of eſcape, before he objected to the eſcape 


itſelf; by urging the great difficulty, if not an ab- 
ſolute impoſſibility « of effecting it; by repreſenting 
the dangers which would attend it, if it ſhould 
miſcarry, in diſheartening his own friends and ex- 
aſperating the army ; by urging, that if the army 
ſhould proceed to ſeize him, they muſt preſerve 
him for their own ſakes, becauſe that it was eſſen- 
tial to the intereſt of any party to join the king” $ 
intereſt, ſo far as related to the ſafety of his per- 
ſon, with its own, becauſe the _ was beyond 
their reach, 

To theſe arguments it was replied 55 the carl 
of Lindſay,” that however theſe ſentiments might 
q 8 2 be 


- 


- * 


7 
14 
if : 
$6 
: 
: 
, 
: 
' 
vt 
| 
: - 
+41 
; 
: FN 
74 
11 
11 
{4% 
: 
: 
1 
1 
F 
: 
: U 
if 
#31 7 
It. * 
ot l 
1 
1507 
4 
144 * 
11 
Bll 
15841 
' 
$436 
1 
lf 


— — — — 
— — I 


— = — — — 


. 


—— 
- — 
5 


— 
— 


- 
———— 
— — 
2 -— > 
' IE 


— 


3 4 * 


— 


— 
„ 1 ** Wo. 3 * T7 . 
7 * £'s * = 


24 a dt ao ——— te 
1 „ L wr AS 1 
PF + * $ ng + Wa — ay © , 
4 Ss 1 . a T6 


mT — 


- 
— 


282 HISTORY OF THE 


be founded in reaſon, it was to be doubted if they 
would be found true in making the experiment; 
and therefore he cautioned the king to beware, 
that he did not fall into hands, which would not 
be very ſcrupulous to ſteer by ſuch rules of policy; 
and reminded him of the buſineſs of Hampton 
Court, where his majeſty had already experienced 
that his eſcape was his beſt ſecurity. And to theſe 
reaſons it was added by the duke of Richmond, 
that he thought an eſcape was very practicable; 
for which he appealed to colonel Cooke, and aſked 
him how he paſſed to and fro? To this queſtion the 


Colonel replied, that he had the word; and on the 


duke's aſking him, whether he believed that he 
could paſs him alſo, it was returned for anſwer, 
that he had not the ſmalleſt doubt of it. 

Ax experiment was made to convince his ma- 
jeſty, that the meaſure was practicable. The duke 
immediately put on a cloak without a ſtar, and 
paſſed through the guards in company with the 
colonel; with whom he returned, to encourage 
the king, and ſhew that it was not a difficult taſk. 
Whilſt the king was in conference with his nobles 
at the window, he turned round to the colonel, 
who at this time was drying himſelf before the fire, 


| and ſaid, Ned Cooke, what do you adviſe in this 


caſe? to which the colonel replied, that he ſuſ- 
pected his own judgment too much to offer any | 
advice, conſidering the greatneſs of the danger, 
and the perſon concerned in it; that his majeſty 
had his privy counſellors with him, to wom̃ he 
begged earneſtly that he would attend. Bur 


121, or WIGHT, 2353 ' 


Bur though the lords reſumed their ſolicitations, il 
and. urged the preſſing neceſſity of the caſe, the | 
king, whoſe fears were awake by ſo many preced- VE 
ing miſcarriages, again addreſſed himſelf to the My 
colonel, and ſaid, Ned Cooke, I command you to 8 
give me your advice. Upon this the colonel craved 
leave to premiſe ſome particulars, with permiſſion 1 
from his majeſty to propoſe a queſtion, which was ö 
granted. Suppoſe, then, ſaid Cooke, I ſhould not —& |: 
only tell your majeſty, that the army mean ſuds -- 
denly to ſeize upon your perſon, but ſhould fully 1 
convince. you of it by concurring circumſtances; 

and ſuppoſe farther, that I have not only the word, 1 


but horſes ready at hand, a veſſel attending and #4 
hourly expecting me at Cowes, and that I am my- i | 
ſelf both ready and defirous of attending your ma- | A 
jeſty ; that the darkneſs of the night is peculiarly _ 8 
favourable for ſuch a purpoſe, and ſeems to pre- 2X 
clude thoſe difficulties which might be occaſioned A 


by the oppoſite circumſtances ; ; there remains but | 
one queſtion, What your majeſty will reſolve to _ WE 
do? To this the king, after a ſhort pauſe, delivered = 
this determined and poſitive anſwer: They have 
promiſed me, and I have promiſed them; and 10 
will not firſt break the conditions. 

As this reaſon was far from ſatisfactory to colo- 
nel Cooke, he requeſted permiſſion to argue this 
point with the king; which being moſt readily 
agreed to, he obſerved, that his majeſty, he ſup- 
poſed, alluded to the parliament, to whom he had 
made that promiſe. But, ſays Cooke, the ſcene is 

„ 3 


. 
— 4 8 * 1 r 
— - "4 _. —— - — — 
2 22 ͤ —— . — = 
* n LY ” 4 woe 4 RE 
4 . — "vhs * ada * "I, 1 
- 1 : - Wo * e , * 1 > Is 
* a ee - c 4 » — * 4 
! +8. n . * * * 
* = a *. at 


— 


—— 


254 s rolr Or fut 


f totally changed ; for our preſent apprehetifion ; and 
cauſe of alarm does not come from them but from 
the army. This army has already violated the 
votes and promiſes of the parliament, by invading 
your majeſty's freedom and ſafety ; by changing 
the ſingle centinel of ſtate at the outward door, if 
abſolute breach of their promiſe, into guards at 
the very bed chamber; by thus putting your ma- 
jeſty i in a ſtate of confinement and durance, which 
1 in all probability, the forerunner of loinerhing 
ill worſe. 

To theſe ſtrong reaſons, the kin, g replied, that 
| be could not perſuade himſelf to do any thing which 
ſhould have the moſt diftant appearance of break- 
ing his word. On this he bid him and the earl of 
Lindſay a good night, the duke of Richmond be- 
ing at that time in waiting ; and added that he 
would go and take his reſt too as Tong as he could: 
Which, Sir, ſaid Cooke, 1 fear will not be long: 
And the king rejoined, As it pleaſes God. But 
the king perceived that the colonel was very much 
agitated, which occaſioned him to alk farther, Ned, 
what troubles you, tell me? He faid, to conſider 
the greatneſs of your majeſty*s danger, and yout 
unwillingneſs to obviate it. Never let that trou- 
ble you, anſwered the king, for were it greater, I 
will not break my word to prevent it. Cooke 
begged him to ſuſpend his reſolution, and give him 
leave to ſtep and fetch the earl of Southampton : 
| but he told him there was no need, for, pointing 


£0 the duke of Richmond and the earl of Lindfay, 
= HE 


I8LE OF WIGHT, 25% 


he ſaid they were his true friends: Be pleaſed to 
conſult them, replied Cooke: I have reſolved al- 
ready, ſaid the king: go ye both to bed, and if I 
have need I will ſend for you. On this lord Lind- 
fay and colonel Cooke took their leave and de- 
parted. 

Wurx the colonel was gone, the duke of Rich- 
mond ſtepped out after him, and requeſted his 
opinion whether he had better go to bed for the 


remainder of the night, or lie in his cloaths; to 


whom Cooke replied, that as for his oun part, 
though his cloaths were ſo wet, he would not pull 
them off, as he placed very little dependance on 
Rolfes promiſes, and he feared it would not be 


long before the king was diſturbed, if the face of 
affairs did not ſtrangely deceive him. The duke 


farther aſked him, if he ſhould again repeat this 
opinion to the king, to which Cooke expreſſed his 
aſſent, and added that he would ſtay in the outer 
foom to wait the reſult; but the duke returned 
with information, that the king was determined to 
go to bed. It was now about one o'clock. Colo- 
nel Cooke did not undreſs himſelf for the night, 
though he was ſo wet. Theſe conferences and 
tranſactions were conducted with ſo much ſecrecy 
and quietneſs, that not the ſmalleſt- noiſe was 
heard, nor the leaſt cauſe of ſuſpicion given. 

Is the morning about day-break, the king was 
diſturbed by a loud knocking at the outer door. 


The duke of Richmond was thereupon ſent 


to learn the cauſe, when he found a perſon 
; Sa; who 


211 
0 
: 
ins! 
: 
: 
©, 
IN 
: 
17 
my gi 
1 
1 
1 
11 
ot! 
| 
FH . 
1 
14 
Ft 
18} 
1 


K 
—— — 


— — 
— — 
— — 


—— —(—é— 
. ͤ — . 

” 4 

: 


— 


— 


Sm 
— — 


— 
== 


— 


— art 
— — 


— a> 
— — 


2586 | HISTORY or THE 


who ſaid his name was Mildmay. This was. the 
brother of Sir Henry Mildmay, and one of the 
ſervants placed by the parliament about the king. 
On enquiring his buſineſs, he anſwered that ſe- 
veral gentlemen from the army were very defirous 
to ſpeak with the king, which meſſage was carried 
in by the duke. 33 
Tn noiſe at the door ſtill een IEP " which 
induced his majeſty to give. orders for their ad- 
miſſion ; which was no ſooner done, than the of- 
ficers rudely ruſhed into the bed-chamber, before 
they would allow him time to get out of bed, and 
at once, without any reſpect or ceremony, abrupt- 
ly told him they had orders for his removal, 
From whom? ſaid the king; and they replied, 
from the army. To which place? ſaid the king; 
and they anſwered, to the caſtle. The king then 
demanded, to what caſtle? and they anſwered 
again, to the caſtle, The caſtle, ſaid the king, is 
no caſtle; but he added that he was well enough 
prepared for any caſtle, and therefore requeſted 
them to name it. After they had whiſpered to- 
ether for a ſhort time, they named Hurſt caſtle. 
Indeed! ſaid he, with much ſurprize, you could 
not well have named a worle. 

AFTER this had paſſed, the king deſired the 
duke of Richmond to ſend for the earl of Lindſay 
and colonel Cooke, to the former of which they at 
firſt objected; but on the king's ſaying, Why not 
both, fince they lodge together: ? they promiſed 
to ſend for both, but in fact ſent for neither. 
| 5 The 


TSLE OF WIGHT, 257 


The. duke of Richmond then ordered the king's 
breakfaſt to be haſtened, preſuming that there 
was no proviſion made in that deſolate fortreſs ; 
but the horſes came before his majeſty was. well 
ready, and he was hurried away with much preci- 
pitation, the duke alone accompanying him, for 
about two miles, when he was informed he muſt 
proceed no farther. On taking a ſad farewel of 
the king, he was ſcarcely permitted to kiſs the 
king's hand ; and the king's laſt words to the 
duke were, as they were on the point of being ſo 
fatally ſeparated, Remember me to * lord Lind- 
from 3 I to forget the paſſages of this — 
Wr, have little ſubſequent intelligence relative 
to the king, of a nature which can entitle it to a 
place i in this hiſtory; it muſt ſuffice to ſay, that 
he was fortunate enough to ſee Mr. Edward Worl- 
ley in his journey, to whom he gave the watch 
out of his pocket, as a ſmall token of his remem- 
brance. This is now in the poſſeſſion of the Rev. 
Francis Worſley, of Chale. Of the fatal cataſtro- 
phe of this ſudden affair, our-readers are too well 
acquainted from various ſources of information to 
need a relation here. It will be abundantly ſuf- 
ficient to ſay, that the king did not long remain 
at Hurſt caſtle, which was indeed but an uncouth 
fituation for any tolexable accommodation. Though 
the parliament voted the king” $ conceſſions to be 
ſatisfactory, but four or five days after, the army 
who had ſecured, his perſop. were regardleſs of 


20 | | this 


Ef. 3 


—— ̃ — 
e 


— 
—— 
Fe 


EL" 


> xz 
— — % 


r ͤ—ͤmM1 ] ——agamra eons ora 
. Foe ne 1 
- 7 Sr 7 af C 
— 8 \ — . 


266 tirs roxy er Tun 


this meaſure; and thofe who had been molt actide 
in procuring that vote, were impriſoned and ſe. 
cluded by the army. On the twenty-firſt the 
king was brought to Wincheſter from the caſtle 
In his way to Windfor, where he arrived a few days 
afterwards ; and from thence he was conveyed to 
St. James's the nineteenth of January, and was 
arraigned for the firſt time on the following day 
enced to death, after three Yom of mock trial, on 
rhe rwenty-ſeventh,” and executed on the thir- 
"tieth. The bodies of Oliver Cromwell, with H. 
Treton, and Bradſhaw, the prefident who paſſed 
ſentence of death upon hith, 'wete afterwards 
-hanged at Tyburn bn the thirteenth of November 
o ie thouſand fix hundred and fixty-one, and bu- 
ried under the gallows. Their heads were ſer 
up on Weſtminſter Hall. | 
Io return to the duke of Richmond, who 
was forcibly ſent back „as we have ſtared, His firſt 
viſit was to the earl-of Lindfay's lodgings, where 
4 guard had been placed all night, to prevent his 
ſtirring abroad during this infamous tranſaction; 
ſo that the earl and the colonel were ſurprized 
with the firſt intelligence of the king's removal 
"by the duke himſelf. He delivered to them at 
the ſame time his majeſty's gracious remembrance, 
as well as his particular injunction to the colonel. 
Arx a ſhort conſultation, they left the iſland 
«ith all poſſible expedition, and, together with 
the car} of — and his counteſs, em- 
wo h |  barkes 


txrx or Went. 235 


barked on board a veſſel which attended colonel 
Cooke, and landed near Titchfield, the ſeat of the 
earl of Southampton. Bur fuch were the mea- 
fures taken to prevent the: king's eſcape, had it 


been attempted, that a party of celonel Okey's 


regiment, which were ſtationed there, immediately 


ſeized them on their landing; they were releaſed - 


on colonel Cooke's engaging for their appearance, 
and permitted to proceed to the earl's houſe. The 
narrative of theſe occurrences, in ſubſtance the 
ame as we have here ſtated; was drawn up the 
next morning, while every thing was freſh in 
their memories, in conformity to the king's com- 
mand]; this was publiſhed, as many others were, 
Jon after the reſtoration; but is not now to be 
met with. The account of theſe circumſtances 
is, however, preſerved in the collection of Har- 
leian MSS. in the Britiſh Muſeum. 

We cannot take leave of this awful buſineſs; 
without ſubmitting an obſervation or two to the 
confidetation of our readers. Though we have 
little to add to the remarks which have been made 

by preceding hiſtorians, we ſhould not do Juſtice 
to our ſubject, if we declined to preſent ſuch re- 
flections as ſtrike us with more peculiar energy on 
the occaſion. 


Or the character of colonel Hammond, it is 


probable there can be but one opinion, viz. that 
he was an artful, deſigning, and thorough-paced 
miſcreant, who would ſtop at nothing to accome 
pliſh the objects of ambition and avarice. No 

: tles 


260 HISTORY or THE 


tics of honour, it is plain, could bind him; no 
| regard to truth 97. veracity reſtrain him. In the 
true ſpirit of the times, diſſimulation was the pro- 
minent feature in his portrait; and, with words 
as ſmooth as oil, and a countenance placid as a 
cherub, the moſt iniquitous and baſe projects and 
the moſt horrid and barbarous intentions lodged 
in his heart. Though entruſted with, the dread. 
ful ſecrets of the prevailing powers, he could aſ- | 
fume the face of innocence, and, by the moſt plau. 
fible pretences, abviate appearances, and ward off 
the reſponſibility, or even the ſuſpicion, of being 
acceſſary to their proceedings. Or if ſuſpicion 
did ariſe, after the, moſt artful meaſures taken to 
prevent it, he did not ſcruple, by downright falſe. 
hoods, to purſue the ſame iniquitous ſchemes for 
effecting his purpoſes. 

To ſpeak of mayor Rolfe, we can n only conſider 
him as the premeditated aſſaſſin, or callous regi- 
cide, thirſting for that blood which he ought to 
have been zealous and active in endeavouring to 
preſerve ; but the influence of party, and tempta- 
tions to apoſtacy, by holding out rewards, will 
ever prevail with baſe minds. 

Or the conduct and intentions of the duke of 
Richmond, the earl of Lindſay, and colonel 
Cooke, the utmoſt anxiety was. manifeſted for the 
king's preſervation and eſcape from the impend- 
ing danger. They renewed their preſſing intreaties 
again and again, that his majeſty would be pleaſed 


to conſult his perſonal ſafety, and put himſelf un- 
der 


ISLE OF wichr. : 26r 


der their protection. The colonel pointed out 
what was apparently a mode of eſcape which 
could ſcarcely miſcarry, and convinced the king 
that the neceſſary meaſures were taken to execute 
it inſtantly ; and every argument and incentive 


was uſed to. render it productive of the defired 


effect, but in vain. The laſt, in particular, who 
had a far better opportunity of diſcovering the 


danger, from the occurrences of the night, than 


the two noblemen who were attending the king, 
could not refrain from ſome motions and agita- 
tions, though in his majeſty's preſence, which 
ſtrongly marked the ſtate of his mind, when the 
king perſiſted in declining the attempt to eſcape. 
But it was of no avail; and the enſuing morning 


demonſtrated the cauſe of all this dread and 28 


prehenſion for the ſafety of the king. 
Wrru reſpect to his majeſty's determination, 


how far it was right or wrong, will certainly admit 


of ſome conſideration. From the circumſtances 
which attended colonel Cooke and his party, on 
their landing near Titchfield, it is much to be 
doubted if the attempt would have ſucceeded, 


even if they had been ſo fortunate as to eſcape 


| from the iſland; for as they would probably have 
ſtretched, as they now did, for the earl of South- 
ampton's houſe there, their danger at leaſt muſt 
be allowed to have been great, had they adopted 
this meaſure. Either way, therefore, the atteige 
was pregnant with Langer: | N 


WHETHER 


262 5 AIATQRY or THE 


Wnernzg his DEP was apprehenſive of ſych 
an obſtacle on the one hand, which, added to the 
bad ſucceſs of his former attempts might influence 
| his determination, is a matter about which we can 
decide nothing with certainty. But no ſuch reaſon 
is handed down to us as the cauſe, and therefore 


_ . muſt not be made the ſubject of a ſerious argu- 


ment; the king's refuſal being ſolely grounded 
on his promiſe to the parliament. Yet, as was 
pertinently obſerved to him on the occaſion, ſuch 
a promiſe had no relation to the preſent circum. 
ſtances ; and could not extend to prevent him 
from eſcaping out of the hands of a third party, 
who were manifeſtly aſſembled with a hoſtile in- 
tention againſt his perſon. 

NerTHEeR muſt we allow too much ſtrength to 
the objection, if the king had any appre- 
henſions that ſuch meaſures had been taken 
on the main land for preventing his eſcape from 
the iſland, on a ſuppoſition of his being able to 
elude the vigilance of thoſe who were ſent to 
ſeize him. Of the fact, that a part of the army 
was poſted near Titchfield, no knowledge could 
have reached the iſland : and, therefore, if ſuch an 
apprehenſion aroſe in any of their minds, it 
would only operate to a cautious and wary con- 
duct, but not to an abſolute refuſal to make the 
attempt. 

83 perhaps. aſſerted by few, that in the 
| firſt and leading cauſes of this unhappy diſſen- 
non between the king and his parliament, the 

former 


ISLE OP WIGHT; , 263 


former was entirely free from blame. Neither 


can it be juſt or equitable to judge him by 
thoſe rules and meaſures, which were eſtabliſhed. 
at the æra of the revolution; when, in calling in 
2 foreign prince, becauſe allied to the crown, 
through the defect 'of an heir of the proteſtant 
ſucceſſion to fill that throne which, the king had 
abdicated, they could ſtipulate for and preſcribe 
the conditions upon which they would accept him 
for their prince. If he was led into any error, he 
made abundant conceſſions to the parliament, which 
ought to have protected him from farther inſults ; 
and his death, which was effected by the turbulent 
ſpirits of the times, was far more than a compen- 
ſation for certain acts of power, which the example 
of his predeceſſors gave countenance to. 

On the other hand, if we take a view of the con- 
duct of his enemies, what were their pretenſions ? 
They pretended a great veneration for liberty and 
the proteſtant religion; but the proſpect of power 
and emolument were manifeſtly the principles on 
which they acted. They oſtenſibly held out their 
having a great reſpect for the laws, and a venera- 
tion for the principles of the Engliſh conſtitution; 
but their ſelf-created tribunal, which they eſta- 
bliſhed for the purpoſe of condemning their ſove- 
reign for a breach of that conſtitution, was itſelf a 
_ proceeding, which thoſe very laws in the ſtrongeſt 
manner condemned. 


char TER 


HISTORY or THE 


CHAPTER X. 


or THE eri HISTORY OF THE ISLAND FROM KING 
CHARLES'S DEATH. |, 


Arrkn this fatal cataſtrophe of the king 5 
murder, colonel Hammond did not continue in 
the government of the ifland. He was ſucceeded 
in the year one thouſand fix hundred and forty- 
nine by colonel William Sydenham, the ſon of 
William Sydenham, eſq. of Winford Eagle in Dor- 
fetſhire, and the brother of the celebrated phyſi- 
cian of that name. His appointment, it is unne- 
ceſſary to ſtate, was the reward of his former ſer- 
vices to the parliament, for whom, as governor, he 
had before held Weymouth and Melcombe againſt 
the king, and was afterwards commander in chief 
in Dorſetſhire. He was made one of the council 
to Oliver Cromwell, and a commiſſioner of the 
' treaſury ; he was alſo one of the committee of 
ſafety, and a member of the other houſe of parlia- 
ment, which had been ſubſtituted for a houſe of 
lords; and he was likewiſe, as we have obſerved, 
governor and commander in chief of all the forts 
and forces in the ifle of Wight. 
We have already obſerved in what manner the 
inhabitants of this iſland took part with the par- 
liament, in an early part of the civil war; by which 
means it . a much happier ſtate, as we have 
noted, 


181 or Wonr. 265 


noted, than moſt other parts of the kingdom. To 
prevent the king's friends from adminiſtering any 
effectual aſſiſtance, the parliament took care that 
forces ſnould be ſtationed in different parts, that the 
people might be kept in ſubjection. This prudent 
meaſure was productive of quiet and repoſe, which 
induced many ſtrangers to retire hither from the 
more active ſcenes of thoſe times. By theſe 
means, the landholders were greatly benefited, as 
it occafioned an increaſe in the rent of lands to 
the amount of at leaſt twenty per cent; and that 
this ſolely was the cauſe, muſt be inferred from the 
known fact, that they ſunk to their former level 
ſpeedily after the reſtoration. 

Wuen the regal government was again eſtabliſh. | 
ed, by the wonderful and extraordinary feries of 
thoſe events, which ſo rapidly followed the death 
of Oliver Cromwell, and terminated in the reſto= 
ration of Charles the Second to the throne of his 
anceſtors; we find that Thomas lord Culpeper, in 
the year one thouſand fix hundred and ſixty was 
appointed governor of the iſland. The diſplea- 
fure of the inhabitants was excited hy his govern- 
ment, which was unpopular and arbitrary; and 
they repreſented their grievances in a petition to 
the king, as the moſt probable means, in their 
eſtimation, to- obtain redreſs. As it diſplays the 
nature of his government, we ſhall give it to our 
readers in the original dreſs. 

Petition of the inhabitants of the iſland to the 


king and council. | 
Ne. 6. * «© To 


266 HISTORY or THE 


ee To the King's moſt excellent Majeſty, the 
humble Petition of your Majeſty's Subjects, In- 
habitants of the Iſle of Wight, | 
In all Humility ſheweth, 

That they conceive it to be their Duty at 
this Time humbly to repreſent to your moſt 
excellent Majeſty, that the Right Honourable 
Lord Culpeper, who, by your Majeſty's Letters 

Patent, hath the Grant of the Office of Captain 
| of the ſaid Iſle during his Life, hath encloſed 
| a great Part of a certain Foreſt there, called 

Parkhurſt, in which, during the Reigns of your 
1 Majeſty's Predeceſſors, there hath been, Time 

out of Mind, enjoyed common Paſture for their 

Cattle, by the Inhabitants. of the ſaid Iſle, to 
the great Damage and Impoveriſhment of many 

poor People, who have a great Part of their 

Livelihood thereby, and to the great Grief and 

Diſcouragement of your Majeſty's good Sub- 

; jects of the ſaid Iſle. That the faid Lord Cul- 

:  peper, your Majeſty's Captain of the ſaid Iſle, 

.- aſſuming to himſelf, in his Commiſſions to the 

- Officers of his Majeſty's Militia there, the addi- 

tional Title of Governor of the ſaid Iſle (which 
they humbly conceive. doth no more of Right 
belong to his Lordſhip, than it doth to your 

Majeſty's Lieutenants of the ſeveral, Counties 

within this your Kingdom), doth exerciſe an 
arbitrary Power in the ſaid Iſland, frequently 
intermeddling in the civil Government thereof, 


by giving a Dine to the Proceeding and 
| due 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 267: 


due Execution of your Maj eſty's Laws,to the great 
Vexation and Trouble of the Inhabitants there- 
of: and hath ſometimes proceeded ſo far, as, 
by his arbitrary Power, to impriſon the Perſons 
of ſome of your Majeſty's good Subjects in a 

noiſome Dungeon in Cariſbrooke Caſtle, to 

their great Grief and Diſcouragement, and con- 
trary to your Majeſty's good Laws. 

That ſince it hath always been thought fit by 
your royal Progenitors, in all Times of War 
and Danger, to put the ſaid Ifle, being a con- 

ſiderable Frontier of the Kingdom, into ſome 
Poſture of Defence; they humbly preſent it to 
your moſt excellent Majeſty, as a Danger more 
immediately threatening themſelves, but of 
manifeſt Conſequence to the whole Kingdom, 
that the ancient Magazines and Stores of the 
ſaid Iſle, are neither ſo full, nor in ſo good 
Repair as in former Times; nor the Militia of 
the ſaid Iſle in ſo good a Condition and Poſture 
of Defence, as they humbly conceive it ought 
to be for your Majeſty's Service, and the De- 
fence and Safety of this your Kingdom. The 
- Premiſes conſidered, they do humbly beſeech 
your moſt gracious Majeſty, that the ſaid Stores 
and Magazines may be viewed and repleniſhed, 
that your Majeſty's ſaid Iſle may be put in ſome 
better Poſture of Defence than it is at preſent z 
and that, by Order of your Majeſty, the Inclo- 
ſures of the ſaid Foreſt may be laid open, and 
the other Grievances of the poor Iſle ſome Way 
| E redreſſed, 


268 HISTORY OF THE 


redreſſed, as to your Majeſty's great Wiſdom 
ſhall ſeem meet, 
And your Petitioners, as in Duty bound, 
| Shall ever pray.” 


 Troven the inhabitants had been long enuved to 
and in the habit of petitioning the kings of this 
realm, whenever they conſidered themſelves as 
Injured or oppreſſed by any of their captains; it 
muſt be acknowledged, that this was of a much 
more moderate nature than thoſe. which had been 
dictated on former occaſions. The ſtyle and 


language, too, are obviouſly of a very different 


complexion. We cannot give a ſtronger proof 


of the manner of its reception, than by reciting 
the following anſwer to it, which was tranſ- 


mitted by lord Clarendon, whe: was the lord 
chancellor. 


Reply of the Lord Chancellor Clarendon to the 
Inhabitants of the Iſſe of Wight. 


. As to yourſelves, you have acquitted YOUr- 
ſelves very handſomely in the Bufineſs, both in 
the ſubmiſſive. Tender of it to the King, and in 
the managing of it for the Country; and I can 
ſay you have proceeded with great Reſpect and 
Civility to the Lord. Culpeper: but as to the 
HBuſineſs, the King neither likes the Manner 
nor the Matter of the Petition. The Manner, 


in your having ſo many Hands to it, contrary 
8 to 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 269 


to the laſt Act“, conſidering the late Times 
when ſo ill Uſe has been made of Petitions ; 


| and that you have preſented it at this Time, 


being ſo unſeaſonable, that were not ſome of 
you known to the contrary, you might be ſuſ- 
| pected to be diſaffected. The Matter, my 
Lord being the King's Officer, and the Parti- 
culars moſt of them trivial, do ſavour of Anger 
and Malice to the Lord Culpeper. 

As to the Foreſt, I wiſh you have not awaked 
- a ſleeping Lion, by acquainting the King with his 
Right; but the King is a gracious Prince; and the 
Lord Treaſurer, the Lord Aſhley, and I myſelf, 
we are Friends to the Country, ſo there is Hope 
you will be in no Danger of loſing your Foreſt. 
As to the Impriſonment, there is nothing of 
Weight in it; though in the Matter that con- 
cerns Anthony Dowding, my Lord may proba- 
bly have been a little raſh, and have proceeded 
too far; and as to the Cauſe of the firſt Impri- 
ſonment of the Mayor, poſſibly my Lord may 
not be wholly juſtified init, though there Wy 
be good Cauſe for the detaining him. 

As to the Militia, my Lord Culpeper will be 
appointed togo down to put it in Order. My Lord 
Culpeper, had' not this Petition been preſented, 
would before this Time have been removed, and 
another put in his Place, for as much as the King, 


Act of the 13th of king Charles the Second, chap v. en- 
titled, ** An act againſt tumults and diſorders, &c. 


T3 | being 


290 HISTORY or THE 


being in the Iſland, took Notice that he was not re- 


ſpected by the Gentryas became his Government; 
and truly my Lord is not to blame to be willing 
to leave the Command of a Place where he is not 
reſpected; but now he ſhall go down to ſhew you 
he is not out of Favour with the King, although 
his Majeſty is unwilling to put Perſons to Em- 
ployments not ſuitable to their Capacities. As 
for Inſtance, he would not command me to ride 
Poſt. And finding this a Place not ſo proper 
for his Command, he intended to remove him 
to ſome Employment fitter for him. But I be- 
lieve, though you may poſſibly have one that 
hall live more ſociably among you, you may 
never have one that will uſe his Power leſs than 
my Lord Culpeper.” 

This very modeſt and handſome reply muſt be 
admired as a ſpecimen of found policy, and con- 
ſiſtent with the dignity of the perſon intereſted in 
it. The writer, whoſe admirable hiſtory of the 
times preceding affords us the ſtrongeſt demonſtra- 
tion of his prudence and diſcernment, has in no 
part of it more happily tempered the various re- 
quiſites of a profound ſtateſman, ſtripped of all the 


ſubtleties and manœuvres, which have ſo highly dif. 


graced ſubſequent times, under the molt ſpecious 
pretences and deluſive artifices. We are at a loſs 
which maſt ta wander at; the noble lord's conde- 
ſcenſion in writing ſo honeſtly, plainly, and fami- 
liarly to the inhabitants of the iſland, the meaſures 
dn to preſerve the dignity and honour of the 

poverhor 


ISLE OF WIGHT: 271 
governor pure and inviolate, the diſadvantages of 
which their petition had been productive on ac- 
count of its militating with a recent act of parlia- 
ment, and the ſatisfaction of being ſufficiently en- 
couraged to hope that no unpleaſant conſequences 
would reſult from it. Free from all attempts to 
deceive by a ſtudied and affected language, which 
is capable ofa double conſtruction, it ſpeaks home 
to the heart, and expreſſes more in a few ſhort and 
plain phraſes, than the moſt laboured harangue, 
or the moſt florid oration, which comprehends 
more than a ſingle object, and is calculated to 
amuſe rather than to convince. | 

Wi have thought it adviſable to lay before our 
readers, on the authority of Kehle's Statutes - at 
large, the act entire to which alluſion is made in 
the lord chancellor's reply ; which is not only of 
uſe to diſcover the great candour and moderation 
of the noble lord, but, as being till in force, is 
entitled toattentionas matterof general information» 
and will, no doubt, on that account be acceptable. 

« An Act againſt Tumults and Diſorders, 
upon Pretence of preparing or preſenting pub- 
lick Petitions, or other Addreſſes to his Ma- 
jeſty, or the Parliament. 

« Whereas it hath been found by ſad Expe- 
rience, That tumultuous and other unn 
ſoliciting, and procuring of Hands by private 
Perſons to Petitions, Complaints, Remon- 
ſtrances, and Declarations, and other Addreſſcs 


to the King, or to both, or either Houſes of 
14 | Parliament 


Na HISTORY OF THE 


Parliament, for Alteration of Matters eitabliſh.. 
ed by Law, Redreſs of pretended Grievances in 
Church or State, or other publick Concernments, 
have been made Uſe of, to ſerve the Ends of 
factious and ſeditious Perſons gotten into Power, 
to the Violation of the Publick Peace, and have 
been a great Means of the late unhappy Wars, 
Confuſions, and Calamities in this Nation ; 
For preventing like Miſchiefs for the future, 
II. Be it enacted by the King's moſt excel. 
lent Majeſty, by and with the Conſent of the 
Lords and Commons aſſembled in Parliament, 
and by the Authority of the ſame, That no 
Perſon or Perſons whatſoever, ſhall from and 
after the firſt of Auguſt, One thouſand fix hun- 
dred ſixty and one, ſolicit, labour, or procure 
the getting of Hands, or other Conſent of any 
Perſons above the Number of Twenty or more, 
ro any Petition, Complaint, Remonſtrance, De- 
_ .. claration or other Addreſs to the King, or both, 
or either Houſes of Parliament, for Alteration 
of Matters eſtabliſhed by Law in Church or 
State, unleſs the Matter thereof have been firſt 
. conſented unto, and ordered by three or more 
Juſtices of the County, or by the major Part of 
the Grand Jury of the County or Diviſion of 
the County where the ſame. Matter ſhall ariſe, 
at their publick Aſſizes, or General Quarter Seſ- 
fions, or if ariſing in Loxpox by the Lord 
Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common 
Council aſſembled; And that no Perſon or Per- 
ſons 


ISLE OF WIGHT, ; 273 


ſons whatſoever ſhall repair to his Majeſty, or 
both, or either of the Houſes of Parliament, 
upon Pretence of preſenting, or delivering any 
Petition, Complaint, Remonſtrance, or Declara- 
tion or other Addreſſes, accompanied with ex- 
ceſſive Number of People, nor at any one Time 
with above the Number of ten Perſons, upon 
Pain of incurring a Penalty not exceeding the 
ſum of One hundred Pounds in Money, and 
three Months Impriſonment without Bail or 
Mainprize for every Offence, which Offence to 
be proſecuted at the Court of King's Bench, or 
at the Aſſizes, or General Quarter Seſſions, 
within ſix Months after the Offence committed, 
and proved by two or more credible Wit- 
neſſes. | 
III. Provided always, That this Act, or any 
Thing therein contained, ſhall not be conſtrued 
to extend to debar or hinder any Perſon or 
Perſons, not exceeding the Number of ten 
aforeſaid, to preſent any publick or private 
Grievance or Complaint to any Member or 
Members of Parliament after his Election, and 
during the Continuance of the Parliament, or to 
the King's Majeſty, for any Remedy to be 
thereupon had; nor to extend to any Addreſs 
whatſoever to his Majeſty, by all or any of the 
Members of both or either Houſes of Parlia- 
ment, during the Sitting of Parliament, but 
that they may enjoy their Freedom of Acceſs 
to his Majeſty, as heretofore hath been uſed.” 
; | .« 


274 HISTORY OF THE 


Ir this act of parliament and the lord chancel. 
Jor's reply to the petition againſt lord Culpeper 
be conſidered and compared, the moderation and 
candour of the noble lord muſt be conſpicuous 
and manifeſt. We need not add to the remarks 
already made on this ſubject; the diſpaſſionate 
muſt be ſatisfied that we have aſſerted noth ing 
which is not fully juſtified from ſuch compariſon. 
The hiſtorian is not obliged to combat every ob- 
jection which the credulous or the ſceptic may be 
diſpoſed to throw in his way; it is ſufficient that 
he relates facts, and hazards little as authentic, 
which is not warranted as a plain deduction or in- 
ference from thoſe facts. | 
- NoTwITHSTANDING the obſervations contained 
in lord Clarendon's reply to the petition of the 
Inhabitants, we find that the lord Culpeper reſign- 
<d ſoon after, and admiral Sir Robert Holmes 
vas appointed his ſucceſſor. This was conſidered 
by the king as a ſmall acknowledgment of the 
ſervices he had performed in the war againſt the 
Dutch, on the coaſt of Africa. He had been diſ- 
patched hither ſecretly before any declaration of 
war had taken place, with a ſquadron of twenty- 
two ſhips; there he expelled the Dutch from the 
ſettlement of Cape Corſe, on which the Engliſh 
had avowed a claim, and alſo feized upon their 
factories of Cape Verd and the Iſland of Goree, at 
which places he likewiſe took ſeveral trading veſ- 
ſels. From hence he croſſed the Atlantic and 
poſſeſſed himſelf of Nova Belgia, which has ſince 
been better known by the name of New York. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | 275 


Warn theſe depredations were communicated 
to the Dutch, complaints were formally announced 
to the Britiſh ambaſſador, and tranſmitted to the 
Engliſh court. According to the ſyſtem of war 
at that time practiſed, though ſince totally diſre- 
garded, ſuch an infraction of public peace, with- 
qut a formal declaration of war, was altogether 
unwarranted. As king Charles was unwilling to 

avow an action, which, under all theſe circum- 
| ſtances, could not be juſtified, he was reduced to 
the political neceſſity of declaring himſelf totally 
ignorant of it. So different in theſe reſpects was 
the conduct of the Britiſh king and his chancel- 
lor; but both very conſiſtent with their general 
reſpective characters. 

To carry on this political manœuvre, which the 
king, whoſe conſcience was not very nice in theſe 
matters, was obliged to ſubmit to for avoiding war, 
the admiral, under the oſtenſible motive of com- 

mitting theſe uſurpations without authority, was 
| ſent to the tower, merely to amuſe and gratify the 
Dutch. But the king, as ſoon he poſſibly could, 
ſo as to avoid ſuſpicion, releaſed him from his 
confinement, and gratified him with the govern. 
ment of this iſland. He was in very high favour 
at court, and continued in this office to the time 
of his death. We ſhould have noted, that he ſuc- 
ceeded lord Culpeper as governor in the year one 
thouſand fix hundred and fixty-ſeven. In the 
ſummer of the year one thouſand fix hundred and 
ſeyenty-one, the king paid him a viſit at Yar- 

1 = mouth, 


A HISTORY OF THE 


mouth, where he had built an handſome houfe on 
tands which had been conferred on him by the 
crown; at which time it was a garriſoned town, 
and ftrongly fortified, with the advantage of a 
drawbridge at the eaſtern entrance. In ſpeaking 
particularly of the town of Yarmouth, we ſhall 
have occaſion to notice ſome farther particulars, 
which we muſt here paſs over. | 
Wurm the king paid this viſit to the iſland, as 
we have juſt obſerved, he landed at Gurnard Bay, 
to the weſtward of Cowes, and paſſed through the 
foreſt of Parkhurſt, as far as what is now called 
Park farm, at that time belonging to the gover- 
nors of the iſland. For this purpoſe, Sir Robert 
had cauſed a road to be made, ſome faint traces 
of which are ſtill viſible. It has been ſaid, that 
the foreſt was then ſo full of wood, that the ſquir- 
rels, thoſe nimble-footed quadrupeds of the animal 
tribe, could leap from one tree to another 
throughout the whole of it; but this timber 
has been long ſince cleared, and probably a good 
part of it ſent to Portſmouth, and little beſides 
underwood is now to be ſeen. | 

ALL that we need obſerve further on this ſub- 
ject, is to remark that the admiral was ſtyled go- 
vernor and captain of the iſland, and of the caſtles 
and forts in it, by his patent. With great pro- 
priety did he ſupport the dignity of his office. 
He alſo conſtantly reſided in the iſland, and there- 
by acquired great popularity. He held this office 
to the time of his death in one thouſand ſix hun- 
dr ed 5 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 277 


dred and ninety-two, and was buried in a vault 
in the church at Yarmouth; an elegant monu- 
ment of fine marble is there erected to his me- 
mory, together with a ſtatue as large as life. 
Fun government of this iſland was not long 
vacant after the death of Sir Robert Holmes. 
John, lord Cutts, of the kingdom of Ireland, and 
of an ancient family in Cambridgeſhire, was ſoon 
appointed to it. Befides his having made a con- 
ſiderable progreſs in polite learning, he was ſtill 
more diſtinguiſhed for his valour and courage. 
Of the latter he had given many inſtances, during 
his ſervices under king William, both in Flanders 
and Ireland; and he obtained his favour ſo high- 
ly by this gallant conduct and behaviour, that he 
was promoted to the command.of the Coldſtream 
regiment of foot guards, with the rank of lieute- 
nant general. In various parliaments he was the 
repreſentative of the county of Cambridge. 

From the great popularity of his predeceſſor, 
he came to this government under circumſtances 
very unfavourable to his perſonal reputation. 
Hence he was very unpopular in the early part of 
his. government, and often interfered without juſt 
grounds, and in an 1mproper manner, with the 
corporations of the ifland ; ſeveral of the burgeſ- 
ſes of Newtown being disfranchiſed, and a clergy- 
man impriſoned for ſeveral weeks in, Cowes caſtle. 
This conduct greatly incenſed the inhabitants, 
and they prepared a ſtrong petition againſt him to 
be preſented to the Houſe of Commons, complain- 


ing 


278 HISTORY OF THE 


ing of the arbitrary exertions of authority, which 
the governor exerciſed towards them. Upon 
theſe preparations, the governor conſidered the 
matter with due attention, and prudently deſiſted 
from his pretenſions. This was in the year one 
thouſand ſix hundred and ninety-ſeven, after he 
had been about four years in the government. 
Ox this occaſion, it muſt not be forgotten, that 
articles of reciprocity and friendſhip were agreed 
to and figned by his lordſhip and the inhabitants, 
for the purpoſe of accomodating all differences, 
and obviating all cauſes of diſpute ; wherein the 
governor, on his part, engaged to rectify whatever 
had been done amiſs, and particularly to reſtore 
the burgeſſes of Newtown, which had been 
disfranchiſed, or forcibly prevented from exer- 
ciſing their rights. 
The following copy is here preſented to the 
attention of our readers. 
A Copy of the articles of agreement be- 
tween Lord Cutts, governor of the Ifle of 
Wight, and Sir Robert Worſley, Bart. James 
Worſley, Eſq. and the other principal gentlemen 
of the ſaid Iſland, reſpecting the Rights, Privi- 
leges, &c. of the ſeveral corporations. Signed 
at Weſt. 17th of March, 1697. 
. ARTICLES made and agreed between the 
Right Honourable John Lord Cutts, his Ma- 
jeſty's Governor of the Iſle of Wight, &c. and 
Sir Robert Worſley, Baronett, James Worſley, 
"Eſq. Anthony Morgan, Eſq. Henry Holmes, 
Eſq. 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 279 


-, Eſq. in Behalf of themſelves and all other Gen- 
tlemen of the ſaid Iſland, who ſhall afterwards 
ſign the ſame. | 
That there ſhall be, from the Day of the 
Date hereof, a reall, ſincere, mutuall, and laſt- 
ing Friendſhip between the Governour and 
* -Gentlemen of the ſaid Iſle, as alſo between their 
Dependants, Friends, and Servants, to all in- 
.* tents and purpoſes. | 

That all Quarrels, Lawſuits, Animoſitys, and 
the like, relating to Corporations and Elections, 
that have at any Time happen'd between them, 
their Dependants and Servants, ſhall, ipſo facto, 
ceaſe, and be abſolutely forgotten, as if they 


had never been. 


That Sir Robert Worſley, his Friends, and 
the Partys, who have ſigned theſe Articles doe 
engage to aſſiſt any Perſon recommended by the 
Governor to be choſen Members to ſerve for 
the Corporation of Newport, in the laid Iſland, 
for the enſuing Parliament. 

That the Governour ſhall, before the firſt of 
May next enſuing (by himſelf or lawfull De- 
puty) call a Hall at New:own, examine Witneſ- 
ſes concerning the ancient Method of chofing 
Members to ſerve in Parliament for that Corpo- 
ration, and effectually reſtore the ſaid Corpora- 
tion, and all thoſe who have a juſt Pretence 
'to be Members of it, to their ancient Rights of 
Burgage- Tenure: Provided always that the ſaid 
' Governour be firſt put in Poſſeſſion of a qualify- 


ing 


280 HISTORY Of THE 


ing Burgage-Tenure, ſufficient to enable him 

to be a Member and Elector of the faid Corpo- 

ration. He paying for the ſame. 

That the Election of Members to ſerve in 

Parliament for the ſeveral Corporations in the 

faid Iſland ſhall be managed by all who ſhall 

at any Time hereafter ſtand for the fame, and 

by ſuch as recommend or appear for them, with 

all Calmneſs and good Nature, and no Animo- 

fitys or harſh Proceedings be encouraged or 

practis'd on either Side. 

That when any Perſons ſtand for Parliament 

Men, at any Time in the faid Ifle of Wight, 

who are not of the ſaid Iſland, the Governours 

Recommendations ſhall be preferr'd againſt ſuch 

Perſons not being of the Ifland, before any 

other Recommendation whatſoever. 

1 That all due Refpect ſhall be had upon all 

k Occaſions, and by all Perſons ro his Majeſty's 

| Commiſſion, veſted in the Governour, and to 

every Thing thereunto belonging. 

_— a CUT IS. 

Signed at Weſtminſter, this 
17th. of March, 1697-8 in 

the Preſence of 
J. SMITH. 
CHA. SHRUBSHAW. * 


1 Tuts 3 thus happily effected, 

* was productive of every advantage, which could 
| _ reaſonably be expected from it. The governor and 
* | inhabitants 


pe 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 281. 


inhabitants afterwards continued ta live on the 
moſt friendly terms. The habitable part of Ca- 
riſbrooke caſtle was repaired by his lordſhip, for 
the ſatisfaction of receiving company. Here he 
frequently gave very handſome entertainments, 
and ſtudiouſly cultivated a good underſtanding 
with the gentlemen of the ifland, in which he was 
far from being unſucceſsful. Of ſuch good conſe- 
quences was this happy termination of differences 
productive; and the diſpoſition to amity fully con- 
firmed by this ſeaſonable and hoſpitable conduct. 
He died in Ireland, in the year one thouſand ſeven 
hundred and fix; where he was one of the lords 
Juſtices, and general of the forces. 

Wr now come to a period, when the conſtitution 
of the government of this iſland aſſumed a more 
conſequential and important aſpect. As the ſue- 
ceſſor of John, lord Cutts, we find Charles, mar- 
quis of Wincheſter, and duke of Bolton. This 
nobleman was alſo warden of the New Foreſt, lord 
lieutenant of the counties of Southampton and 
Dorſet, and one of the commiſſioners appointed to 
negotiate the treaty of union between England and 
Scotland. Theſe occupations were of a nature 
which did not, perhaps, very conſiſtently admit of 
his reſiding much in the iſland ; and it was now, 
for the firſt time, that the appointment of a lieu- 
tenant governor, with a ſalary, was inſtituted by 
the crown. For though we have before met with 
the appellation of deputy governor, who was 
1 * one of the gentlemen of the iſland, and 
No. 9 U 8 nominated. 


282 HISTORY OF ru 


nominated” by the principal governor to tranſact 
the affairs of ſuch government during his abſence; 
we do not find that any pecuniary TING was 
conferred for ſuch ſervice. 
Ir is not to be underſtood; from what has here 
been obſerved, that no perſon, in the character of 
deputy, ever received any acknowledgment for 
ſuch ſervice, We may reaſonably ſuppoſe, that 
when the appointment of a deputy aroſe from ſome 
neceſſary and unavoidable, or perhaps from the 
voluntary abſence of the governor or captain, ſuch 
emoluments and advantages as appended to the 
governor, either of lands, commons, foreſts, or 
other privileges, were naturally poſſeſſed by the 
deputies ſo reſpectively nominated: And we may 
farther obſerve; that, during the government of 
Sir Robert Holmes, who was prevented from re- 
ſiding ſo much in the iſland as he was'defirous of 
doing, he obtained a ſalary of four ſhillings'a day 
for his deputy, Sir Edward Worſley; a'grant which 
paved the way for the eſtabliſhment which was 
now formed. For, after the ſucceſſion of the mar- 
quis of Wincheſter to the government, colonel 
Morgan was appointed lieutenant governor, by 
royal commiſſion, with-a ſalary of twenty ſhiltings 

per day. 
To thoſe who are acquainted with the hiſfory of | 
queen Anne's adminiſtration, thenumerous changes 
which occurred therein from the prevalence of 
party, and how frequently thoſe who were. one day 
in the * * er were * from all their 
honours 


| 
Ms 
5 
* 
t 
1 
+4 
'T 
"3 
v3 
i 
: Ly 
7 
Fl 
"3 
= 
4 
4 
4» 
on 
* 
1 
"2 
Fr. 
|, iy 
4 
- ol 
N 
A 
$0 
1. 
14 
1 | 
1 
8 
1 
ts 
. 
1H 
19 
Al 
14 
* 
| 
x 


9 
14 
i 
| } 
: 
i x 
Bs 
{= 
iD 
4 
= 
1 
1 
7. 
11 
ih 
5 


— — 


— 


"ISLE OF WIGHT. 283 
"honours and dignities on the ſucceeding one, it 
will not be ſurprizing to find, that the duke of 
Bolton experienced the ſame turns of fortune. His 
removal from this government was, therefore, an 
effect naturally to be expected, in which he was 
ſucceeded by general John Richmond Webb, in 
the year one thouſand ſeven hundred and ten.— 
This gentleman had been bred a ſoldier, and was 
_ rewarded with the commiſſion of colonel of foot 
for his ſervices under king William; and during 
the reign. of queen Anne was promoted to the rank 
of lieutenant general. As an officer, he was va- 
liant and courageous. At the memorable battle 
of Wynendale, his military talents were particu- 
larly diſplayed ; where, with only ſeven thouſand 
men, he defeated more than three times that num 
ber under the French general La Motte, whoſe 
object was to cut off a convoy with ammunition, 
which was paſſing. to the ſiege of Liſle. | | 
WIILIIAu, lord Cadogan, ſucceeded , general 
Webb as governor of this iſland, in the year one 
thouſand ſeven hundred and fifteen; and for. his 
ſpecial ſervices as an officer was created earl Cado- 
gan. He had been firſt created baron of Reading, 
in the ſecond year of the reign of king George the 
Firſt, and in April one thouſand ſeven hundred 
and eighteen was advanced to the dignity of baron 
of Oakley, viſcount Caverſham, and earl of Cado- 
gan, His gallant conduct under king William 
and the duke of Marlborough, had raiſed him on 
the twenty-fifth of April one thouſand £ ix hundred 
U 2 and 


284 HISTORY OF THE 


and ninety- four. to the rank of colonel; being af. 
terwards promoted to the rank of brigadier gene- 
ral on the ſame day of the ſame month juſt ten 
years after, and to that of major general on the firſt 
of January one thouſand ſeven hundred and ſeven, 
in about two years and eight months after. In 
little more than two years afterwards, on the tenth 
of January, he was appointed lieutenant general, 
which was in the beginning of the year one thou- 
ſand ſeven hundred and nine. 

Soo after his creation to the barony of Rating, 
on the twenty-ſecond of June one thouſand ſeven 
hundred and ſixteen, he was elected a knight of 
the Thiſtle; a circumſtance, which proves the eſti. 
mation in which he was held by the king. In July 
one thouſand ſeven hundred and ſeventeen, he was 
appointed general of all his majeſty's forces; and 
on the eighteenth of June one thouſand ſeven hun- 
dred and twenty-two, he was made maſter general 
of the ordnance, on the death of the duke of Marl- 
borough, and colonel of the firſt regiment of foot 
guards. 

Wuen the regency was eſtabliſhed on the third 
of June one thouſand ſeven hundred and twenty- 
threc, he was declared one of the lords juſtices for 
the adminiſtration of government affairs during 
his majeſty's abſence at Hanover. Beſides all theſe 
ſtations of honour and dignity, he was alſo maſter 
of the robes to his majeſty, high ſteward of the 
| borough of Reading, and one of the privy council; 


he died on the ſeventeenth of July one thouſand 
ſeven 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 2 


ſeven hundred and twenty-ſix. He left no male 
iſſue, and the titles of baron of Reading, viſcount 
Caverſham, and earl of Cadogan became extinct; 
but the barony of Oakley deſcended to his brother. 
His advancement in the army can leave no 
doubt that he was particularly regarded'by the duke 
of Marlborough, as a perſon in whom he placed 
the greateſt confidence. He was employed in ne- 
gotiating with the confederate princes and ſtates ; 
and afterwards, through his grace's influence, was 
ſent ambaſſador extraordinary and plenipotentiary 
to the united provinces. 
CnaRLes, duke of Bolton, the eldeſt ſon of the 
late duke who was appointed governor in one thou- 
ſand ſeven hundred and ſeven, ſucceeded lord 
Cadogan in the government of this iſland, to which 
he was appointed on the twenty-ſixth of Auguſt 
one thouſand ſeven hundred and twenty-ſix. He 
had been called to the houſe of peers as lord St. 
John of Baſing, in one thouſand ſeven hundred 
and ſeventeen, and ſucceeded his father as duke of 
Bolton in one thouſand ſeven hundred and twenty- 
one. In the following year he was elected knight 
of the garter; and on the thirty-firſt of May one 
thouſand ſeven hundred and twenty-five appointed 
conſtable of the tower of London, and lord lieu- 
\ tenant of the Tower Hamlets, when he was alſo 
ſworn as one of his majeſty's privy council. On 
the third of June he was alſo appointed one of the 
lords juſtices for the adminiftration of government 
during his majeſty's journey to Hanover; and in 


94 October 


286 HISTORY. OF THE. 


firſt of May one thouſand ſeven hundred and. 


had before in one thouſand ſeven hundred and 


_ Glamorgan, and was high ſteward of Wincheſter. 


October of the ſame year was made colonel of the 
royal regiment of blue guards. | 

Bes1Des his ſucceeding: to the government of 
this iſland, he was made one of the lords juſtices 
of the regency for the ſecond time on the thirty. 


twenty-ſeven; and an the firſt of September of 
that year was appointed lord heutenant of the 
counties of Southampton and Dorſet, cuſtos rotu- 
lorum of the county of Carmarthen, warden and 
keeper of the New Foreft in Hants, and governor . 
of Milford Haven in the county of Pembroke. He 


twenty been ſworn lord lieutenant of the county of 


From the extraordinary changes in the political 
hemiſphere, which were accompliſhed in one thou. 
ſand ſeven hundred and thirty-three, the duke re- 
ſigned all theſe accumulated offices and honours, 
in the month of Auguſt. His ſucceſſor in this 
ifland was John, duke of Montagu, but he did not 
long continue in the poſſeſſion of this government ; 
he reſigned that, with the lieutenancy of the county 
of Southampton, in the July following. 

Tus iſland was now conferred on John, lord 
viſcount Lymington, who had alſo the office of 
vice-admiral of the county, having been made 
juſtice in eyre, North of Trent, in January one 
thouſand ſeven hundred and thirty-three, and, in 
September of the fame year, lord lieutenant and 
cuſtos rotulorum of the county of Hants, warden 

Wd | Ig en 


ISLE OF WIGHT. ' 22807 


and keeper of the New Foreſt in that county; and 
had the grant of the manor and park of Lindhurſt. 
On ſurrendering his plaee of chief juſtice in eyre, 
on the twelfth of July one thouſand ſeven hundred 
and thirty-five, he was conſtituted governor and 
captain of the iſte of Wight, captain of the caſtle 
of Cariſbrooke, and of the offices of ſteward, ſur- 
veyor, receiver, and bailiff of all manors, lands, 
woods, revenues, &c. within the ſaid iſland. He 
reſigned the government of the ifland in the year 
one thouſand ſeven hundred and forty-two: and, 
on the eleventh of April one thouſand ſeven hun- 
dred and forty-three, he was created earl of Portſ- 
mouth. | 

Wr now come to the period when Charles, duke 
of Bolton, was reinſtated in the offices of captain 
and governor of the iſle of Wight, conſtable of 
. Cariſbrooke caſtle, warden and keeper of the New 
-Foreſt, and of the decoy there; but his grace did 
not long retain theſe appointments, having rea- 
ſons to refign the government of the itland, with 
its dependencies. 

AGAIN was the government of the ifland beſtowed 
on John, viſcount Lymington, now become carl of 
Portſmouth, on the twenty- ſecond day of February 
one thouſand ſeven hundred and forty-five, He 
enjoyed this ſtation, with its uſual dependencies, 
till his death, which happened on the twenty-third 
of November one thouſand ſeven hundred and 
-bxty-two.. 


4 Tur 


288 HISTORY OF THE 


Tur next governor was Thomas, lord Holmes, 
who had lately been created baron Holmes, of 
Killmalloch, in the kingdom of Ireland ; to which 
ſtation he was appointed in April of the following 
year. But he did not long live to enjoy this ap. 
pointment ; for-in the month of July one thouſand 
| ſeven hundred and fixty-four he alſo paid the great 
debt of nature, and thereby a vacancy in the go- 
vernment again occurred, | 
Io lord Holmes ſucceeded Hans Stanley, Efq. 
dne of the lords tominiffioncrs of the admiralty, as 
governor, vice-admiral, &c. of the iſle of Wight; 
but the great changes of adminiſtration in the year 


one thouſand ſeven hundred and fixty-fix, occa- 
rnd his removal from this government. 
Harry, duke of Bolton, now living, and brother 
of Charles, duke of Bolton, who had been twice 
*governor of this iſland, was appointed to the go- 
vernment on the twenty-third of December one 
thouſand ſeven hundred and ſixty-ſix. He was 
vice-admiral of the counties of Southampton and 
Dorſet, and ſenior admiral of the white ſquadron 
In his majeſty's navy. He was removed from this 
appointment of governor in the year one thouſand 
ſeven hundred and ſeventy. 
Tur Right Honourable Hans Stanley, cofferer 
. of his majeſty's houſhold, and one of the privy 
council, was again appointed to the government 
of che iſland. He held it, with its uſual append- 
ages, till one thouſand ſeven hundred and ſeventy- 
our. when 1t was confirmed to him tor lite by a 


* 


1 | | new 


ISLE OF WIGHT. © 289 


new and ſpecial grant to that purpoſe. He died 
in the month of January one thouſand ſeven hun- 
dred and eighty. 

Taz Right Honourable Sir Richard Worſley, 
comptroller of his majeſty's houſhold, and one of 
his moſt honourable privy council, was appointed 
ſucceſſor in the offices of governor, vice-admiral, 
&c. of this iſland. In this government he conti- 
nued till April, 1782, when the duke of Bolton 
was again appointed. He has been ſucceeded by 
the Right Honourable Thomas Orde, whoſe patent 
bears date in the year 1789. We underſtand that 
his Majeſty has therein reſerved the appointments 
of the ſeveral captains of Cowes, Sandown, and 
| Yarmouth caſtles (a new regulation!) in his own 
power. The governor's tower in the pariſh of 
Wootton, now erecting, and other improvements, 
do honour to his taſte and liberality. A fine diſ- 
play of fire-works was there exhibited in June 1794, 
on his majeſty's late viſit to earl Howe and the 
fleet at Portſmouth. 

Ar an early period of the time when the grand 
queſtion reſpecting the policy and humanity of the 
African ſlave trade has been agitated in the two 
great councils of the nation, and engaged the no= 
_ tice of the public in general, and petitions from 
| every part of the kingdom were preſented to par- 
lament reſpecting it; the following one was tranſ- 
mitted from this iſland, which we ſhall tranſcribe 
as follows, without offering any comment on the 
- general ſubject, | 
Petition 


. 
4 
* 
1 
1 
1 
& 
7 
= 
rn 
* 
* 
— 
1 
PR 
EY 
2 
N 
* 
s I 
4z 
. 
x N 
1 
* 
. 
C . 
* 
' 
, 
* 
* 
+# 
* 
U 
* 
297 
"oi 
ii 
2» 
1 
9 
4 
. 
| 1 
19 
14 
1 
27 
g 
CY 
1 


290 


IS 


HISTORY OF THE 


Petition on the Slave Trade from the Ine of 
Wight. | 
« To the Honourable the Commons of Great 
Britain in Parliament aſſembled. 
We, &c. of the Ifle of Wight, beg Leave to 
join the numerous and reſpectable Body of Peti- 
tioners, who, ſupported by the beſt Principles 


of moral and religious Obligation, as well as an 


enlightened [Regard to national Proſperity, are 
applying to Parliament for the Suppreſſion of 


the Slave Trade: a Traffic which we have often 
deplored, as the Diſgrace of our free Country, 


and expoſing us, by the horrid Cruelties which 
it occaſions, to the Indignation of the Univerſal 
Parent of Mankind. 

To be inſenſible to the preſent Call on Piety 
and Benevolence, would be inconſiſtent with all 
our Feelings and all our Ideas as rational and 


accountable. Beings. 


We conſider the preſent Efforts in Favour of 
the Rights of our oppreſſed Fellow Creatures, as. 
tending to conſtitute the moſt briiliant /Era in 


our national Hiſtory, and would lend our Voice 


in its Progreſs. 


To do what we would be done unto, we know 
to be the immutable Law of Equity, as well as. 


the Precept of our Divine Maſter ; infinitely pa- 
ramount to every Conſideration of local Intereſt, 


or private*Avarice. 
We ſee, therefore, with the utmoſt Concern, 
that Arguments, drawn from ſuch polluted 
Sources, 


ISLE OF WIoHT. 291 


Sources, are adventured to miſlead the public 4 
Opinion, to check a generous Syſtem of Policy, | 
and lull Activity into Indifference. 

We abhor the Baſeneſs of ſuch Motives, and 
would enter our laſting Proteſt againſt ſuch Miſ- 
repreſentations. - For though Navigation and 
Commerce are the grand Source of the Nation's 

. Celebrity and Strength, we are conſcious that 
Wealth can never be bleſſed or beneficial, which 
is acquired by Violence and Cruelty. 

We have too high a Senſe of public Honour 

to ſuppoſe our Country muſt be indebted to the 
moſt infernal Practices for her Support ; and are 
convinced, that to diffuſe Science, to ſpread the 

Influence of every humanizing Heart, and eſpe- 
cially the all-healing Bleſſings of our mild Re- 
ligion, may go, in the happieſt Combination 
with every juſt Proſpect of Gain, and under the 
Bleſſings of Heaven, to an Exaltation and Ex- 
tent which the prepoſſeſſed and illiberal have 

never had in Contemplation.” | 


1 0 


TH1s petition was preſented to parliament in 
the beginning of the year one thouſand ſeven hun- 
dred and eighty-eight; which had the ſame recep- 
tion as all others on the ſubject, in being ordered 
to lie on the table. It is not our province to ſay 
any thing farther on this ſubject, which is com- 
prehended in the general hiſtory of the times, and 

does not afford any thing peculiar to the iſland. 


CHAPTER 


| BerokkE we proceed to deſcribe more minutely 


a civil and political view. 


292 ' HISTORY OF THE 


CHAPTER XI. 


OF THE HISTORY OF THE SEVERAL BOROUGHS OF. 


THE ISLAND. 


the various parithes, villages, and particular parts 
of the iſland, it ſeems neceſſary to take notice of 
the feveral boroughs contained in this tract of 
country ; not fo much, if we except the principal 
town of Newport, on account of their preſent mag- 
nitude and importance, as for the pre-eminence 
they have acquired in the hiſtory of the iſland, in 


As ue do not mean to enter critically into the 
enquiry, whether boroughs or incorporated towns 
ſenr members to parliament before the twenty- 
third of king Edward the Firſt, it may be ſufficient 
generally to obſerve, that this era is commonly 
underſtood as the time when our preſent Engliſh 
houfe of commons began to aſſume the aſpect 
witich it now wears. We are certain that, upon 
this occaſion, many cities and boroughs were ſum- 
monęd to fend members to parliament, and that 
many of them complied literally with ſuch ſum- 
mons; but all thoſe which are at preſent known 
2s boroughs, were not ſo conſidered at that time. 
Many of thoſe which were then comprehended in 
the general ſummons, have been ſince omitted; 

and 


9 


ISLE OF WIG HT. 293 


and many others, which at that time were paſſed 
over unnoticed, have ſince obtained the privilege 
of boroughs, ſome by grant, and ſome by pre- 
ſcription. | | 

Ir may not, however, be improper to obſerve, 
that the ancient boroughs, ſo far back as the times 
of the Saxons, were either the property of the 
crown, or of ſome of the principal lords under 
their immediate protection; that they were in- 
veſted with municipal and commercaal privileges, 
and paid tolls, ſtallage, and other reſerved dues in 
return, which were collected by a bailiff or over- 
ſeer of the borough. Nor was it unuſual for bo- 
roughs to obtain grants of lands, which belonged 
to them, as well as the duties impoſed upon them; 
ſuch were, toll, ſtallage of market, pontage, paſ- 
ſage money, cuſtoms on goods imported, and other 
payments of various kinds, and under various de- 
nominations. Many were likewiſe indulged with 
an exemption from hundred courts; and the liberty ' 
of holding pleas in cauſes under a certain ſpecified 
value, ariſing within their reſpective towns; and 
had alſo the power of collecting tolls and cuſtoms 
by a bailiff of their own chuſing. Hence it is, that 
fee-farm rents have been made payable from cities 
and incorporated towns to the crown, as the price 
or compolition for all theſe privileges; which na- 
turally accounts for the origin of thoſe rents. 

HavinG placed the true period, at which the 
form of our preſent houſe of commons may be pro- 


perly ſaid to have commenced, when the boroughs 


Were 


294 firsTORY Of THE 
were ſummoned to parliament by vittue of the 
king's writ ; an obſtacle preſented itſelf upon this 
occaſion from the clergy, whoſe unwillingneſs to 
acknowledge the authority of the temporal power 
induced them to heſitate, whether they ought to 
obey ſuch writ of ſummons. After ſome conſul- 
tation, a mode of compromiſing this buſineſs was 
adopted, by which all their ſcruples were ſatisfied. 
It was ordered, that the King ſhould ifſue his writ 
to the archbiſhop, who was afterwards, as a con- 
ſequence of the authority thereby conferred, to 
ſummon the clergy ; and theſe, in obedience to 
their ſpiritual ſuperior, no longer objected to meet 
in convocation. But this expedient was not pro- 
ductive of all that the king was deſirous of obtaining 
from it; for the eccleſiaſtics did not form one 
eſtate, according to the king's firſt intention, as 
was the practice in other European countries, but 
aſſembled in two houſes of convocation, under their 
reſpective archbiſnops. It has alſo been obſerved, 
by thoſe who have profeſſedly wrote upon theſe 
ſubjects, that the king's tenants in demeſne formed 


__ a diftin& and ſeparate body from the knigh: s and 


burgeſſes, and deliberated apart from them; uſually 
taxing themſelves in a proportion higher by one 
third than the reſt of the laity. This was proba- 
bly deſigned as an encouragement to theſe to ſub- | 
mit. cheerfully to ſuch impoſts, as were found to 
be neceſſary for the ſupport of the ſtate ; and to 
prevent the moſt diſtant ſuſpicion of ſcreening 
themſelves from any burdens which the ſafety of 
the kingdom required. THouGH 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 295 
" Troven we might be allowed to hazard an opi- 
nion, which the ſubject before us aptly ſuggeſts, 
that the commercial part of the kingdom was now 
taxed, or at leaſt repreſented, for the firſt time, 
and from thence obſerve the propriety of ſuch a 
mode of repreſentation ; we ſhall ſolemnly enter 
our proteſt againſt every meaſure which militares 
with the act of parliament, already cited in the 
preceding chapter“, reſpecting the mode and man- 
ner of preſenting petitions to the king, or either 
or both houſes of parliament, to obtain ſuch a 
change, as the revolutions of commerce have made | 
in the courſe of five hundred years from the period 
alluded to. A ſufficient proviſion is contained in 
that act for ſuch alterations of that nature as may 
from time to time be conſidered as expedient, 
without having recourſe to any of thoſe meaſures 
which have at various times been pronounced dan- 
gerous to the conſtitution. But on this ſubject it 
is not our buſineſs to enlarge. 


BOROVYGH of NEWPORT. 

Tar town of NeweokrT firſt became conſpicuous, 
by a grant or charter of Richard de Redvers, earl 
of Devon, lord of the iſland, and ſon of earl Ri- 
chard, in the time of Henry the Second. Its exact 

date cannot be aſcertained ; but as this earl died 
in the thirtieth year of that reign, it muſt evidently 
have been prior to the year one thouſand one hun- 


P See ch. Xo p · 269. 


dred 


[2 
$ 
3 
I 
$ 
1 
v 
. 
7 
* 
0 
5 
5 
2 
ATI 
4 * 
LY 
14 
3 T 
4 3 
3 4 
vs 
4 1 
1 
» 
- 
' : 
* 1 
99 
- 
- 
$ 
I} 1 
7 | 
3 
= 
4 
_ 
EL 
5 l 
** * 
X : 
wg | 
*B 
£2 
„ 
* 
bg 
* 7 
4 4 
# : 
- 


* © tome . * ” _ 
" . e 
S Tos , Nr _ Sr * 
nom — - . N 4 : 
— — — - —— — — 
* o 
* 


296 HISTORY OF THE 


dred and eighty-four, It is very conciſe, like moſt 
other charters of that period, and expreſſive only 
of a grant of liberties in general terms; a mode, 
which was frequently productive of much diſſenſion, 


and, though ſince varied into the other extream, 


to prevent the cauſes of miſinterpretation, equally 
prejudicial to the peace of the community with the 


prolixity of the preſent times. We find the fol- 
lowing names appending to it, as witneſſes of the 


grant. TER. 
Will. Fil. Eſtur, Rob. Fil. Brieni, 
Waller. de Infula, Rob. de Sorewell, 
Roger de Aula, Will. de Argenton, 
Will. Maſkarell, „ 
Rob. Trenchard, Radulphus de Glamorgan, 
Rob. de Affeton, Will. de Inſula, 


Adam de Compton, Henrie Trenchard. 
'DourixG the time of Iſabella de Fortibus, coun- 
teſs of Devon, and lady of the iſle of Wight, who 
died about the year one thouſand two hundred and 
ninety-three, as we have ſtated more fully in a 
former chapter, another charter was granted to the 


town of Newport ; of which we ſhall preſent our 


readers with a tranſlation, as correctly and literally 
as the nature of the words and terms of it will 
permit. | 
« Charter of the Lady Iſabella, Counteſs of 
Albemarle and Devon, to the New n ow 
Medina. 
KNOW all Men preſent and to come, that 
I . de Fortibus Counteſs of Albemarle and 
Devon, 


* 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 297 


Devon, and Lady of the Iſland in liege Widow=. 


hood and in my full Power, have given and 


granted, and by this my preſent Charter have 
confirmed to my Burgeſſes of my new Borough 
of Medina all Manner of Liberty of Toll*, and. 


of all other Cuſtoms from whence free Burgeſſes 
can have Liberty}, as much as in meappertains; 
through all my Land, in Towns, in Ways, in 
Land, in Sea, in Port , in Fairs, in Markets, 
| in 

'* Theolonium, or toll, was a payment which was made for the liberty of 

ſelling in the market, and for freedom and protection in coming to, and 
going from the market. The proportion was rated according to the valug 
of the goods brought for ſale ; an eighth, a twentieth, a ſortieth part, was 
paid by the Romans, Germans, and Saxons. By the ancient law of the 


land, it is ſaid by a writer on ancient cuſſoms, that buyers of corn and cat- 
tle in fairs and markets, ought to pay toll to the lord of the market for the 


legality of their contrafts in the open market ; private contrafts being held 


unlawful. | 

+ The common liberties of a borough confifled in a liberty of rrade, un« 
der the protection of its lord, whether he was the king or any of his ſub- 
jects. This was a licenſe granted by the lord, for which every burgeſs paid 
a yearly rent. The Germans ſtil] retain this cuſtom ; from whom it was 
introduced into this country by the Saxons. This rent was likewiſe to be 
paid by an officer of their own chuſing, whether he was known by the name 
of a mayor, bailiff, or other compeer ; which privilege was firſt enjoyed in 
fimilar circumſtances in Normandy, and from thence transferred into this 
country by William the Conqueror, by whom and his ſucceſſors it was af- 
terwards granted in all their borough charters. Before that time, the king 


or other lord of a town, had his prepoſitus, or ſteward, to collect rents for 


the lord of the borough. They had alſo a liberty of receiving toll for all 
goods ſold in the town, with many other privileges, including thoſe of 
markets, fairs, fiſheries, &c. The farm or rent of ſuch boroughs aroſe 
commonly from the profits and . iſſues of theſe ſeveral liberties, which was 
uſually ſo very moderate as to leave a great ſurplus to the community of 
the borough, | 

+ In portu, is the original expreſſion in the grant. It is highly probable 
tat the bailiff of Newport, under colour or ſuppoſed authority of theſe 

No. 7. X words, 


— . — — — 
* . 


1 


298 HISTORY OF TRE 


- in Sellings, in Buyings, in the Boroogh and 
without the Borough, and in all Places, and 
in all their Concerns. 
I have alſo granted to my aforeſaid Burgeſſes 

that they may be quiet and free from f Sheriff 
and Hundred Courts, and from all Þ Services to 

Sheriffs and Hundred Courts in the Iſland. 

Likewiſe I have granted to the ſame Burgeſſes 

that they have Commonage of Paſture. for all 
their Cattle of every Sort throughout the whole 
- Paſture in my Lands in Parkhurſt without the 
| Wood free with Reſpect to Herbage for ever. I 
have moreover granted to the Burgeſſes them- 
ſelves, that every Plea which has ariſen · in the 
- aforeſaid Bqrough, that to me appertains in the 
_ faid Borough, may be pleaded among themſelves 


words, formerly exacted a duty from veſſels anchoring in the mouth of the 
river; becauſe it appears by an entry in their books, that ſuch a duty is 
claimed by the town. No other ground can indeed be affigned for the duty 
which is paid at Cowes at the preſent day, by ſhips which caſt anchor in 
that road; and it muſt alſo proceed from the fame cauſe, that they claim 
an excluſive privilege of fiſhing in that river. It is nevertheleſs doubted, if 
ſuch a foundation could he ſupported and eſtabliſhed, if it ſhall ever be 
deemed an objett of importance to controvert and diſpute the right. 

This part of the grant, which was ſuppoſed to authorize the town of 
Newport in exacting a toll in all places within the iſland, for which pur- 
poſe they had conſtituted five ba:1.ffs or officers to demand and levy the ſame 
by diſtreſs, if neceſſary—was refifled at an early period, and adjudged to be 
illegal fo early as the eighth of Edward the Firſt, It was tried in the nature 
of a quo warranto, and ſet aſide on two grounds, as untenable ; being not only 
contrary to the laws of the kingdom, but made without the king's licenſe. 

+ The original is, /czr:s ct hundredis. Sciris probably is meant for ſheriit 
or county courts ; and kundred:s for hundred courts. 

+ Here the original is, ect. ad ſcir. et hundred, This probably means 

ts 07 ſervices ad ſcira et hundreda, ſheriff and hundred courts, 


and 


ISLE OF WẽIonr. 299 


may be amerced and exacted by themſelves. 
And I will and grant for myſelf and my Heirs 
that no one of them when he ought to be amerced 
reſpecting any Fine which to me belongs, be 
fined to the Amount of more than thirty Pence; 
and this by the Judgment and Conſideration of 
the Burgeſſes themſelves. I have moreover 
granted to the Burgeſſes aforeſaid that no one 
in the ſaid Borough be a Steward or Bailiff but 
he whom the ſaid Burgeſſes by common Election 
and Conſent might chuſe; and the aforefaid 


to me and my Heirs and Aſtigns for all their 
Meſſuages in the ſaid Town excepting the Meſ- 
ſages built in the thirteen Perches“ and half a 
Perch the Rent of which with the Eſcheat and 
all other Things from thence ariſing I have given 


and granted to God and the Chapel of St. Ni- 
cholas in my Caſtle of Careſbroc and to the Vicar 


more fully declared, at the two Seaſòns of the 
Year, eighteen Marks two Shillings and two 


* In tredecim placeis et dimid, placea is the original. We think it can- 
not refer to any thing but to the limits of what is now called CASTLE 


azainſt the houſes. The admeaſurement indeed fomewhat exceeds ſo many 


or cuſtomary mealure; but this comes the neareſt io any eſtimate we. can 
form of the length intended by it, and is the more probable, becauſe an- 


ile more modern and ſlandard calculations of the very fame premiſes. 


X 2 Pence, 


* d 

2 - * 

6 © 
IE. 
"IT 


and by themſelves, and the Fine thence arifing 


Burgeſſes and their Heirs ſhall pay in every Year. 


of the ſaid Chapel as in the Charter thereof is 


Hol p, at the extreme boundaries of which {tones have been lately placed 


perches of the modern ſtandaid, even if we allow ſeven yards to the peich, 


cen ſpecifications of this nature were generally ſuch as are found to exceed + 


=» ae oo —_ F ˙: 2 
— — * 8 *- "a ow 


©". IE "IL" 


Page n AI SBS HEL 


Xz 22> mts 9s 
— 7 . oo — 


* * 

— 5 es = 

r => 
- 


„ ; = 
* 77 ͤ DS Wd rare iy cn 2 9b 
1 — 


— p< — 

— — <-—- 
- - Tay — 
- . 


8 5 . * EY 
me "— M 
- 22 —_— 

. — N 
d ” n 

* — — r n 
ſl © hy Ca * = 
warn fg is x ey os Fl: : e 
P WI_—_—_— E23 — 
x 


- 
— 


G2 


300 HISTORY OF THE 


Pence, namely, half at the Fealt of Eaſter, and 


the other half at the Feaſt of Saint Michael : and 


to the Lepers of the Hoſpital of Saint Auguſtine 
at the aforementioned Seaſons in every Year one 
Mark of Silver of my free and perpetual Alms, 
namely, at each of the aforeſaid Seaſons half a 
Mark. I have moreover given and granted to 
my aforeſaid Burgeſſes as a Fee Farm to conti- 
nue for ever one Water Mill ſituated near the 
Priory of Saint Croſs which is called the Weſt 
Mill, with all its Appurtenances, and the half 
of a Water Mill fituated by the Ford which is 


called Ford Mill, with all its Appurtenances. 


I have granted alſo that the aforcſaig Burgeſſes 
may have and quietly enjoy all and every Fine 
reſpecting all Complaints and Pleas ariſing in 
the Borough aforeſaid which are pleaded among 
theraſeives or u hich they may plead. And allo 
that they may have all Toll and Cuſtom which 


to me belong in the Borough aforeſaid and with- 


out the Borough, together with Power to diſ- 
train for the ſaid Tolls anJ Cuſtoms, in all Places 
where they have at any Time been accuſtomed 
to pay them, excepting the thirteen Perches and 
a half aforeſaid and ſaving the Privileges by me 
granted to the Abbot and Convent of Quarr and 
his People, to the Prior of Chriſt Church of 


Twynham and his People, and to the Prior of 


Appledurcombe and his People, as their Deeds 


more fully and better atteſt; To have and to 


hold all the Premiſes given and granted to the 
. aforeſaid 


18LE OF wionr. 301 


aforeſaid Burgeſſes and their Heirs, with all the 
| Increaſe and Advantage which they may be pro- 


ductive of in the aforeſaid Borough; without 


Contradiction Reclaiming ot Impediment of me, 
or of my Heirs or Aſſigns, freely, peaceably, and 
entirely, rendering annually to me or my Heirs 
or Aſſigns for the aforeſaid Mill in Fee Farm 
Tolls Cuſtoms and Fines eighteen Marks of 
Silver at the four Seaſons of the Year, namely 
at the Feaſt of Saint Michael Sixty Shillings, at 
the Nativity of our Lord ſixty Shillings, at the 
_ Feaſt of Eaſter ſixty Shillings, and at the Nati- 

vity of Saint John Baptiſt ſixty Shillings. And 
to the Prior and Monks of Careſbroc two Marks 
yearly at the ſame Seaſons by equal Portions for 
a perpetual Alms for all ſecular Services Exaction 
and Demands. And I Ifabella and my Heirs 
and Aſſigns will warrant and againſt all People 
for ever defend all theſe Things given granted 
and confirmed to the aforeſaid Burgeſſes and 
their Heirs in all and by all Ways; as alfo that 
this our Grant and Confirmation of this my 
Chart may obtain the Force of a perpetual Firm- 
neſs, I have corroborated the preſent Chart by 
the Impreſſion of my Seal. Witneſſes to which 
are, William Saint Martin, Henry Trenchard, 
Thomas de la Haulde, Thomas Evercey, William 
' Eftur, and Jordan de Kingſton, Knights, John 
de Patghgrave then Conſtable of the Iſland, John 
de Heyno, William Neville, Geoffrey Liſle, Hugh 
Vavaſour, Walter Barnard, and others.“ 
RX 3 Tnovon 


200 HISTORY OF THE 


Pence, namely, half at the Feaſt of Eaſter, and 
the other half at the Feaſt of Saint Michael: and 
to the Lepers of the Hoſpital of Saint Auguſtine 

at the aforementioned Seaſons in every Year one 

Mark of Silver of my free and perpetual Alms, 
namely, at each of the aforeſaid Seaſons half a 
Mark. I have moreover given and granted to 
my aforeſaid Burgeſſes as a Fee Farm to conti- 
nue for ever one Water Mill ſituated near the 
Priory of Saint Croſs which is called the Weſt 
Mill, with all its Appurtenances, and the half 
of a Water Mill ſituated by the Ford which is 
called Ford Mill, with all its Appurtenances. 
I have granted alſo that the aforcſaig Burgeſſes 
may have and quietly enjoy all and every Fine 
reſpecting all Complaints and Pleas ariſing in 
the Borough aforeſaid which are pleaded among 
themſelves or which they may plead. And alfo 
that they may have all Toll and Cuſtom which 
to me belong in the Borough aforeſaid and with- 
out the Borough, together with Power to diſ- 
train for the.ſaid Tolls and Cuſtoms, in all Places 
where they have at any Time been accuſtomed 
to pay them, excepting the thirteen Perches and 
a half aforeſaid and ſaving the Privileges by me 
granted to the Abbot and Convent of Quarr and 
his People, to the Prior of Chriſt Church of 

Twynham and his People, and to the Prior of 
Appledurcombe and his People, as their Deeds 
more fully and better atteſt; To have and to 


hold all the Premiſes given and granted to the 
= 1 aforeſaid 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 301 


aforeſaid Burgeſſes and their Heirs, with all the 


Increaſe and Advantage which they may be pro- 


ductive of in the aforeſaid Borough; without 
Contradiction Reclaiming of Impediment of me, 


or of my Heirs or Aſſigns, freely, peaceably, and 


entirely, rendering annually to me or my Heirs 
or Aſſigns for the aforeſaid Mill in Fee Farm 
Tolls Cuſtoms and Fines eighteen Marks of 
Silver at the four Seaſons of the Year, namely 
at the Feaſt of Saint Michael Sixty Shillings, at 


the Nativity of our Lord ſixty Shillings, at the 
Feaſt of Eaſter ſixty Shillings, and at the Nati- 
vity of Saint John Baptiſt fixty Shillings. And 
to the Prior and Monks of Careſhroc two Marks 


yearly at the ſame Seaſons by equal Portions for 
a perpetual Alms for all ſecular Services Exaction 
and Demands. And I Ifabella and my Heirs 
and Aſſigns will warrant and againſt all People 
for ever defend all theſe Things given granted 
and confirmed to the aforeſaid Burgeſſes and 
their Heirs in all and by all Ways; as alſo that 
this our Grant and Confirmation of this my 
Chart may-obtain the Force of a perpetual Firm- 
neſs, I have corroborated the preſent Chart by 
the Impreſſion of my Seal. Witneſſes to which 


are, William Saint Martin, Henry Trenchard, 


| Thomas de la Haulde, Thomas Evercey, William 
' Eftur, and Jordan de Kingſton, Knights, John 


de Patghgrave then Conſtable of the Iſland, John 
de Heyno, William Neville, Geoffrey Liſle, FRO 


Vavaſour, Walter Barnard, and others.” 


X 3 Thnovon 


302 NIS TORY OF TRE 


Tuovon no Cate is aſſigned to this charter, the 
time of its being executed is ſufficiently aſcertained 
to be ſubſequent to one thouſand two hundred and 
ſixty, when the earl,of Albemarle died, and prior 
to the conveyance of the iſland to king Edward 
the Firſt in the year one thouſand two hundred 
and ninety-three, as we have already ſtated. 
Amongſt other purpoſes for which the parliament 
of that year was called, it is not improbable that 
the king might ſeize as early an opportunity as 
poſſible of making his purchaſe of the iſland noto- 
rious, by ſummoning burgeſſes to parliament from 
the ſaid iſland ; though we cannot poſitively affirm, 
whether John Ge Coſkeville, of a conſiderable fa- 
mily in the ifland in the time of the preceding 
reign, was deſigned to repreſent the iſland at large 
in that parliament, or only the new borough of 
Newport. In either caſe, it would have the effect 
propoſed by the king, of rendering his propriety 
of the iſland ſufficiently manifeſt to the whole 
Eingdom. | 

Ous next obſervation on this ſubject occurs in 
the ſecond year of king Edward the Second, which 
was avout fifteen years after ; when we are told, on 
the authority of Prynne who has collected the 
[revia parliamentaria, that writs were iſſued to the 
bailiffs of the liberties of the biſhop of-Winton, of 
the prior of Winton, of the town of Southampton, 
of the town of Portſmouth, of the ISLE of WIGHT, 
Chriſt-church, Andover, Baſingſtoke, Odiam, and 
Alton. Theſe bailiffs at that time made no return 
to 


Fi. 


ISLE or WIGHT. | Jog 


to the ſheriff; and it is not probable that any 
means were then in practice to compel thoſe re- 
turns, when the reſpective inhabitants were pro- 
bably unwilling or unable to pay their repreſenta- 
tives, according to the ſtipulated allowance of thoſe 


times. For it was then conſidered as a very heavy 


burden, and many conſiderable towns were deſirous 
of evading it as long as poſſible. 
How different a condition this to the ſtate of the 
_ preſent century hen che greateſt intereſt is 
made on moſt occaſions to obtain a feat wn parlia- 
ment ; when the expences of procuring a majofity 
of votes are almoſt incredible; when the moſt al- 
luring and deluſive meaſures are uſed to induce 
perſons entitled to vote in favour of patticular 
gentlemen ; when, ſo far from paying thoſe who 
are elected to repreſent. them, and to watch over 
their peculiar intereſts in the great council of the 
nation, large ſums are frequently expended by the 
candidates, and every manceuvre exerciſed, to ac- 
compliſh an object which in thoſe earlier ages was 
ſo little deſired ! | 
Acain we are informed, that other writs were 
iſſued in the fourth year of king Edward the Second 


to the bailiffs of the iſle of Wight, and ſeveral of 


the towns which we have juſt mentioned, but that 
no returns were then made to thoſe writs. 
Havins recited the charter of Iſabella de Forti- 
bus, it may not be improper to obſerve in this 
place; that it was afterwards corroborated a id con- 
firmed 85 various royal diſpenfations and grants. 
„ The 


— - — 7 re — 2 —— — 2 _ 
- * mor. nw 4 PAR I—_——— = — — — — — — 
7 4 4 r WOT > 61 9 AR \ : 
r TIE 


304 HISTORY OF THE 


The charter of Edward the Fourth contained a grant 
of the forfeitures of outlaws, felons, fugitives, and 
of felo de fe or ſuicide within the borough ; and 
thoſe of Henry the Seventh and Edward the Sixth 
added alſo the petty cuſtoms within any port or 
creek of the iſland. To theſe we may add the 
preamble to the charter of confirmation of queen 
Elizabeth, which is now extant in the records of 
the town, wherein are enumerated the names of 
the various kings and princes of this kingdom, 
who had at various times ratified the charter of 
the borough of Newport. We ſhall recite it to 
ſhew, that the kings of England paid a peculiar 
attention to the intereſts of this town, and encou- 
raged its commerce and advantage by every means 
which the ſtate and condition of thoſe times re- 
ſpectively admitted. It is expreſſed in the follow- 
ing words. | 


« ELIZABETH, by the Grace of God Queen 

of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the 
Faith, &c. beheld the Charter of her Brother 
Edward the Sixth. Edward the Sixth beheld 
the Charter of his Father Henrie the Eighth. 
Henry the Eighth beheld the Charter of Henry 
the Seventh. Henry the Seventh beheld the 
Charter of Edward the Fourth. Edward the 
Fourth beheld the Charter of Richard the Second. 
Richard the Second beheld the Charter of his 
Graunt Father Edward the Third. Edward the 
Third beheld the Charter of the good Ladye 

| ; Iſabella 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 305 


Iſabella de Fortibus, who, in her pure Widoed, 
gave, granted, and confirmed the Charter of 
Medyne, now commonlie called Newporte, to 
the Balives and Comburgeſyes of the ſame, as 


in the ſaid Charter hereafter ſhall and may more 


at large appeare.” | | 


From what has appeared, it muſt be obvious 
that the town of Newport was of very inconſider- 
able rank and importance until the reign of Henry 
the Second ; about which time, it is probable, the 
church was built, before which time it does not 
ſeem to have had any place for divine worſhip 
nearer than Cariſbrooke. Its dedication to St. 
Thomas a Becket, who was the popular Saint about 
that period, gives ſtrong grounds for this ſuppo- 


ſition; for he was not enrolled into the Romiſh_ 


calendar till the year one thouſand one hundred 
and ſeventy-two. Its erection ſeems, therefore, to 
have been determined on about the ſame time with 


the date of the firſt charter, which was granted to 


it by Richard de Redvers, earl of Devon; and 
both together, perhaps, contributed, together with 
its convenient ſituation for commerce, to render 
it a large, populous, and flouriſhing town, and 
the metropolis of the iſland. | 
AFTER the church had been erected for the ac- 
commodation of the inhabitants of the new town 
of Medine, we learn from the cartulary of the 
priory of Cariſbrooke, that it was covenanted be- 
tween William de Vernun, whom we have men- 


tioned 


365 HISTORY OF THE 


tioned in a ſormer chapter as the ſecond ſon of the 
firſt earl of Devon of the name of Baldwin“, and 
the monks of that houſe, that two of their body 
ſhould perform divine ſervice in the church of 
Newport. This was about fifty years before the. 
town enjoyed the privilege of a market; and when 
it obtained this grant, which muſt certainly be 
prejudicial to the market of Cariſbrooke, that be- 
longed to the monks. of the priory there, it is 
probable that the annual payment of two marks 
from the town, of Newport to them, was in confi- 
deration of this diſadvantage. Such a payment, 
we find, was actually made, becauſe it is expreſsly 
mentioned in the charter which was granted by 
the counteſs Iſabella; and it is not to be attributed 
to any thing ſo likely as to this origin. Hence 
probably aroſe the vulgar tradition, that the town 
of Carifbrooke fold its market to Newport. 

Ir is pertinent to our purpoſe to take notice of 
a cuſtomary which is entered in the ancient books 
af the corporation, and contains a tariff of the du- 
ties which were paid for the ſeveral kinds of goods 
ſold there. We find therein, amongſt other things, 
that they made a claim of ſour pence a ton from all 
the ſhipping. which paſſed the coaſt; though it is 
much to be doubted if the town of Newport could 
ever legally enjoy ſuch a right, by virtue of any 
grant or charter which was given to it. Whether 
tha duty which is ſtill impoſed on all veſſels that 


See chap. vi. p. 128, &c. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 307 


come to an anchor in Cowes road, at the mouth of 
Newport river, had its origin from this claim. 
does not ſeem to be very improbable. 

Ir was not till the acceſſion of king James the 
Firſt, that the town of Newport was incorporated 
by charter, granted to it in the firſt year of that 
reign. The bailiff and burgeſſes of the town were 
thereby conſtituted a body politic, which was to 
conſiſt of a mayor, twenty-four burgeſſes, and a re- 
corder, with power to chuſe and elect a town clerk. 
The mayor was to be ſworn into office before the 
captain of the iſland, or his ſteward. The mayor, 
recorder, or his deputy, with two burgeſſes, are 
empowered to hold a court weekly on Fridays, for 
the trial of all cauſes of debt, treſpaſs, &c. which 
may ariſe within the borough, according to the 


laws of England. They can take recognizance of 


debts according to the ſtatutes of merchants and 
ſtaple ; and they have a goal, with power to hold 
ſuch perſons as they commit for debts or felonics 
or miſdemeanors againſt the laws. 

Ix the thirteenth year of king Charles the Second 


they obtained a charter which extended their 


powers, on the ſuit and petition of the mayor and 
burgeſſes ; wherein they are incorporated by the, 
names of mayor, aldermen, and burgeſſes, which 
mayor was to be choſen from among the aldermen, 
ho are to be twelve in number, and the aldermen 
to be choſen out of the chief burgeſſes by the mayor 
and aldermen, as often as any vacancy: ſhould take 
place. By this charter alſo, the mayor is to be. 

3 ſworn 


0 


— 


22 
HT 
=_ - ou Ba * * 


1 
„% e 
- ” o 


+ 
7 
© 
Gf 
A 
3 
« * 
7 S 
WM 
* ” 
* 
A 
| { 


308 HISTORY OF THE 


ſworn into his office before the governor of the 
iſland, or his ſteward. All petty cuſtoms within 
the ſeveral ports and creeks of the iſland were alſo 
granted to be held, as had been, or ought to have 
been, aforetime held and enjoyed. The mayor, 
aldermen, and chief burgeſſes, are likewiſe ex- 
empted from ſerving on juries either. at the 
aſſizes or at the general quarter ſeſſions of the 
county. 
We have noted already, that John de Coſkeville 
was returned to ſerve in parliament in the twenty- 
third year of king Edward the Firſt; but we can 
find no mention of any members being ſent after. 
wards till the twenty-ſeventh year of Elizabeth, 
from which time we have regular accounts of the 
parliament. Many other boroughs at this period, 
particularly all the boroughs in Hampſhire, except 
Portſmouth and Southampton, received precepts 
to ſend two burgeſſes each, to the parliament which 
was called in that year. £ 
Ix is from hence manifeſt, that the national re- 
preſentation experienced on this occaſion a very 
material alteration. The ſheriffs had uſually re- 
ceived diſcretionary inſtructions, and their writs 
commonly ran in very general terms, “to ſend two 
« burpeſſes from whatever borough they thought 
« proper ;” and it is not therefore ſurprizing, that 
the repreſentation had heretofore been of ſo very 
fluctuating a nature. There have not been want- 
ing ſome authorities, who conſider this general 
direction to the ſheriffs as the original cauſe of the 
very 


ISLE OF WIGHT, _ 309 


very unequal diſtribution of this privilege of re- 
preſentation. 

From what has been W ſtated, that the bur- 
geſſes uſually maintained their members, during 
their attendance on parliamentary buſineſs, it can- 
not be wondered, if meaſures were ſometimes taken 
to procure exemptions from the obligation. Hence 
we find, that many were granted, both to indivi- 
duals and boroughs, on petition ;- and the nature 
of ſuch petitions may be readily inferred, from a 
patent of this kind, which was granted in the forty- 
ſecond year of king Edward the Third, which ex- 
cuſed Sir Robert Liſle from all attendance on par- 
liaments and juries during his life. Many ancient 
boroughs were alſo exempted from ſending bur- 
geſſes, on a plca of poverty, without any patent; 
in which caſe it was uſual for the ſheriff to make 
the following return on the writ of ſummons, — 
„There are no Citizens or Burgeſſes of ..  . 
* able to attend this Parliament; they are neither 
« uſed nor ought tobe required to come on Account 
« of their ants, = 

Ir is worthy of obſervation, that almoſt all the 
| boroughs which, in the twenty-ſeventh year of 
queen Elizabeth, obtained this revived or newly 
conferred privilege of repreſentation, were either 
in the hands of the crown, or in thoſe of men of 
influence and power dependant on the court.. Gen- 
tlemen of family and fortune, who were able to 
bear their own expences, in attending the parlia- 
ment, were now alſo for the moſt part clected every 

where ; 


4 
4 
7 
hs 
1 1 
- 
=_ 
: 
= 
4 
1 . 
L 
* 
4 * 
- ” 
1 
. 
c 
| 
7 
in 
+ 
+} 
q 
i] 
© Y 
0 
4 
'F 
ruS 
* 4 


310 MISTORY OF THE 


where; ſo that from this date we may reckon the 
æra of the preſent houſe of commons, as beginning 
to acquire that increaſe of weight and power which 
it has ſince poſſeſſed in ſo ample a degree. 
Wullsr it was the practice for the conſtituents 
to pay their delegated member, when he was ab 
ſent on parliamentary duty, the grievance was 


conſidered as a very preſſing one in many inſtances. 


Some few exceptions, therefore, were voluntarily 
made by thoſe members. As early as in the third 
year of Edward the Fourth, we are informed that 
John Strawnge, Eſq. of Brampton, entered into 


an agreement with the bailiffs of the town of Dun- 


wich in Suffolk, to take no more for his wages 


than a cade and a half barrel of herrings, whatever 


might be the duration of the ſaid parliament ; and 
it is ſaid, that the original deed is or was lately 
extant in the poſſeſſion of Thomas Aſtle, Eſq. 

Bor this change, though it probably received its 
greateſt alteration about this period in the time of 
queen Elizabeth, was apparently of a progreſſive 
nature. For fo late as the year one thouſand fix 
hundred and ſeventy-eight, which was almoſt an 
hundred years after, we meet with an inſtance of a 
member of the houſe of commons being paid by 


his conſtituents for his attendance in parliament. 


This was the famous Andrew Marvell, member for 
Kingſton upon Hull, who dicd in that year, and 
appears to have been the laſt member of this de- 
ſcription. | 


IT 


ISLE or WIGHT. 311 


Ir is more than probable, that many of the bo- 
roughs would have refuſed to accept the privilege 
of repreſentation as a favour, if the members had 
not about this time generally agreed to relinquiſh 
the regulated wages for their attendance. As it 


was of much importance at this period to obtain 


the fulleſt poſſible conſent of the nation to the pro- 
_ ceedings of government, we cannot have a doubt 


that the moſt perſuaſive means were uſed to induce _ 
thoſe boroughs, which had ever ſent members to 


parliament, and of others which were deemed com- 
petent to be ſummoned, to avail themſelves of the 
privilege at this period. From a curious entry in 
the records of the town of Newport we find that it 


was in the latter end of the year one thouſand five 


hundred and eighty-four, when, probably, the 
queen had ſufficient information of the deſigns of 
Spain in her projected formidable Armada, and 
naturally wiſhed for a general approbation of the 
meaſures to be purſued at this crifis ; as it was lit- 
tle more than three years previous to their actual 


attempt to invade this country. The receipt from 


the ſheriff to the bailiff and burgeffes of Newport 


is dated Oct. 18, 1584; and the entry referred to 


18 expreſſed i in the following terms. 


« Memorandum, That at the ſpecial Inſtance 
and Procurement of Sir George Carey, Knight, 
Marſhall of her Majeſties moſt Honourable 

Houſhold, and Captain of the Iſle of Wight, two 
Wen were admitted into the High Court of 


Parliament, 


7 - * 
2 gh 2. —— RT 
; "= — „ 


312 HISTORY OF THE 


Parliament, holden at Weſtminſter, the 23d. Day 
of November, in the 27th Year of the Reign of 
our moſt gracious and ſouveraigne Lady Eliza- 

- beth, by the Grace of God Queen of England, 

- France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. 

for our Town of Newport; that is to ſay, Sir 

Arthur Boucher, Knt. and Edmund Carey, Eſq. 

whereas there were never Burgeſſes admitted in 
any Court of Parliament before that Time, du- 
| ring the Memory of Man, for the ſaid Towns, and 
for a Memorial that we the ſaid Bailiff and Bur- 

7 geſſes of the ſame, doe account ourſelves greatly 

bounden to Sir George Carey, have, with our 
Aſſent and Conſent, given full Power and Au- 
thority unto the ſaid Sir George Carey, to no- 
minate one of the Burgeſſes for us, and in our 
Names, during the natural Life of the ſaid Sir 
George Carey, whoſe Life God long preſerve.“ 


Burozs we diſmiſs this ſubject concerning the 
repreſentation of the borough of Newport in par- 
liament, we think we ſhall not do an unacceptable. 
ſervice to our readers to make the following ex- 
tract from a recent publication; entituled, K 
« Hiſtory of the Boroughs of Great Britain and 
* the Cinque Ports, in three Volumes, 1792.”— 
We do not make ourſelves reſponſible for the au- 
thenticity of the obſervations therein contained; 
and we wifh it particularly to be noted, that we 
diſclaim the idea of expreſſing thereby, either po- 
fitively or negatively, any opinion whatever of our 

DOWN, 


181. or WIGHT. 3 


own. Our readers, therefore, muſt judge for them- 
ſelves of the vos. rt of credit which 1s to be given 
to it. 


IN ſpeaking of its political character, the author 


thus expreſſes his ideas on the ſubject. This 


cc 


rc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


cc 


40 


.cc 


cc 


10 


cc 
cc 
ce 
cc 
tc 
cc 
«c 
« 
60 
cc 
Cc 
«c 


cc 


97 No. . Y 15 | ag AN by 


borough was formerly under-the influence of the 
preſent duke of Bolton, at whoſe deceaſe the late 


lord Holmes, of the kingdom of Ireland, took. 


the lead of the corporation, and held it during 
his life. Upon the demiſe of that nobleman, 
the intereſt - deſcended with his eſtate to his 


nephew, the Rev. Leonard Troughear, who has 


ſince taken the ſurname of Holmes, -and 1s the 


preſent patron of the borough. This borough 


contains about five hundred houſes and between 
two and three thouſand inhabitants ; out of the 
moſt diſcreet and ſubſtantial of 503 the char- 
ter directs, that the corporation, conſiſting of 


twelve aldermen and twelve burgeſſes, ſhall be 


choſen, in the following manner, vi. That when 
a vacancy happens in the court of aldermen, 
one of the twelve burgeſſes be elected to ſue- 
ceed him; and that his place be filled by taking 
a new burgeſs from among the inhabitants. In 
this corporation, conſiſting of twenty- four mem- 
bers, the right of electing the members of par- 
liament for the town is veſted. One who was 
an officer in the cuſtoms was disfranchiſed by a 
late act, and ſeventeen only, at moſt, of the 
electors are reſident.”” 


. by . 
= 
n n om vo. 
-_ = ” 


= 


e 
= 5A * — 


2 „„ 
* WA 
- —— — 


314 5 | U1STORY oF THE 


« AN ANECDOTE 

| Qccuns in the hiſtory of this borough, which 
deſerves to be recorded in characters of gold. On 
the death of the late lord Holmes, a very powerful 
attempt was made by Sir William Oglander, and 
ſome other neighbouring gentlemen, to deprive 
his lordſhip's nephew and ſucceſſor, the preſent 
Rev. Mr. Troughear Holmes, of his influence over 
the corporation. The number of that body was at 
that time 7wenty=three, there being one vacancy 
among the aldermen, occaſioned by the recent 
death of lord Holmes. Eleven of them continued 
firm to the intereſt of the nephew, and the ſame 
number was equally eager to transfer that intereſt 
to Sir William Oglander and the Worſley family. 
A Mr. Taylor of this town, one of the burgeſſes, 
withheld his declaration, and as his vote would 
decide the balance of future influence, it was ima- 
gined that he only ſuſpended it for the purpoſe of 
private advantage. Agreeable to that idea, he 
Vas cagerly ſought by the agents of each party.— 
The ſirſt who applied is ſaid to have made him an 
offer of 2,000/. Mr. Taylor had actually made up 
his mind to have voted with this party: but the 
moment his integrity and independence were at- 
tacked, he reverſed his determination, and refolved 
to give his ſuffrage on the oppoſite ſide. That 
party, however, like their opponents, being ig- 
norant of the favour deſigned them, and of the 

accident to which they owed it, aflailed him with 
| a more 


181 E OF WIGHT." 315 


a more advantageous offer. He informed them 


that he had but juſt formed the reſolution, in con- 


ſequence of a ſimilar inſult from their adverſaries, 
of giving them his ſupport ; but ſince he had diſ- 
covered that they were both aiming at power by 
the ſame means, he was determined to vote for 
neither of them; and to put himſelf out of the power 
of further temptation, he reſolved to reſign his 


gown, as a burgeſs of the corporation, which he 


accordingly did the next day.” 

Berors we proceed to a deſcription of the town, 
it may not be improper to obſerve, that it has had 
the honour of giving a title to four earls and one 
baron. In the reign of Charles the Firſt, lord 
Mountjoy Blount, who was a natural ſon of the 
earl of Devonſhire, was created baron of Thurlſton 


and earl of Newport, in the fourth year of that _ 
reign. He died in the year one thouſand ſix hun- 


dred and fixty-five, and had for his ſucceſſor George 


Blount, his ſon and heir, who died unmarried in 
one thouſand fix hundred and ſeventy-ſix. From 


him the title devolved on his brother Charles, who 
did not furvive him more than a year, when it de- 


ſcended to the next brother Henry ; but he died 


unmarried in about two years more, when the title 
became extinct. In the reign of queen Anne Ibrd 
Windſor was alſo baron Newport. 


TOWN of NEWPORT. 
Tuts ſtands nearly in the centre of the whole 
iſland; and to its ſituation, with other circumſtances 


.Y2 equally 


2 
I * 
„ 
4&8 
i 
4 
$ = 
| * * 


2 . 
- CO Pre 


Rt * — * - 1 — — Hs " * 
ng 

— PLE — f e ©; * : — 5 — N 

- 4 - ma i ; 4 

XX — nt + 5 382, n * 56 ” — N — 

: £ * 1 2 ” w 454 * —— my Wy - 
” — I = n 
| | — * —— 


——ů * * 
gt 


—— OE" — PR 


r r 7 


A. 


* 


316 HISTORY OF THE 


equally favourable, as we have already intimated, 


may be attributed irs preſent ſuperiority, in which 


it can have no fear of being rivaled. It is happily 


watered, both on its eaſt and weſt ſides, by plen- 
tiful ſtreams. One of theſe riſes at the fartheſt foot 
of the ſouthern hills, and the other commences at 
a place called Rayner's Grove, which is about three 
miles diſtant from the town. On each of theſe 
ftreams are ſeveral corn mills of confiderable value 
and employment ; from which large quantities of 
flour arc ſhipped coaſtways, particularly to the 
weſtern counties, and to the iſlands of Jerſey and 
Guernſev. Theſe two ſtreams form an union below 
the town; where is a quay for the convenience of 
exporting and importing whatever may be neceſ- 
fary in a commercial way. It 1s ſupplied with a 
crane for the purpoſe of loading and unloading 
veſſels or lighters, which have a communication 
from hence with the fea by means of the river 
Medina, which falls into the channel at Cowes, 
about five miles below; and the adjacent ſhores 
contain various good ſtorehouſes for grain or other 
commodities, which are occaſionally ſhipped here, 
or landed for the uſe of the iſland. | 
Tur town 1s, generally ſpeaking, diſpoſed tin 
five parailel ſtreets in length, and three in breadth, 
which rroſs each other nearly at right angles. All 
theſe are ſpacious and clean, and have been paved 


by act of parliament, according to the modern 


Improvements, with footways for the inhabitants 


on 1 each fide; and as the buildings are, for the moſt 


part, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | | 317 


part, neat and convenient, fome few of the older 
houſes excepted, which are progreſſively improv... 
ing, it has altogether a very pleaſing appearance. 
Arx the interſection of the ſtreets, we ought to 
remark that the deſign comprehended three large 
ſquares, each of which had its peculiar appropria- 
tion as markets for cattle, corn, and poultry. But; 
here the ſtranger's eye will be leſs ſatisfied than i in 
ſome other reſpects, from the numerous encroach- 
ments which have deſtroyed the original plan of 
the town, and defaced its primitive beauty and. 
uniformity. 
Tur town hall is Grape over ho largeſt of the, 
market houſes, in which the mayor and corpora- 
tion hold their meetings; and in this alſo the 
knighten courts are held, of which we ſhall here- 
after take notice, by the ſteward of the governor: f 
of the iſland. —_— 
Havixe mentioned the market houſes, it is ne- | f 
ceſſary that we ſhould take notice of the markets, 
of which two are held here every week, on Wed- a 
neſdays and Saturdays, the latter of which is the. 
principal. Two hundred waggons are frequently 
loaded and brought for ſale, amounting to fourteen. 
or fifteen hundred quarters; of which a great part 
is manufactured in the ifland into flour, malt, and 
biſcuit for the uſe of the navy, and the reſt pur- 
chaſed by factors and merchants for exportation. 
Proviſions of other kinds are alſo brought to the d 
market in great abundance, eſpecially poultry and 1 
butter; of both which very great quantities are 
13 bought © - ß 


ww 4% xs 
* -— —- * 
* ia — B —— 222 


—- . 
A 
oo ws 


Utes LY Yo e 


W * 


„ * 
n 


<>, — W rd 3 
11 * < mm * 
r ads 5 po. * o 
. - 


r 


-: * * * 
err 
* 


he nm wa 


Ji: HISTORY OF THE 


bought for the ſupply of outward bound ſhips, and 


much of the latter uſed to be barrelled for foreign 
conſuinption. 5 | 

Tut markets for corn and grain are uſually i in 
ſome degree diſcontinued during the month of 
harveſt, which is generally abundant, and a large 
ſupply of hands is annually x6; Apodqgn for the pur. 
poſe of reaping it. 

- Is this market the illegality of the cuſtomary 
buſhel of nine gallons, and ſometimes nine gallons 
and a half, was e1R&sT agitated and tried, inſtead 
of the legal Wincheſter buſhel of eight gallons, 
much to the honour and credit of the gentlemen 
who promoted the enquiry; a meaſure replete 


with good policy, as reducing the price of grain 


per quarter to its proper average eſtimate, - and 
thereby tending to quiet the minds and apprehen- 
ſions of the community againſt the unfounded and 
imaginary fears of ſcarcity. By this means the 
legal quarter at forty-eight ſhillings is equivalent 
to the cuftomary quarter of nine gallons and a half 
to the buſhel, at fifty-ſeven ſhillings ; though the 
idea of the latter price ſuggeſts alarms, whilft the 
former is productive of no ſuch conſequences. 

A very large manufa@ory of ſtarch and hair 
powder is alſo carried on here, which conſumes a 
great quantity of flour; it has been ſaid that the 
duty alone has amounted to more than three thou- 
ſand pounds annually, 

Nor muſt we omit to mention the various ſhops 
of mercers and others, which make a very good ap- 
pearance, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 319 


pearance, as well by their number as the great” 
variety of goods with which they are reſpectively 
ſupplied for the accommodation of the public. 


The concourſe of people which aſſemble in the 


town on market days from the different parts of 


the iſland and elſewhere, for tranſacting every kind 
of buſineſs, afford the means of a very good trade. 


We muſt alſo take notice of the free grammar 


ſchool, for the inſtruction and education of a li- 


mited number of boys, which was erected by pub 


lic ſubſcription, during the government of the” 
earl of Southampton, about the year one thouſand 
fix hundred and nineteen. It is a plain ſtone 
building, containing convenient apartments for 
the maſter. The ſchool room, which is fifty feet 
long, was the room in which the treaty was after- 
wards held between king Charles the Firſt and the 
parliament commiſſioners in one thouſand fix 
hundred and forty-eight. The endowment conſiſts 
of the produce of certain lands adjoining to the 
foreſt of Parkhurſt, which were granted to the 
bailiffs and burgeſſes of Newport, in the reign of 
Henry the Fifth, by «Agnes Atrelode and John 
Erleſman, and by the corporation appropriated to 
the ſupport of the ſaid ſchool ; which lands, con- 
taining about thirty-four acres, the ſaid governor, 
after having taken the advice of counſel], allowed 


to be incloſed for that purpoſe. From hence it is 


manifeſt, that its endowment is entirely to be at- 
tributed to the corporation, and. not to any en- 


croachment on the foreſt; in whom the appoint- 


14 | ment 


4 


bt * r - ; 


74", So 6. + « — * ' r fr d r it 
\ „. . rr p 22. —— E—— Y > 


mM 2 7. tad or * "> P 
- 2 — f i * — 4 — 


n 
—— — 


n 


320 HISTORY OF THE 


ment of the maſter is veſted, under their common 

ſeal for that purpoſe. "Theſe lands are deſcribed 
as being ſituated on Hunny Hill, on the north ſide 
of a current or ſtream of water, which is known 
by the name of Lukely. 

«© A Copy of the Deed of 8 the 
original of which, is ſaid to be ina ſmall black box 
in the town cheſt of Newport, is here rendered 
into Engliſh under the allowances already men- 
tioned in various places, © of Hunny Hill, to the 
Corporation of Newport, 1 Henry V. 

: Know all Men preſent and to come that we 

Agnes Widow of John Attelode and John Erleſ- 

man the elder have given granted and by this 
our preſent Chart have confirmed unto William 

Farſye and William Gander Bailiffs of the New 

Borough of Newport to John Compton John 

Langſtoke William Paxhulle Richard Shide and 

all other the Burgeſſes of the ſaid Borough all 
the Lands and Paſtures which we have upon 

Honiehulle on the North Side of the Water Courſe 

called Lukely and on the Weſt Side of the Ditch 
of the Priory of Saint Croſs called Mcnken 
Woodich ; to have and to hold for ever all the 
aforeſaid Lands and Paſtures with the Appurte- 
nances aforeſaid to William Farſye William 

Gander John Compton John Langſtoke William 

Paxhulle Richard Shide and all other the Bur, 
geſſes of the Borough aforeſaid and their Heirs 
paying or rendering out of the ſame for the Ser- 

yices due and of Right accuſtomed to the Lords 


of 


ISLE OF wWIoHr. 321 


of the Fee to us and our Heirs yearly twenty 
Pence at the Feaſt of the. Paſſover and Saint 


Michael the Archangel by equal Portions for all 


other Services Exactions or Demands. And we 
the aforeſaid Agnes and John Erleſman and our 


Heirs will warrant defend and for ever quit 
Claim all the aforeſaid Lands and Paſtures with 
their Appurtenances aforeſaid to William Farſye 

William Gander John Compton John Langſtoke 
William Paxhulle Richard Shide and all other 


the Burgeſſes of the Borough aforeſaid and to 


their Heirs againſt all Perſons whatſoever. In 


Seal to this our preſent Chart before theſe Wit- 
neſſes, William Bremeſkete William Ringborne 
Thomas Brereding John Hakett John Heyne 
and others. Given at Newporte aforeſaid on 
the fourth Day of the Month of October in the 
_ firſt Year of the Reign of King Henry the Fifth.” 


Havins thus aſcertained the preciſe circum- 


ſtances and ſtate of the free grammar ſchool of this 


town, it will be ſufficient to ſay, that, beſides the 


endowment and ſchool houſe, the corporation have 
generally ſelected perſons of ability to preſide over 
and direct the riſing youth, who have uſually a 
conſiderable number of young gentlemen as board- 
ers, which is of very conſiderable advantage to 

the town. | 1 
| Bes1Des this, there is another ſchool for the 
purpoſe of cloathing and inſtructing girls to read 
and 


1 7 


Teſtimony of which Matter we have put our 


* 

* 
1 
«> 
Li 

8 

q wt 


bs 4 IX. Ia N 2 —_— - . A 
4 2 , rg Yo 8 EY = *<. — * 4 s 0 
_-v — WW re w 40 er wy” 4.6 ä * * * 8 > 
— - - —— — — 
* 4 2 N * — — — — — — 


* * . . : lp — 
e , 933 
2 rr - I — 2 2 , * 
- 
. 


AS 


a= Wes 
> any 


KELL IIS 


„ 


An i. 


2 * * 
D 
* . — > = 


32 vs rolf or thy. 


Aung fte, tögetker with the uſe 6f the neesle and 


ſach other employments as are calculated to ren. 
der them uſeful members of ſociety, which is ſup- 
ported by voluntary ſubſcription ; an object of the 
firſt importance ih civil life, and carries with it 


the truly ſincere and heart-felt ſatisfaction of all 


true friends of morality and difcipline, which, after 
the numerous excellent arguments of their utility 
that arife beth from reuſon and fact, it is the leſs 
neceffaty for us to enlarge upon. The various 
eſtabliſhments of this ſort which occur in all the 
populous and extenſive pariſhes of che metropolis, 
afford the moſt convincing and demonſtrative evi- 
dente of the grounds of our aſſertions. 

Non muſt we diſtegard the Sunday ſchool which 


Ras for ſothe time been promoted and encouraged 


in this populous town, with a degree of ſpirit that 


reffects great credit on the exertions of thoſe, whoſe 


actual ſervices in ſuperititending the conduct and 
management of the ſubordinate teachers and ma- 


nägers, claim the honour and reſpect due to every 


diſplay of phifatithropy and benevolence. The 
probable utility of ſuch inſtitutions demands the 


fupport of every true friend of humanity ; and, if 
the nature of our work admitted, we could eaſily - 


fwell our pages with pointing out, how moſt of 


the ſubſcribers have a very fair chance of reaping 
immediately the benefits ariſing froni them. 


THar theſe are not ſpeculative conjectüres, we 


would only juſt remind our readers of the popula- 


rity of the town, in which it has been already 
mentioned, 


SLE OF WIGHT. 323 


mentioned, in an extract from a popular Work, are 
five hundred houfes, though other accounts, agree- 
ing with the books of the town tates, ſwell the 
number to five hundred and fifty! At the general 
eſtimate of ſive perſons and a half in each family, 
ſuppoſing theſe houſes to contain only one family 
in each, which is the proportion generally allowed 
for determining the number of inhabitants in 
towns, the conſideration of its containing about 
three thouſand inhabitants is a full argument of 
the importance of ſuch inſtitutions. Whether this 
eſtimate, as Newport cannot properly be conſidered 
as a manufacturing town, may be ſomewhat over- 
rated, is not very material; for if we ſhould abate 
five hundred of the number, the remaining num- 
ber will ſtill be ſufficient to demand every reaſon. 
able attention from the philanthropiſt. We have 
accounts which make the number of inhabitants 
in Newport pariſh alone to be two thouſand three 
hundred and ſeventeen, without reckoning thoſe 
parts of the town which are conſidered as more 
immediately appertaining to Cariſbrooke, St. Ni- 
cholas, and Whippingham; all which being com- 


prehended, ſwell the account to two thouſand 4 
ſeven hundred and ſeventy-eight inhabitants. 1 
_ Havixs adverted to the inhabitants, it is im 
poſſible for us to paſs over the character which has | 

7 


generally, and with the greateſt juſtice, been ap- 

plied to the more delicate part of the creation; in 

which indeed, though the town of Newport does 

by no means s yield the palm of victory, the whole 3 
illand 4 


rener 


Ana vepmay 


* * 
-- = oy „„ 9 er IIS ogg oo ng ee ew ere err ts mc 4 = 
— ” IEEE ren, * 


af paving the ſtreets. It is greatly to be regretted, 


324 HISTORY OF THE 


iſland is equally concerned. It has been obſerved, 
and the voice of truth aloud proclaims the pro- 
priety of the remark, that * © Beauty has here its 
“ exquiſite triumph. The market and gala days 
of Newport have often detained the ſtranger's 
«* eye, in a tumult of amazement. Here all is 
9 * ſimple nature, with the meekeſt pretenſions of 
* neatneſs and humility, roſy: with health, and 
« ſmiling from goodneſs ; while here, art is proud 
« to contribute her unneeded decorations to. the 
« finiſhed forms of ſuperior life. Every favoured 
« fair, unleſs ſpoiled by affectation, or robbed by 
25 poiſonous coſmetics, retains the full grace of 
% nature's deſignation, by means of the happy 
introduction and general practice of © Inoculation, 
« the conſervatrix of the female face divine; and 
« the conteſt on Mount Iva was caſier decided 
n than it would on the plains of Vecrta, or its 
« neighbouring borders.” 

Tus town, it is diſcovered, was formerly ſup- 
plied with water; for which purpoſe there was a 
large reſervoir in the beaſt market, which appeared 
a ſhort time ſince, on digging ſtone for the purpoſe 


that ſuch a work does not now exiſt, becauſe it, 
might be ſo caſily effected, and the inhabitants 
ſupplied with moſt excellent water from a ſpring 
at Caritbrooke, not half a mile em; it, at an eaſy 


S 1792, 1 55, 56. 


expence. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | —_ 


expence. The gradual deſcent is moſt favourable 
for ſuch a purpoſe; and ſuch an undertaking might, 
and perhaps ought to be performed by ſome pub- 


lic meaſure, which would exonerate the lower 


order of the people, who are very frequently as 
unable as they are unwilling ro contribute the 
ſmalleſt mite, though a conſiderable ſaving In 
point of time as well as advantage in reſpect of 


health would be the certain conſequence. Such 


an intimation, 1t is greatly to be hoped, though 
the writer does not preſume to propoſe any ſpecific 
meaſures, will not be overlooked by thoſe gene- 
rous and public-ſpirited gentlemen, who may be 


convinced of its importance, and how eaſily it may 


be executed. | 

AMUSEMENTS are not wanting for the accommo- 
dation of thoſe, who have the means of encouraging 
them; and thoſe occaſional relaxations from the 
ſeverer application to buſinefs which they afford, 
are not leſs delightful to ſuch as are exerciſed in 
the buſtle of life. 

For the ſupport of a TROY which is well 
conducted by Meſſrs. Collins and Davies, every 
exertion has been made, for the mutual ſatisfaction 
of the public and the managers. By their liberal 
proviſion, and the reſpectable company which they 
procure, united with the moſt ardent and zealous 
efforts to acquire whatever is worthy of the appro- 
bation of a generous public ; copies of all new 
pieces, which obtain the general ſanction of the 
reſpective audiences in the metropolis, are pur- 


„ chaſed, 


1 
* 
7 
9 
5 
7 
" 
25 
. 
5 


— — 


326 55 HISTORY er THE 


chaſed, without exception of price or expence.—- 
Such ſtudious and diligent endeavours to provide 
for the general amuſement, deſerve that patronage, 
which, for the moſt part, a generous community 
is as eager to beſtow, 

Or the public rooms, perhaps few towns of equal 
fize afford ſo great a variety; in particular, we 
ought to notice the aſſembly-room, equally capa- 
cious and elegant, in which is a very genteel peri- 

_ odical aſſembly, to accommodate thofe who are 
diſpoſed to viſit ſuch places of polite amuſement. 

Ix ſpeaking of the various inns which this town 
contains, it is not our province to mention any of 
them particularly ; but it would be injuſtice to 
withhold our general teſtimony, in ſaying that 
there are ſeveral very good and ſpacious ones, which 
are well ſupported. 

We now come to ſpeak of the public buildings 
appropriated for religious purpoſes ; which, be- 
fides the church already mentioned, ſo far as re- 
fates to the time of its erection, are a prefbyterian, 
methodiſt (of the followers of Weſley), ditto (of 
lady Huntingdon), baptiſt, and quaker's meeting 
houſes, for their refpective followers to aſſemble 
in for religious worſhip. 

Tnxxrs has alſo been erected lately a — ay Ca- 
tholic chapel, faid to be at the ſole expence and 
under the patronage of Mrs. Heneage ; of whom 

ve have the following character by a pen“, that is 


— ——LU— — wt nar oe Gon 


——— oY Ro 


Rt 


F TI. NENT XX 
Rae. N 4 . en ith amn j - * — F — 7 "is Wiſh — — — 
5 


ie $63 tar 


AT» 


Eee eee BE I 


Ss ew 


po 


1 


* 
* 
8 
hk 
>. 
14 
— 
A 
"7 
8 * 
* 
as 
z 


* 
x 
* 1 
43 
4.4 
- Mt | 
8 
F 
3 
+ 
i Lol on 
' 
r * 
1 
4 
4 
. 
4 
1 
. q 
4 
—_ 
8 
Ly. 
"> 
= 
\ 
4 
f 
' 
. 


— 


. — —— % 3 > N — m bk 8 
"hs — * 2 * N Y <nand . ow a 
N * * Eg e TY Y 8 * — a ©... 
3 ab, . „ I8 wa 10 ö * , 5 
2 Mo ot oe IS Sat on... e 

0 , 

* . 


* Sketches, &c. p. 59, 60. 


well 


- —— — — "4 - . 
N 2 7 e q - 4 * 1 41 4 - 

Li of 25 8 = ? = IEA. . 

1 W 3 . * PH, he 
e bo . ? * 4 . —__— n Per * N 
* 8 a 2 ry 3 . * T 8 . 8 N op 2 ww 

X v2 4 my S 8 0 * 2 * 
_ | & 


C1 * 

— — 
a. «x 

. N 3 

"IE ages, FN 


ISLE OF WIGHT» 2" 


well calculated to excel in the deſcriptive, though 8 
we believe it to be a faithful delineation. © Her 


* pious exertions,” ſays this pleaſing writer, wha, 
by the way, is no convert to their principles, , are 
« animated by as lively and perhaps as purea zeal 
te as that of the right honourable patroneſs of the 
« methodiſts ; but their effects, it is preſumed, 
« will not be ſo extenfive.—The chapel is formed 
« to the prettieſt accommodation of female finery, 


« connected with the /mplex munditiis*, and re- 
« gular order of workmanſhip. It is one of the 


« moſt charming places where the voice of rational 
« eloquence might be heard to advantage, by four 
« or five hundred attendants on the inſtruRion. 


It has a very handſome altar-picce, a neat and 
« well-toned organ, and the tout en/embleF within, 
te of the ionic order, with the doric portico at its 


« entrance, does much credit to the liberality of 
e the foundreſs, and the ability of the architect. 

Ir will occur to our readers, that we have not 
yet given a deſcription of the church of Newport. 


We now come to diſcharge this part of our duty, 


with as minute an accuracy and correctneſs as the 


nature of our hiſtory will permit. Nor have vr 


placed it the laſt, as being the leaſt in our eſtima- 


tion, but becauſe we ſhall find it neceffary to be 
more diffuſe on this head than on the preceding 


articles. 
Wr have already obſerved that this church was 


* Simple elegance. 
+ Al together, i. e. a due proportioned neatneſy, 


built 


* 


328 HISTORY OF THE 


built towards the end of the reign of king Henry 
the Second, from its being dedicated to Saint Tho- 
mas a Beckett, the popular Saint of that time.— 
This was not done ſo expeditiouſly or fo completely 
finiſhed all at once, as buildings of this kind ge- 
nerally are, but carried on progreſſively, by the 
zeal and aſſiduity of the inhabitants, according to 
the abilities and circumſtances of the people em- 
ployed in it. From the various inſignia of the 
different kinds of artificers which were exerciſed 
upon it, fuch as hammers, ſhears, and other de- 
vices and repreſentations, we may properly con- 
clude that many perſons of theſe mechanical pro- 
feſſions were contributors to its erection; who 
ſeverally cauſed theſe figures to be cut to perpe- 
tuate their liberality. As ſuch kinds of repreſen- 
tations are very uncommon, we have thought it 
our duty to point them out; and therefore direct 
the curious and inquiſitive more eſpecially to the 
figures which appear under a ſmall pediment in 
the centre of the ſouth fide of the church. 

From the various reparations of the church at 
different periods, as occaſion required, it is almoſt 
certain that many of thoſe ſymbolical repreſenta- 
tions have been removed or deftroyed. 

Ir muſt not be omitted, that the church had no 
burial place particularly allotted to it, till the 
reign of queen Elizabeth; for the inhabitants were 
obliged to carry their dead for interment to the 
mother church of Cariſbrooke. They acquired 
this privilege from a very melancholy cauſe, viz. 

that 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 329 


that of the plague; when the mortality was ſo 
great, that the burial ground of the pariſh church 
of Cariſbrooke was not ſufficiently capacious to 
contain them, and therefore they were permitted 
to appropriate a burial ground for themſelves. 

_ Tae ſquare tower at the weſt end contains a ring 
of ſix bells; and the church conſiſts of three aiſles. 
As a curious piece of workmanſhip, though in 
wainſcotting, the pulpit ſhould not be unnoticed ; 
being an uncommon relick of antiquity, richly 
ornamented with fourteen carved emblematical. 
figures, diſpoſed in the different pannels round it 
in two rows, ſo as to repreſent the liberal ſciences 
and cardinal virtues. The date is in 1636, juſt 
under the canopy ; on the cornice of which, cut 
in ornamental letters of fret work, is the following 
applicable ſentence, © Cry aLouD, SPARE NOT, 
c LIFT UP THY VOICE LIKE A TRUMPET, ISATAH 
© 68. VERSE 1.” —Over this in front, the god of 
gar, and the goddeſs of peace are repreſented as 
forming an union, the one holding a ſword, and 
the other the olive branch; with ſome other ſuit- 
able devices on each hand. 

Wr have ſeen in what manner the duty was per- 
formed at Newport, after the firſt erection of the 
chapel or church there“; and it is extremely pro- 
bable, that it continued to be ſupplied by the 
monks of Cariſbrooke until the diſſolution of that 


„ See alſo the charter of William de Vernon in the reign of 
King John, in the fourteenth chapter. 


N.. 2 priory; 
| | 3 5 


® 
* 


— — 
— 


2 
. IR 


44 
1 
4.1 


[ 
: if 
4 
41 
9 
4 
I 
— 14 


— es 791 


3 


— 2 — — bee 
— 2 * — » = 26: 
Is — 12 


8 m % 
ws AF 4,5, ow cs n 


222. 
rr 


meth ht 4 * * * x 

eee * — > E TI we — r 

0 4 Ss F _ £ WIT * — — * 2 — 8 -- be * a | : he N _ \ 
eee | . — 


1 

ba es Fo 8 * 5 A 7 
— 2 
_— 8 


n 
82 


R 


—— 2 K 


4 pa a 4 © mm” yr * 
r _ D . n > 
— * r 
T 3, 3 » r 


— — 


— OE ae 
ar 


. — 5 * 
r 
Is Nr 1 


* 9% 4% * IF, 1 
Y wt * * wn r 
. *, IR: os. 3 


r Tr e SCION 
— — = - <> > - - 
U 
* 
. 


1 miStORY or THE 


priory ; after which, as a regular and natural con- 
ſequence, it ſeems to have followed the fate of the 
vicarage of Cariſbrooke. Of its being ſerved by 
the monks, previous to the reformation, there need 
ſcarcely be any doubt entertained; for in cardinal 
Beaufort's regiſter, who lived in one thouſand four 


hundred and five, we find that Cariſbrooke with its 
| chapels was then valued at forty marks, and the 


vicarage at fixteen marks. And as no mention is 


therein made of Newport, it is a manifeft inference, 


that it muſt have been comprehended at that time 
in the general deſcription of the chapels, as the 
appendages to the rectory, probably, of Cariſ- 
brooke, becauſe as a priory it could not be taxed, 


and would not in that caſe have been mentioned 
in the regiſter. 


Ir may not be improper to notice in this place 
the inventory of plate, bells, veſtments, &c. which 
were feized in the name of king Henry the Eighth, 
at the time of the reformation, and for which the 


town of Newport was engaged to account for the 


uſe of the crown, as reported by the commiſſioners of 

king Edward the Sixth, in the fixth year of his reign, 

under letters patent of the date of the 14th of Sep- 

tember one thouſand five hundred and forty-ſeven. 
NEWPORT. 


 {ltm. ſolde in ann. pmo. Edw. vj : 

one Shipe to Senſors to Paxes a 2 

Wm. New- Pixe ij Crewats ij Candleſſicks lj. xviij 
man & Wm. ij Challeſes and a Croſs of Si} 11d. 


| 
Burrell ver, for J 7 4 
bownd and 4 Itm. ſolde the fon Vous to, Bells THE 
appointed | weinge xvj C. & 2, at xxiujs. 65 er 
for the An- the Hondrith xix. xvj. 
ſwer. Itm. Veſiments and other Imple- 
ments ſolde in ann. v& 3645 "4 176. 
„„ & now MOTT. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 331 


From this account of the value of the utenſils 
and other requiſites of public devotion, which the 
ſuperſtition of preceding times had deemed necef- 
ſary, and now ſeized for the public ufe, in the 
church of Newport alone; and confidering alſo 
the difference of the value of money betwixt that 
age and the preſent ; we may readily perceive that 
a vaſt accumulation of property was by theſe means 
obtained for the ſervice of government. Perhaps 
we ſhould rather be deficient in faying, that at 
leaſt the proportion may be eſtimated as five to 
one; and this proportion pretty well agrees with 
the value of bell-metal, in making the price of 
that article in our times about fix pounds a hun- 
dred weight. Our accounts of ſuch of the other 
churches of the ifland as we have any particulars 
of, excluſive of the monaſteries, will ſwell to a 
conſiderable amount; from whence our ideas of 
the riches of the whole kingdom, in theſe reſpects 
only, muſt riſe to an amazing extent of value. 

IT is very probable, that Newport, after the 
diſſolution of the monaſteries, muſt have been till 
connected with its parochial church; and from 
hence it might ſeem reaſonable to conclude, that 
it was ſerved at leaſt for ſome time, by the in- 
cumbent of Cariſbrooke. Of that fact, however, 
we are not aſcertained; and it is not an unreaſon- 
able ſuppoſition, that the vicars of thoſe times 
might find it prudent to leave the inhabitants of 


the town at liberty to chuſe their own miniſter, — 
L' 2 Our 


332 HIS TORX OF THE 


Our reaſons for this opinion, though not ſtrictly 
demonſtrative, are, we think, ſufficiently manifeſt 
from the following record, and our remarks re- 
ſulting from 1t. 

LA Copy of the Rate 1500 March 17th, 16 53, 
for the eee of the Miniſter of Newport. 
Wr REAs this Towne and Burrough is become 
very populous, conſiſting of 2500 Soules and up- 
wards, and the Church or Chappell thereof is 
not endowed wih. any Means or Maintenance for 
the Subſiſtance or Livelyhood of any Miniſter, 
or Miniſters, to preach the Word of God, or 
officiate therein as a Miniſter or Miniſters; By 
Meanes whereof all Godly Miniſters are utterly 
diſcouraged to take the Care and Burthen of the 
ſaid Place and People upon themſelves, to the 
great Damage and eternall Hazard of the Soules 
of the poore Inhabitants of this ſame Towne. 
The weh. the Mayor and chief Burgeſſes of this 
Burrough are willing, as much as in them lyeth, 
to remove, redreſſe, and for the future p“ ſent, 
it being a Duty incumbent on all Magiſtrates, 
and therefore have thought fitt to conſtitute, 
ordeyne, and appoint, and do hereby, at this 
p*ſent Aſſembly conſtitute, ordeyne, and ap- 
point, That for, and towards the Maintenance 
of fuch Miniſter, or Miniſters, as are, or ſhall 
be thought fit and appointed to officiate in the 
aforeſaid Church or Chapell, a Rate, Tax, or 
Aſſeſſmti., not exceeding the Some of One Shil- 
| ling 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 333 


ling and Six Pence upon every Pound, for one 
whole. Yeare, be made on all the Lands and 
Tents lying wh. in the ſame Burrough, and alſo 
on all the Rents and perſonall Eſtate, and Eſtates, 
of all the Inhabitants, reſiding weh. in the afore- 
ſaid Burrough, with Reſpect to their beſt Abi- 
lities in that Behalfe, by the Mayor, and the 
Chiefe Burgeſſes of the ſame Burrough, or the 
Major Part of them, together wü. Eight, Six, 
or Four of the able Inhabitants reſideing wi. ing 
ye. ſame Burrough. And that thoſe for the ſame 
Purpoſe ſhall be from Time to Time elected, 
named, and choſen by the ſaid Mayor, and Chief 
Burgeſſes for the Time being, for that purpoſe.” 
From the Court Book, Page 76. 


From the general preamble to this order it is 
obvious, that the inhabitants of the town of New- 
port, or the corporation, muſt have been in the 
habit of electing their own miniſters, and conſe- 
quently conſidered themſelves as juſtly required to 
provide for their camfortable ſubſiſtence. It is 
not probable, that ſuch a meaſure would have been 
taken for the liberal ſupport of a miniſter, if he 
had not been the object of their own choice. The 
want of an endowment is expreſſed in terms of re- 
gret, as a very ſerious impediment to the exerciſe 
of religious duties; and, however the change of 
times and circumſtances may affect the general 
language of particular perſons, it is not very eaſy 
to conceive how the language of the preceding de- 

2 3 termination 


|: "4 7 - . - & —_— n Pay EE A bs 
„ 2 k "IT er" a * & 
ME IE , 


r 
2 ——— 


3 


» 
. F 
-X£E 
- ++ 
+» 
: = #5 
„ 4 $4 
L. 4 
£©# 
. 
. 
. 
W 7 
$- 4 
„ 6 
3 
4 8 
C 
* [ 
© 4 
þ 4 
oo 
il 
b 
* Ef 
4 
U 
F ” 
„ * 
3 
© 
4 
E 


— 2 — 2 — nt 


wap) 
-. 44-< -+—. 2.8 


334 utsrokx OF THE 


termination could conſiſt with any interference in 
the vicars of Cariſbrooke for the time being, to no- 
minate the miniſters of Newport. It may there. 
fore be laid down as a fair concluſion, that no ſuch 
interference had ever exifted within the memory 
of the people then living; and conſequently that 
the vicars of Cariſbrooke, if they were ever con- 
ſcious of poſſeſſing the right of nomination, pru- 
dently waved their right, and permitted the inha- 


bitants, who were to maintain a miniſter, to enjoy 


an uninterrupted freedom in ſuch choice. . 
Nor do we conceive that theſe arguments can 
be affected by the confideration, that at this time 


the prevalence of puritanical principles was gene- 


ral, and that Newport was not the laſt to fall in 
with the current and popular opinion of the times. 
For the government was now in a ſettled ſtate; 
and we have already obſerved, that this iſland en- 


| joyed much more quiet and repoſe during the 


preceding troubles, than moſt other parts of the 
nation. There is not the ſmalleſt alluſion made in 
this record to any ſubſcription of a voluntary na- 


ture, as the caſual means of ſupporting a miniſter, 


though we learn from hence, that the number of 
Inhabitants in the town at that time was not ma- 


terially different from what it is at preſent ; it does 


not appear that any ſuch cuſtom was then practi- 
ſed, or even thought of. 
Wr have conſidered it our duty to bring forward 


theſe remarks to the notice of our readers, on ac- 


count of the preſent unhappy differences which 
now. 


ISLE OF WIGHT, = 


now ſubſiſt reſpecting the appointment of a mi- 
niſter to the church of Newport. It 1s not our 
deſign to diſcuſs the ſubject minutely and parti- 
cularly, which would not very well conſiſt with 
the impartial deſign of a faithful hiſtorian ; but in 
what ſo nearly concerns the inhabitants of the 
preſent day, we ſhould ill diſcharge our truſt not 
to collect and concentrate whatever relates to the 
ſubject, or withhold any ſuggeſtions which may 
develope or explain the true nature of theicaſe. 
AFTER all, it muſt be obſerved, that, generally 
ſpeaking, where chapels have not been made pa- 
rochial by act of parliament, or eſtabliſhed as ſuch 
by preſcription, which, perhaps, as the venerable ' 
earl Camden remarked in the caſe of a modus, 
ſhould be prior to the thirteenth year of queen 
Elizabeth; the ſtrict and legal right of nomina- 


tion appears to be veſted in the rector or vicar of 


the original pariſh church. And it is not to be 
omitted in this caſe, that the want of an endow- 
ment is a ſtrong preſumptive plea againſt the ex- 
iſtence of any ſuch preſcription. 

Bur although ſuch a right be admitted, argu- 
mentatively, in its fulleſt poſſible extent, the im- 
policy and imprudence of exerciſing ſuch a right 
ought to be conſidered very maturely. The credit 
of religion, the peace of the inhabitants, and the | 
' friendſhip and ſocial intercourſe betwixt the clergy * 
and people, without which all inſtructions muſt © 
be loſt and perverted, —may all ſuffer moſt eſſen- 
Z 4 » -.« -» wh 


— 2 — 


336 HISTORY OF THE 


— </b boete fer rhe 4b = — 


tially by an ill-judged exertion of ſpeculative 
rights, which are unproductive of any advantages. 
Or fostxo, then, the probability of ſo nuch to 
be Jamented and fevere calamities to the mere 
queſtion of right, without the ſhadow of any ad- 
vantages to be obtained; the friend of peace and 
order can only adviſe, what every moral, religi- 
ous, and chriſtian man muſt acknowledge to be 
juſt, the cultivation of harmony by a dereliction of 
thoſe ſpeculative ideas, which, if enforced, can 
only be productive of confuſion and anarchy. 
Numerous inſtances of this kind of virtual renun- 
ciations have occurred in various parts of the 
kingdom; and happineſs and tranquility have been 
reſtored by theſe means to the inhabitants. 8 
To explain our motives in producing theſe ar- 
guments, it may not be improper to inform ſuch 
of our readers as are unacquainted with the preſent 
hiſtory of the church of Newport, that the vicar of 
Cariſbrooke has, in the prefent year one thouſand 
ſeven hundred and nincty-four, nominated a gen- 
tleman to ſupply the church, in conſequence of a 
vacancy, in oppoſition to the wiſhes of the inha- 
þitants. On this account much animoſity and 
Giflention has been occaſioned, and ſtill ſubſiſts. 
It were greatly to be defired that the cauſe of it 
could be removed, by an interference and accom- 
modation cf ſome indifferent perſons; that ſome 
neutral gentleman, properly qualified, and with 
abilities equal to the duty required, might be ap- 
| pointed 


_ 2 —ů—— 4 4 
x vant gh & 


H I 
e 


* On” 
N my = 
me 4 + * 1 
8 o 
7 % Ü OOO 


Cann —— r : = 
— * * A A 22 : N 2 2 
* = 2 N - * 82 E * * 3 p * £ + « by ; . - 21 
. 5 e : - I 
VE * 1 . , * " - . — i F 
: * ee 1a WES . ien * 3 = 


rr 
1 i . 2 , * . 
| 


ISLE OF WIGHT. — "220 


pointed to the office, and that both parties might 
retire from the conteſt, without having the morti- 
fication of acknowledging themſelves vanquiſhed 
in the ſtruggle. Before this time, ſo far as the 
memory of man reaches back, the ballot of the 
inhabitants had been uſually taken in ſupplying a 
vacancy. | 553 
Tux church which ſtands in the centre of one of 
the ſquares of the town, is very ſpacious, but 
comparatively low, and has galleries in every part; 
ſo that it requires great vocal powers to command 
the diſtant extremities of it. It has a good organ, 
and ſome handſome monuments. That of Sir Ed- 
ward Horſey has been greatly noticed, and juſtly 
claims the precedence, as to rank and importance. 
Under a decorated niche a whole length figure of 
him armed lies on the tomb; at his feet, a horſe's 
head attired, on a wreath argent and azure; and 
the following inſcription, which expreſſes his cha- 
racter, 1s given as an accompaniment. 


Edwardus qui miles erat, fortiſſimus Horſey, 
Vectis erat præſes conſtans, terraque marique 
Magnanimus, placidæ ſub pacis nomine fortis 
Juſtitiæ cultor, quam fidus amicus amico. 
Fautor Evangelii, dilectus principe vixit 
Munificus, populo multum dilectus ab omni 
Vixit: et ut ſancte, ſic ſtamina ſancta peregit. 
| Qui obiit 23d die Marcu 

An. Dni. 1582. 


Trax 


238 urs roh OF THE 


Tur Gillowiig ranſiation'i is given for the ſatis. 
faction of our Engliſh friends, as literally as the 
nature of the inſcription will admit; our reaſons 
for the obſervation will occur to the claſſic * 
on the leaſt attention. 

Six Edward Horſey, a moſt valiant knight, was 
captain of the iſle of Wight, and ſteady and cou- 
rageous both by land and ſea, of a meek and 
peaceable diſpoſition, not leſs famed in name as a 
ſtudent of juſtice than faithful in his friendſhips. 
A ſupporter of the goſpel, he lived beloved by his 
prince, bountiful to the people, and much eſteem- 
ed by every one; and as he lived religiouſly, ſo he 
diſcharged all the particular parts of his duty.— 
He died on the twenty-third of March in the year 
of our Lord one thouſand five hundred and eighty- 
two. 

His arms are quartered over the centre. In the 
firſt quarter, 1. Sable, three horſe's heads attired, 
couped. 2. Sable, within a bordure engrailed Or 
a cheveron between three croſs croſlets fitche of 
the ſecond. 3. Sable, four bars wavy Gules ſur— 
mounted of a ſaltier Or. 4. as the firſt. 2d. 
quarter. Gules a cheveron engrailed between three 
teopard's heads Or. 3d. as the fecond. 4th. as the 
Hir. Creſt, A horſe's head attired as in the arms. 
On the dexter corner is a ſhield of the firſt quarter, 
and on the ſiniſter corner a ſhield of the /econd. 

In our accounts of Sir Edward Horſey, as cap- 
| rain of this iſland, we ſhould have noted that he 


was employed by queen Elizabeth, in 1576-77, as 
| ambaſſador 


ISLE OF WICHT, 339 


ambaſſador to Don John of Auſtria (ſon of Charles 
the Fifth) on acceding to the government of the 
Netherlands. \ 

Tukxx is alſoa tablet againſt a pillar of the mid- 
dle aifle, in memory of Mr. Redſtone, a native of 
Newport, who had long ſerved under government, 
and died in July 1783, having been for ſome years 
ſtorekeeper of the ordnance at Plymouth Dock. 

Tus vault of the princeſs Elizabeth which is 
arched was diſcovered in the month of October 
one thouſand ſeven hundred and ninety-three, -on 
digging a grave in the chancel of this church. 
Na it is a ſtone let into the wall, with the 
initial letters, E. S. upon it; which was doubtleſs 
intended to point out the place of her interment, 
but had been forgotten from the confuſion and al- 
teration of the political hemiſphere, till by this 
accidental diſcovery the deſign of thoſe letters was 
manifeſted. 

Sus died a priſoner in the caſtle of Cariſbrooke, 
on the eighth day of September one thouſand fix 
hundred and fifty, in the fifteenth year of her age. 
Salmon has preſerved the memory of the time in 
his geographical grammar. The coffin was of very 
ſtrong lead, and ridged in the middle, according 
to the form of ſome ancient tomb ſtones in cathe- 
drals and other places, and had this inſcription | 
upon it, 


« E/ixabeth Second Daughter of the late King Charles 
« Deceaſed Sept. 8. 1650.” 


Brrogg 


340 HISTORY OF: THE 


Brrokk we take our leave of Newport, we muſt 
not omit to mention that the corporation are 
charged with a fee farm rent of twenty-four pounds 
two ſhillings and two pence, payable half-yearly 
to the crown, and John Fleming, Eſq. with twelve 
pounds five ſhillings and nine pence, payable in 
like manner to the crown for the chauntry of New- 
port; which, with other rents in the iſland, have 
been, granted by patent to the governors of the 
iſland, amounting in the whole to ſix hundred and 
feventy-two pounds ſeventeen ſhillings and eight 
pence. 1 | 
Yer we think it not improper to lay before our 
readers in this place a curious agreement, which 
was made and entered into, according to its ſpe- 
cific title, more than two hundred years ago, and 
omitted to be inſerted in the hiſtory of that date. 


« An Agreement between the Bayliffs of New- 
port and the Clothiers of Shipton Mallett, A.D. 
1578. 

The Sixth Day of Julye, in the xxi Yeare of 
the Reyne of our Sovereyne Ladye Quene Eliza- 
bethe Anno Dm. 1578, It is orderd and con- 

cluded betweene the Bayliffes of this Towne of 
Newport, and Richard Biſſe of Coſham, Edward 

Moſfe of Coſham, Richard Goodall of ſaid Coſ- 
ham, Edud. Shoude of Shepton Mallet, and 
Henry Cabell of Meber, Clothyers, as well for 
themſelves as for all other Clothyers of the 
County of Somerſet, as will hereunto aſſent for 
and 


w 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 341 


and concerning the Petit Cuſtomes of the Wolls 
by them, or any of them, bought within this 
Ifle, by the Mediation and Award of Sr. Edward 
Horſey, Knight, Captayne of this Iſle, and in 
the Preſence of diverſe Gentlemen of the ſaid 
Iſle then preſent, as followeth, 

Imprimis, the ſaid Clothyers, or Wolmen, and 
every of them, granteth, and are contented to 
ſatisfy and paye to the Bayliffes of this Town of 
Newport, for the Time being, and their Succeſ- 
ſors, for, and in Conſideration of the Petit Cuſ. 
tomes of all Wooles, by them, or any of them, 
hereafter to be bought within this Ifle, in Man- 
ner and Form following, that is to ſaye, for every 
Lode of Woole conteyning two Sacks, and a 
Rider, ij v3*. that is to ſay, xiid. for every Sacke, 
and vis. for the Ryder. 

Item, if any of them ſhall hereafter happen to 
carry in One Lode leſs than two Sacks and a 
Ryder, as aforeſaid, then they are contented to 
pay xiid. for the Sacke. 

Item, It is agreed that the ſaid Clothyers, and 
every of them, ſhall receive of the Hands of the 
Bailiffes, for the Time being their Cockatts for 
the tranſporting their Sacks of Woll. 

Item, the ſaid Bayliffes granteth, and are con- 
tented for themſelves, or there Officers or Ste- 
ward, to make to every of the ſaid Clothyers, 
demanding the ſame, there Cockatt indented, 
receiving only for the Fees thereof 111%. and far- 
der, that every of the ſaid Clothyers ſhall pay 
5 but 


- 


342 | a hoes o ar THE 


but for one Cocks, bn 1 ſhabl at 
feveral Times in one Yeare' receive ſeveral 
Cockatts of the Bayliftes or there Officers. 

In Conſideration of the ſaid Sums of Money, 
to be paid by the ſaid Clothyers, and every of 
them, in Manner and Forme aforefaid concluded, 
and by the ſaid Sr. Edward moderated and li- 
mited, the ſaid Bayliffes are contented, from 
henceforth, not to demand or receive the Petite 

Cuſtomes for Wooles according to their Cuſto- 
maty of the Tode, nor to vex 
nor trouble any of them therefore. 

In Witneſs whereof the faid Sir Edward, as 
the Baytives and Clothyers above named, have 
| herevrito ſubſcribed their Names.” 


Tur great ſervices of Sir Edward Horfey, when 
captain of this ifland, would be a very pleafing 
theme to expatiate upon. But befides the general 
account we have given of his government, we 
think it may be fully ſufficient to ſay that his many 
excellent virtues, which are deſcribed on his mo- 
nument, are by no means exaggerated ; and, after 
this eulogium on the refpectability of his charac- 
ter, we ſhall not detract from it * detailing it 
more at targe. 

Or the Houſe of Induſtry, which we had origi- 
natly propoſed to mention here, we ſhall only ob- 
ferve, that a full account of it, with our reffections 
on the ſubject, is reſerved for the next chapter. 


BOROUGH: 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 343 


BOROUGH of NEWTOWN. 

THERE is reaſon to ſuppoſe that this town is 
much more ancient than its name ſeems to import, 
but under the name of Francheville; which name 
it probably obtained either from its being a free 
town, or elſe from its having been for ſome time 
poſſeſſed and at laſt deſtroyed by the French when 
they invaded the iſland. Aymer, biſhop of Win- 
cheſter, was lord of this borough, and granted by 
charter to this town of Francheville, all ſuch li- 
berties and franchiſes as were ſeverally and reſpec- 
tively enjoyed by the burgeſſes of Taunton, Alif- 
ford, and Farnham ; which deed or charter was 
iſſued at Swainſton, and firſt confirmed to the town 
by Edward the Second, afterwards by Edward the 
Fourth, and queen Elizabeth alſo ratified it, as « 
teſtimony of her diſpoſition in its favour. 

Wurd the counteſs of Albemarle and Devon, 
lady of the iſland, gave in her claims, in the eighth 
year of Edward the Firſt, which were allowed her 
by the itinerant juſtices, ſhe is repreſented as hav- 
ing a knight's fee in Newtown; of which Robert 
de Pimely held one half, and William ſon of Wil- 
ham Liſle and Baldwin de Newton, as holding 
each one quarter of a fee. In the inquiſition taken 
in the ſeventh year of Edward the Third we alſo 
find that William ſon of Walter Liſle, and Baldwin 
de Newetoh then held half a fee in Neweton by 
knight's ſervice of the honour of the caſtle of 
Cariſbrooke. | 


We 


n 7 


„ n —— _— — 


— 


— 


* —RR⅛ 2 
Dr 


— — auf on wow + 


*; 


——ä— —b * 


F 
— — — — 


Pr 
_— 


=>; by —— — — = = = = = 

AGATE ng HT RG A = ARS TE II 
- ba 2 

"= 4% n i W * 


r 


_- —— — — — 


: 9 2 — 
= 1% =o wr 
a—<<—>— — 


—— — — 


eee —— R122 . 


— r r 
cons 2 8 de N a . 
r Ben ny NOT RENE IIs ge peice Þ 
R * * N nr 1 


— > — - 


7 — «% 
D 
235 E ah 
r 8 m 
* 


344 HISTORY OF THE 


We likewiſe find that a grant of the freedom of 
this borough to the mayor and burgeſſes, was given 
in the thirtieth year of king Edward the Third; 
and another, which is dated in the fourth year of 


Richard the Second, ſhews a gift of forty acres of 


land lying in Calbourn to the mayor and burgeſles 
of Newtown. It likewiſe appears from various old 
deeds, that they had at different times granted | 


many burgage tenures, ſome of which were for 


life, and others in fee. 
Tus charter of king Edward he . to his 


ſon Edward, earl of Cheſter, afterwards Edward 
the Third, king of England, in the eleventh year 
of his reign, gave a power to hold a market at the 


town of Francheville every Wedneſday, and a fair 


of three days every year on the eve of the Feaſt of 


Saint Mary Magdalen and two following days.— 


The power of granting tenures is alſo naturally to 
be inferred from its having a power to buy and ſell 
lands as a body corporate, under a common town 
feal. 

AFTeR it had been deſtroyed by the ee in 
the reign of Richard the Second, on its being af- 
terwards rebuilt, it aſſumed the name of Newtown. 
The traces of a very large town are met with, 
though it is now dwindled away ſo as ſcarcely to 
deſerve the name of a village, not containing more 
than about ten cottages, and conſequemtly but very 
few inhabitants. It ſtill preſerves a corporation 
of mayor and burgeſſes, and has a town-hall ; but 
this body docs not conſiſt of inhabitants of the 

place, 


ISLE or WIGHT. „ 


place, but of the proprietors of certain burgage 
tenures, which entitle them to a vote in the choice 
of their members. In ſome ancient deeds of lands, 
the town is deſcribed as having extended from the 
High- ſtreet on the ſouth to Gold- ſtreet; and many 
ſmall burgage lands lie on each fide of the ſcite of 
the old ſtreets. Two long ſtreets, ſtretching in 
the direction of eaſt and weſt, were connected by 
other ſtreets, nearly at right angles, which extended 
from north to ſouth. Theſe circumſtances render 
it very probable, that the town mentioned in the 
Saxon chronicles, as having been burned by the 
Danes in the year one thouſand and one, could be 
no other than this very town of which we are now 
treating. | | 
No do we ſpeak merely on the authority 10 for- 
mer hiſtorians. From the beſt information, that 
of living evidence, we have been enabled to con- 
clude, that the town formerly extended conſiderably 
to the ſouth, probably beyond the ſituation of the 
_ town-hall, which is uſed for elections and corpo- 
ration entertainments, and ſtands on an eminence 
that overlooks one of the creeks of this harbour. 
With the uſe of this ancient building, we are ena- 
| bled to ſay, that parties carrying their proviſions 
and liquors may be accommodated, when engaged 
in water or land excurſions; being well ſituated 
for the former, when the tide is in, which flows up 
very near to it. A ſmall public houſe is contigu- 
ous to it on the north, and probably ſtood in High- 
ſtreet. At the bottom of the green (or ſtreet to 
Ne. 8. A a the 


ena. . a 1 —.— 24 . ; = 
AS 24% , P _—_ err — > 4 3 *. — 
1 — 
*& > ove q * 8 n * \ * * N 


A d Nee FE EGS tt ——2 —— go EE 


ALE IEG 


© = r Me 
a 8 


r 
8 — * * * 
#7, Chow . 2 * 
a . 
- 1 
— Te r 


habits. His frankneſs gave us much pleaſure, and 


high water. The mayor and burgeſſes claim the 


liament we ſhall be leſs copious than under New- 


| beth was the firſt time of its ſending repreſen- 
tatives, the occaſion of which extenſive ſum- 


> Ob I nts s 5 I a7 — 
* * n » 3 5 A — 
— . OE x 8 ee _—_ or = FO 


346 HISTORY OF ThE 


the north) Gold-ſtreet turns to the eaſt, and Silver- 
ſtreet to the weſt, each of which contains one 
houſe; in the former the venerable William Har. 
vey, aged about eighty-two, and the only refident 
burgeſs, from whom we had this intelligence, in- 


his anſwers to our enquiries afforded us every ſa- 
tisfaction. A ANTS | 
Tut haven of Newtown is certainly a moſt de- 
ſirable place for ſhipping, and affords the beſt 
ſecurity of any about the iſland. It is capable of 
receiving veſſels of five hundred tons burden at 


water and fiſhery, who hold a court leet, and ap- 
point conſtables; but a rent, payable to the lord 
of the manor of Swainſton, is collected from the 
holders of borough lands. 

Ox the ſubject of its ſending members to par- 


port. The twenty-ſeventh year of queen Eliza- 


mons to parliament has been already ſhewn alſo 
vnder that borough. William Mewes and Robert 
Ridge, Eſqrs. were the firſt on whom this honour 
was confcrred, in one thouſand five hundred and 
eighty-five. The right of election is attached 
to thirty- nine borough lands, or burgage tenures, 
the real owners of which convey them to their re- 


* Hiſtory of the boroughs, Ec. as before, vol. 2. p- 88. 


lations, 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 347 


lations, friends, of dependents for life, but in con- 
fidence to vote as directed by them. The number 
has been increaſed to thirty-nine by ſplitting three, 
which are therefore conceived not to be good votes. 
Two of theſe tenures were ſold by lord Edgecumbe 
to Sir Richard Worſley in 1782 for one thouſand 
guineas, though only two decayed cottages.” 
Tr oldeſt books ſhew the qualification of a bur- 
geſs to have conſiſted in holding a BoRoucn LAND, 
paying rent to the mayor and chief burgeſſes. In 
the reigh of Charles the Second an order was made 
to limit the number of burgeſſes to twelve, but in 
the year one thouſand fix hundred and ninety- 
eight, in the reign of William the Third, the 
mayor and burgeſſes pronounced the reſtriction to 
be illegal, and declared that the poſſeſſion of a free- 
hold ina borough land included the right of being 
a burgeſs. We ſhall lay before our readers this 


taſt determination as a matter of record. 


At an Aiſembly had in the ſaid Burrough, on 
* Tueſday the 20th Day of Sept. 1698, ap- 
Francheville, [ Pear the Chief Burgeſſes then that are 
; mark'd thus (—), 
— John, Lord Cutts, Mayor. 
Joſeph Dudley, Eſq. } | — John Leigh, Eſq. 

Deputy Mayor. James Worſley, Eſq. 
Hen. Dore. Coll. Richard Holms. 
Coll. David Urry. —|Mr. Edward Hayles. 

Mr. John Chiverton. || |—|Sir Robert Worſley, Bart. 
Maj. Henry Holmes, || |— William Stephens, Eſq. - | 
Mr. john Phillips. William Bowerman, t1q, 
Mr. David Urry. 1 

Twentieth Day of Sept. 1698, Order of Mayor 
and Chief Burgeſſes to admit thoſe poſſeſſed of 


Burgage Tenures to vote. 
| A a 2 At 


© Newtown 


[ 


T 
— 
U 


HISTORY or THE 


348 
| At this Aſſembly "por examining the ancient 
| Records of the ſaid Corporation, and taking the 
Depoſitions on Oath of James Overy, as alſo 
upon the Averment of ſome of the chief Bur. 
geſſes there then preſent; it is reſolved, that 
the Reſtraint of the chief Burgeſſes of this Cor- 
poration to the Number of twelve, or any leſs 
Number than are Frecholders of Burrough Lands 
is againſt Law, and contrary to the ancient 
' Uſage of this Corporation. | 
Alſo *tis ordered and agreed, chat e 
ſhall prove himſelf to be a Freeholder of any 
Burrough Land in Fee, either by the Rent Roll 
now produced in this Aſſembly, bearing Date 
and beginning in the Year of our Lord 168; 
(whereof a true Copy ſhall be kept by the Mayor 
for the Time being), or otherwiſe effectually in 
Law, ſhall upon Demand, be ſworn a free 
Burgeſs,” | 


We have already ſtated the articles of agreement 
which were entered into between the governor and 
the gentlemen of the iſland, in the preceding 
| - chapter, reſpecting the diſputes of this Borough; 
and therefore ſhall not repeat them here. 

Ir was diſcovered ſome years after, on inſpect- 
ing the old books of the borough, that the laſt 
mentioned declaratory order was contrary to the. 
Ancient uſage of the borough ; when it was conſe- 
quently eraſed out of this book, and the borough 
reſtored to the right of electing burgeſſes out of 


thoſe who enjoyed a freehold in a © gh land. 
Sox 


— 8 — ** * . pe : 
eee ß. 


g * q 
PR : p45; — 7 
—— —— -E — 2 2 7 — 


2 en the Ty we < 7 


— rye Ape. 
Wane =ww das 2 


r 
. 


— eq 
* 2 at wr < 
* * 41 . — 4 


L I — 
- ; r 
—B k nn 
1 n » 4 * * 
_—; <A 22 9 7 2 3 K on * * C a 4 Y 4 6 
CG oe c go gy— 1 — x 5 
f . f * * — ; * — 3 4 OI; 1 G org do ls 2 men nee e 9 — ade * 
* . 8 — 4 " BY - 4 . 
* = - — » * . 
N * * 4 1 - _ 6. _ * 6 : 15 * h 0 - * 
5 * 


= 
2 * 1 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 349 


Sou deciſions have been made in the houſe of 
commons to regulate the mode of election, and to 
eſtabliſh the right of voting for repreſentatives.— 
In the parliament of king Charles the Firſt, which 
aſſembled in one thouſand fix hundred and forty, 
Sir John Barrington, Bart. and John Bulkeley, 
Eſq. were voted the fitting members inſtead of Sir 
John Mewes, Knt. and Nicholas Weſton, Eſq. 

To the parliament which aſſembled in one thou- 
ſand ſeven hundred and twenty-ſeven, James Worſ- 
ley and Henry Holmes, Eſqrs. were returned as 
the repreſentatives of Newtown ; but a petition 
was preſented to the houſe in favour of Sir John 
Barrington, Bart. and Charles Am. Paulet, Eſq. 
which was ultimately determined in a committee 
of the houſe, on the 23d of April, 1729, when the 
houſe reſolved, that the petitioners were duly 
elected, and ought to have been returned inſtead 
of James Worſley and Henry Holmes, Eſqrs. who 
had been returned. It was then laid down as a 
final reſolution of the houſe, that the right of 
eleting members to ſerve in parliament for the 
borough of Newtown, in the county of Southamp- 
ton, © is in the mayor and burgeſſes, having bo- 
rough lands within the ſaid borough.” The 
tenures of this ſort were then declared to be thirty- 
fix. William Harvey, already mentioned, declares 
them to be thirty-ſix. Sir Richard Worſley and 
Sir John Barrington divide the borough between 
them ; indeed we may, perhaps, more properly 
ſay that they are united, and, with the aſſiſtance 

Aa 3 | of 


3509 HISTORY OF THE 


of Mr. Blachford, who poſſeſſes one of theſe te- 
nures, and is brother-in-law to Sir John Barring- 
ton, can always command a majority of thirty-ſix. 
For as Sir Richard Worſley poſſeſſes ten good ones 
(by ſplitting two of them, they are made twelve), 
and Sir John Barrington eight, ſuch an acceſſion 
enſures the returns in favour of their nomination. 
Tus corporation is ſtill preſerved by having a 
titular mayor, and twelve burgeſſes, which are 
choſen by the lord of the manor; and ſuch mayor 
is the returning officer to every new parliament, 
or on any vacancy by death, * or other- 
> WE; ©. 
We have to obſerve with reſpect to Newtown, 
that it is a manor within that of Swainſton, of which 
we ſhall take notice hereafter when we come to 
treat of it within its particular pariſh. It has a 
chapel, which is dependent on the church of Cal- 
bourn, endowed with a glebe which is enjoyed by 
the rector of Calbourn. In the firſt year of king 
Edward the Sixth, an entry was made in the re- 
- giſter of Wincheſter in the following words: © For 
* the ſettling the matter of variance between John 
% Mewes, Eſquire, and Mr. Randolph Howard, 
* parſon of Calbourn, the biſhop, as arbitrator, 
« awards that Mr. Mewes ſhall pay his whole 
* tithes for his merſh, called Bernard-merſh in 
«* Newtown: and whereas the parſon of Calbourn 
* hath formerly paid only twenty ſhillings per 
* annum towards the finding a prieſt for the in- 
„ habitants of Newtown, it is ordered that he ſhall 
f from 


1 


. 

82 
s 

"F 

27 

f 
* 
? 

5 
wy 5 
8 
oy 
155 

14 

tt 
*F] 
4 

of 


: 
th. 

4 

2 

" 

4 4 
* F 
"3.8 . 
-4 4 
7 * 
3 
3 

1 
1 
I , 
17 4 
#7 > 
i 
9 

1 

Hf 


# 
* 7 * 
7 
” of 
2 
* 


N 


2 
A 
at 


"ITAL. TC” 


— 
* 
— — 5 
* — * 4 
— - q 4” 
r E 1 3 be» a * 
- 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 351 


ce from henceforth, with the favourable aid of the 
« jnhabitants of Newtown, at his own coſts, main. 
te tain a prieſt up-rifing and down-lying, to reſide 
* jn the houſe adjoining to the church-yard at 
« Newtown. The mayor and burgeſſes, and the 
« jnhabitants of Newtown, do, on this conſidera. * 
te tion, quit their claim to Longbridge Croft, 
« otherwiſe called Magdalen's Croft, which they 
« will ſuffer the ſaid parſon of Calbourn and his 
© ſucceſſors to enjoy: and the ſaid mayor and 
„e burgeſſes, and inhabitants, as alſo the parſon 
« of Calbourn doe agree, that if any difference 
ce ſhall hereafter ariſe touching this award, that 
« they will refer themſelves to the determination 
« of the biſhops of Wincheſter for the time being.“ 
Signed June the eighth, in the firſt year of Edward 
the Sixth. : 

A $uRvey of the iſland which was taken in the 
ſecond year of queen Elizabeth has noted, that the 
parſon of Calbourn held a grant of forty acres, 
called Magdalen's Land, belonging to the chapel 
of Newtown, and that he provided a reader for 
the chapel on account of the fame. 

We ſhould not omit to mention, that, befides 
the veſtiges of the ſtreets already mentioned, the 
ivy-covered walls of half a church may be ſeen. 
Beſides this, a faltern or two conclude the obſer- 
vations to be made of the remains of this ancient 


town. 


A a4 BOROUGH 


— 248 — n „ Gown = ah 
e — 4 1 


- 
— * 


. y bd a = — 
Y po e * 
» — roun W Ws 8; Dad *; n * Wc * ** 0 _ "La ab3 Ys — 
9 v4 . " — — v —_ * _— G A a 


- 2 
* ͤ 


. 8 
ISR} Me 
> "1 p 


1 
2 
ft 
; 
, 
1 
* 
4 


2 ra 
_—_—_— * 
S - 


2 — 
* 2 nn; By K 
* a» ba 4 ai * 
8 * "> 6— — WAIT. . 5 2 
—— E — I 
- n % 


I 


, — nn * 
— — 8 3 — 
* " _Y 7 

Ry R e — 


W HISTORY or THE 


BOROUGH of YARMOUTH. 
Or the ſituation of this borough, it is ſufficiently 
implied from the name that it ſtands at the mouth 


of the river Yar or Lare. It is nearly oppoſite to 


Lymington river on the coaſt of Hampſhire, to- 
wards the weſtern part of the iſland, and ſtands on 


a point of land, cloſe to the ſea, on the eaſtern 


fide of it. In ancient charters we meet with it 
under the name of Eremuth, and is the firſt town 
in the iſland which obtained a charter of franchiſes. 
Baldwin, earl of Devon, the brother of Iſabella, 
counteſs of Albemarle, gave them ſuch a charter 
in the reign of king Henry the Third. From this 
circumſtance it 1s probable, that the town was at 


that period much larger than it is at preſent ; and 


It is certain that this place has greatly ſuffered 
both by the depredations of time and by the enemy. 

Tur church originally ſtood at the caſt end of 
the town, and in the time of biſhop Woodlock, it 


was returned into the regiſtry of Winton, in the 


year one thouſand three hundred and five, by the 


dean of the iſland, that it paid or received a pen- 


ſion of thirteen ſhillings and four pence to-or from 
the church of Shalfleet ; but though the expreſſion 
of the return is in this and ſome other inſtances 
ambiguous, we are diſpoſed to conclude that it 

paid this penſion. | 
AFrTER the firſt church was burnt, decayed, or 
otherwiſe deſtroyed, the ſecond was built at the 
v.eſt end of the town, in the place where the caſtle 
now ſtands; but this alſo was demoliſhed by the 
SAT French 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | JEFF. 


French in the thirty-fifth year of king Henry the 
Eighth, before which time it does not appear to 
have had any works of defence to withſtand an aſ- 
failing enemy. The king, in conſequence of this 
miſchief, cauſed a caſtle to be erected immediately 
on the ſpot; and the old wall of the church forms 
a part of it, as may be ſeen on the eaſt ſide of the 
fortreſs. The middle of the town was the next 
fituation, which was conſidered as moſt eligible 
for the church; in which it was conſequently 
erected, and where it now at preſent remains. 

Turs town was a place of ſome importance be- 
fore theſe misfortunes befel it; and though well 
ſituated for trade, has been obliged to give way 
to its more flouriſhing rival, Newport, which, from 
its central poſition, and eaſy acceſs to the ſea by 
means of its fine river, has engroſſed the principal 
trade of the iſland. It is conſequently reduced to 
a ſmall village, ſo that a few years ago it was ſaid 
to contain only about eighty inhabitants in the 
pariſh. 

We ſhould firſt have noted, in order of time, 
that, from the ſurvey of the crown lands in the 
iſland, in the twenty-third of king Henry the Se- 
venth, in the year one thouſand five hundred and 
ſeven, the town of Yernemouth (as it is ſpelt in 
that record) is charged with a fee farm rent of 
twenty ſhillings. 

Havins already deſcribed the nature of the Ye 
parations done at Yarmouth for the defence of the 
town and that part of the iſland, in a former part 


of 


354 © HISTORY OF THE 


of this work *, we ſhall not have occaſion to notice 
them here. 8 
Tur. period when the town of Yarmouth firſt 
obtained the privilege of ſending two burgeſſes to 
parliament was, as we have already noted under 
Newtown, when queen Elizabeth had reaſon to 
apprehend a Spaniſh invaſion. Since that period 
it has regularly continued to ſend members, as 
the other boroughs of the iſland. How far it was 
to the advantage of the inhabitants, or in What 
reſpects it contributed more amply to the general 
good of the ſtate than at this day, we may leave to 
be conſidered by the advocates for reforming the 
reprefentation of parliament, after laying before 
our readers the following letter. | 


Copy of a Letter from Lord Hunſdon (Lord 
Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth, and Governor 


_ - — r 1 —— "7 + - FE - 
: > l 28 ＋ 8 = - = * 
N 9 1 . 85 N N * * . oo _ * — wn wr - = 
: a . * 0 my + r = - _—_— 
— — * 
_— * e «a 4 — — 
* 
* 
. 


on USO. 5+ —— —_—— N - — — gy ——_—— — 
* reer . 
7 * 


as 

. ' of the Iſle of Wight) to the Corporation of Yar- 

4% mouth, dated Sept. 20, 1601. 

0 « After my verie hartie Commendations.— 
þ 1 | Whereas her Majeſtie is purpoſed, for certaine 
' ah urgent and greate Affayres of her Kingdome and 
T 1 Commonwealth to ſummon a Parliament, for 
| 5 the better Service whereof you are to ſend twoe 
MY Burgeſſes to that Aﬀemblie, theire to attende 
1 untill that Court ſhall be diſſolved; theſe ſhall 
if | bee to deſire you, that inaſmuch as I was the 
; Nt Meanes and' Procurer of the Libertie for your 
: 4 See Chap. 5, p. 108, &c. 


Corporation, 


- 
A 

5 

. 
4 4 3 
48 i 
* 
75 


* 
. 4 
4 4 
T4 
"x d 

* 
81 

4 
F7Y 
#4 % 


EY TIS" PS * 
*. 1 — * fy 2. 2 7 
Wert CS ee Ss 
_ 


— ; 
22 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 5 


Corporation, you will, with all the Convenience 
you may, aſſemble yourſelfs together, and, with 
your united Conſent, ſend up unto me (as here- 
tofore you have done) your Wrytt, with a Blank, 
wherein I may inſert the Names of ſuch Perſons 
as I ſhall think fitteſt to diſcharge that Dewtie 
for your Behoofe, whom I ſhall take Care ſhall 
likewiſe free you of whatſoever ſhall be dewe by 
you for the Place, which defire may be don 
with all Expedicion after your Receipt of the 
Wrytt. Whereto not doubting you will have 
all dewe Regard, I bidd you very heartily fare- 
well. From my Howſe in Blackfryers, the 2oth 
of September, 1601. Your verie loving Freinde, 
G. HUNSDON.” 

Directed.“ To my verie loving Freindes the 
Maior and Burgeſſes of Yarmouth, give theſe.” 


IT has been mentioned already, that this town 
of Yarmouth had a charter of franchiſes granted 
to it by Baldwin, earl of Devon, before the iſland -- 
came into the hands of the crown, In the ſeventh 
year of the reign of king James the Firſt, that 
monarch, who was fond of beſtowing charters, 
inveſted them with new powers, and confirmed 
the old charter. We ſhall here preſent our readers 
with the ſubſtance of the grant, under which they 
continue to act as a corporation, ſo far as the na- 
ture and preſent condition of the borough will 
admit, 


« Whereas 


* 


HISTORY OF THE 


356 


« Whereas the Borough of Eremuth, alias 
Yarmouth, in the Iſle of Wight, is an ancient 
Borough, and the Mayor and Burgeſſes have 
preſcribed to have and uſe diverſe Liberties and 
Privileges, which they claim alſo under Colour 
of Charters of Confirmation from ſeveral Kings 
and Queens of this Realm, confirming an an- 
cient Grant made to this Borough, by Baldwin 
de Redvers, ſome Time Lord of this Iſle; viz, 
the Charter of Confirmation under the great 
Seal, in the eighth Year of the Reign of King 
Edward the Firſt*; a like Charter, granted in 
the eighteenth of Henry the Sixth; another 
Charter of the ſixth of Edward the Fourth; and 
another Charter of the ſecond of Elizabeth ; and 
whereas the ſaid Mayor and Burgeſſes, and their 
Predeceſſors, have always paid to the King and 
his Predeceſſors, for the ſaid Privileges, [mmu- 
nities, and Liberties, the Fee-Farm of twenty 


| Shillings yearly ; and whereas it appears by the 
4 Records, in the Remembrancer's Office in the 
4: Exchequer, in the ſecond Year of Richard the 
Xt Second, that the Town of Yarmouth was entirely 
1 burned by the Enemp, and its Inhabitants greatly 
3 impoveriſhed; and whereas: the ſaid Town lies 
'Þ near to a good Harbour for Shipping, and for 
Þ that Reaſon King Henry the Eighth cauſed a 


0 < A vel > WS, 
* 88 dt 4 * dt ATR. 4-46 . & +" ” * * hos 
SD IT, 228 . = vs ' 2 o * k 88 my” i , 
P e 3 ** 2 
— RY p 3 
— — ' — 27 = ä — . — En * 18 — a 
: 
* 


OO 


This was about eighteen years after the death of Baldwin, 
earl of Devon, and about thirteen before the purchaſe of it from 
Iſabella de Fortibus, counteſs of Albemarle, None of the charters 
of confirmation here recited appear for our information, 


SY <9 : = - 
Ir >, ng ge 
* * 128 
* R 2 4 
. a > 
2 3 


4 ; = 
* N r 8 5 * Fa 

l "x" —— 

N 4 TRE 6, IPL Mfg > * A ” 

— — 4 BS — TA Ls a 2 a8! ER. 

"+ — rr 4 * þ x 
* 3 — * 
* Se F 


— 


5 A hoe - os 
EC ics 


— — 


Caſtle 


"i 
. - ws ah. 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 357 


Caſtle to be built, ſince which the Town is bet- 
ter inhabited than before, and it is to be hoped 
that it will be yet more filled with People, for 
increaſing the Strength of the Iſland, and guard- 

ing the ſaid Caſtle, if his Majeſty would vouch- 
ſafe to re-grant them their Liberties. and Immu- 
nities; that the ſaid Mayor and Burgeſſes, 
eſteeming the Charters beforementioned inſuffi- 
cient to authoriſe them in the uſing and enjoy- 
ing the ſaid Liberties and Immunities, have 
petitioned the King to make, confirm, and new 
create them a Body politic and corporate, with 
ſuch Franchiſes as ſhall be by the King thought 
expedient ; that the King therefore being willing 
to ſettle the Rules for the Government of the 

Borough, and the People there, declares it to 
be a free Borough; and that they ſhall be a Body 
politic and corporate, by the Name of Mayor 
and Burgeſſes of Yarmouth, in the Iſle of Wight, 
with Capacity to purchaſe, &c. to grant, &c. to 
plead or to be impleaded, and to have a common 
Seal; that there ſhall be twelve chief Burgeſſes 
to be the Common Council of the Borough; that 
- out of theſe, one ſhall be choſen Mayor of the 
Borough; that they ſhall have power to make 
Laws, Statutes, and Orders for the Government 
of the Borough and its Officers; that the'Bur. 
. geſſes of the ſaid Borough ſhall continue for 
Life, excepting any of them ſhall be removed 
for reaſonable Cauſe; and on the Death or Re- 


moval of a Chief Burgeſs, the Mayor and major 
Part 


358 | HISTORY OF THE 


Part of the Burgeſſes then living, fhall Elect 
another in his Place, who ſhall be ſworn before 
the Mayor, and major Part of the chief Bur- 
geſſes: that the Mayor and Steward of the Bo- 
rough ſhall hold the Courts of the ſaid Borough; 
that they ſhall hold a View of Frank Pledge of 
all inhabiting and reſident in the faid Borough, 
and to redrefs Abuſes in the fame : the Mayor 
and Burgeſſes are empowered to elect and con- 
ſtitute a Steward, a common Clerk, and a Ser- 
jeant at Mace, to continue during the Pleaſure 
of the Mayor and Burgeſſes: that the Mayor and 
Burgeſſes ſhall have all the Fines, Forfeitures, 
and Profits of the Courts, which they ſhall have 
Pover to levy, by their own Officers, by Diſtreſs ; 
they have alſo a Grant of Strays; and the Goods 
of Felons, within the Limits of the Borough; a 
Market is granted to the Town, to be kept every 
_ Wedneſday, and a Fair to be held yearly, viz. 
on St. James's Day, the Eve before, and the 
Day after, together with a Court of Pie powder, 
- &c. with all the Profits and Emoluments be- 
longing to ſuch Markets, Fairs, and Courts: a 
- ſpecial Licence and Authority are given to the- 
Mayor and Burgeſſes, to purchaſe and hold to 
them and their Succeſſors for ever, any Manors, 
Lands, &c. not holden of the King in capite, or 
dy Knight's Service, not exceeding the Value of 
_ {+8wenty Pounds per Annum, the Statute of Mort- 
main notwithſtanding ; and Licence is alſo given 
far any Perſon, &c. to grant and alien to the 
| ſaid 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 359 


ſaid Mayor and Burgeſſes, under the like Re- 
_ friction, all Liberties, Privileges, Franchiſes, 
and Immunities, which the Borough has held 
and enjoyed, by Reaſon or Colour of Grants by 
the King or any of his Predeceſſors, or by any 
other Perſons made heretofore, are confirmed, 
ſaving and reſerving out of this Grant, the Caftle 
of Yarmouth, its Ditches, Trenches, and Limits, 
wherein the ſaid Mayor and Burgeſſes have no 
Power or Authority to enter. They are to pay 
the Fee-farm of twenty Shillings yearly, at the 
Feaſt of St. Michael; a Clauſe is added to in- 
. demnify them from all Proſecutions for any 
Liberties or Franchiſes uſed, had, or uſurped by 
them, before the Date of this Charter, and no 
Fine is to be paid to the Hanaper Office for it. 
Dated the firſt Day of September, in | the ſeventh 
Year of James.” 


Upon the operation of this charter generally, 
it appears that Thomas Cheke, Eſq. was appointed 
the firſt ſteward, and Barnaby Leigh, Eſq. the firſt 
mayor. In other reſpects we have very few mat. 
ters to remark, until the government of John, 
lord Cutts; when this borough, as well as New. 
town, of which we have already treated, felt the . 
effects of his violent and arbitrary meaſures. The 
following petition from the gentlemen of the iſland 
to the houſe of commons was preſented to com- 
plain of the oppreſſion and injuſtice exerciſed; in 
which it appears that. they made one common 
cauſe with Newtown. «To 


360 © HISTORY OF THE 


„ To the Honourable the Knights, Citizens, 
and Burgeſſes in Parliament aſſembled, the hum. 
ble Petition of the Gentlemen of the Ifle of 

Wight, and the Mayor, Burgeſſes of Yarmouth, 

and ſeveral of the Burgeſſes of Newtown, in the 
ſaid Iſland, Sheweth, 

That the Lord Cutts, Governor of the ſaid 
1 ſland, in Order to ſubvert the Freedom of Elec- 
tion of Members to ſerve in Parliament, and 
ſubject the free Votes of your Petitioners to his 
arbitrary Pleaſure, hath abuſed the Power in- 
truſted in him, to the great Grievance of his 
Majeſty's good Subjects under his Government 
in the ſaid Iſland, and endangering the free Li- 
ties of England, viz. | 
_ ÞAaſt; By threatning thoſe who have Sans in 
Elections, that if they do not ſerve his Intereſt, 
he will uſe his Power over them as Enemies to 
the Government. 

2dly, By quartering Souldiers arbitrarily, in 
Order to overawe the Corporations. 5 
zZadly, By impriſoning a Clergyman for the 
Space of two Months for voteing againſt his the 
ſaid Governor's Intereſt. 
.._ 4thly, By putting the Officers of the Militia 
out of their Commiſſions for voteing againſt his 


© Intereſt; ſince which the Militia have wanted 


great Part of their Officers, whereby the ſaid 
Iſland has beenexpoſed to Dangerduring the War. 
sz thly, By encouraging the late Mayor of New- 


town to expell Sir Wm. Stephens and Mr. Wil- 
liams, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 361 


liams, on Pretence of their being rend'red un- 
capable to act as Burgeſſes, for not having ſigned 
the Aﬀociation ; notwithſtanding their Burgeſs. 
ſhip is in Right of Burrough Lands, and no 
Qffice within the Act of Parliament. | 

6thly, By diſpoſing the Truſt of the Forts be- 
longing to the ſaid Ifland as Rewards to ſuch as 
ſerve his Intereſt in Elections, and who are un- 
{killfull and unable to diſcharge their Offices, 
by which Means he has now a third Tyme made 
himſelf Mayor of Newtown, tho? not rig 
a Burgeſs there. 
Ithly, And by ſeveral other arbitrary ade 1 
legal Practiſes, of all which your Petitioners 
humbly pray the Conſideration of this Honour- 
able Houſe, and to do for their Relief as to your 
great Wiſdome ſhall ſeem meer. 

And your Petitioners ſhall ever pray, &c. 


Robert Worſley, Thomas Barrett, 
John Dillington, Wm. Combes, 
Will. Stephens, Ed. Guy er, 
Cha, Worſley, . Timothey Heath, 
Ja. Leigh, John Combes, Deputy 
Will. Bowerman, Mayor, 
Tho. Urry, Willam Urry, 
David Urry, Robert Dodd, 
John Richards, Tho. Goodman, 
Jo. Crouch, John Warder, 
Tho. Newnham, Jonathan Combes. 


One cannot help remarking the ſtriking contraſt 
between the letter of lord Hunſdon at the begin- 
Ne. 8. B b | ning 


362 nis rokx or THE 


ning of the century, 1110 the preceding petition of 
the gentlemen of the iſland towards the cloſe of it. 
It does not ſeem almoſt probable, that ſo total a 
revolution of ſentiments ſhould take place in the 
minds of the ſame people within fur h an interval. 
We muſt recollect, however, that the diſturbances 
of Charles the Firſt's reign had occurred within 
that time ; and our readers muft be tolerably pre- 
pared to account for fuch a change from our gene- 
ral hiſtory of that calamitous and diſaſtrous period, 
though, if we except the ſpace of the king's con- 
tinuance in the iſland, it was leſs ſenſibly felt here 
than in other parts of the kingdom. 

Tur differences which occaſioned the preceding 
petition were, after ſome time, amicably adjuſted, 
by a mutual accommodation of the reſpective par- 
ties. We have already recited the articles of agree. 
ment, which our readers will perceive to have an 
immediate reference to the ſubject of this petition; 
by means of which the corporations were reſtored 
to their ancient rights and privileges, and every 
thing granted to the governor that could reaſon- 
ably be deſired. On comparing this petition with 
the articles, the generoſity of the gentlemen of the 
iſland is ſufficiently obvious, and manifeſts a diſ- 
polition to peace and order; from both which the 
concluſion is undoubted, that the grievances com- 
plained of were of a ſerious nature, and juſtly en- 
titled to redreſs. Of the effects of this accommo- 
dation we have already ſpoken, and therefore need 


not enlarge upon it. ? 
Taz 


TISLE OF WIGHT, 363 


Tur fee farm rent of twenty ſhillings, which has 
becn before mentioned, and recognized in the 
charter of king James the Firſt, was returned, 
amongſt others, as payable to the crown, in one 
thouſand feven hundred and eighty. The preſent 
military eſtabliſhment has been given in a WE 
ing chapter. | | 

Wer ſhall now ſpeak more particularly of he 
parliamentary repreſentation from the hiſtory of 
the boroughs of Great Britain, already referred to. 
This author ſays, that Yarmouth © contains about 
fifty houſes, cottages included. The right of elec- 
tion is in the capital and free burgeſſes. The free 
burgeſſes are choſen from the capital burgeſſes, 
and are unlimited by the conſtitution of the bo- 
rough; but at preſent there are only nine. 

Mr. Holmes and Mr. Jervois Clarke Jervois 
have each their friends and dependants as bur. 
geſſes; and by mutual compact have agreed that 
each ſhall nominate one of the two members.— 
The capital burgefles are equally divided between 
the two parties. | 

Turss free burgeſſes are of old ſtanding, and 
will not be made capital. Formerly there were 
many (the number being unlimited), but in the 
year 1756, after a diſpute between Mr. Holmes 
and Mr. Jervois, and the Leigh family of North= 

Court in the iſland (of which Mr. Jervois's lady 
was a part), a compromiſe took place, by which 
it was ſtipulated that a great number of free bur. 


geſſes, then newly made, ſhould be disfranchiſed, 
40. B b 2 | which 


364. ursrokv or THE 


which was accordingly done; that each party 
mould thenceforth name one Member; and, to 
keep the intereſts even, whenever a capital bur. 
gels ſhould die, the fide to which he belonged 
ſhould immediately nominate another perſon to be 
a free burgefs, and then make him capital, as the 
charter preſcribes. 
Tuts borough firſt ſent repreſoueniives to par- 
liament in the twenty-third of Edward the Firſt; 
bur, though it was afterwards ſummoned in this 
reign, no return was made for it, or any place in 
this ifland, until the twenty-ſeventh of Elizabeth.” 
It has been obſerved under Newport, that the 
principal inducement of king Edward to ſummon 
burgeſſes to parliament from the iſland, might be 
to recognize and render notorious his late pur- 
chaſe of the ifland from the deceaſed -counteſs of 
Albemarle and Devon. 
SeveRarL deciſions have been made in parliament 
to fix the proper mode of election, and in whom 
the right of chuſing reprefentatives 1s veſted. We 
ſhall tranſcribe the reſolutions of the houſe of 
commons at two periods, which will ſufficiently 
aſcertain this matter. By a determination of the 
11th of April, 1717, it was reſolved, That the 
bye law made the 21ſt of Sept. 1670, by the mayor 
and five chief burgeſſes of Yarmouth, in the iſle 
of Wight, being the major part of the chief bur- 
geſſes then exiſting, for electing free burgeſſes by 
the mayor and five chief burgeſſes, was a good bye 
law.” A ſubſequent determination of the houſe 
| of 


ISLE OF WIGHT, | 365 


of commons, of the 19th of January, 1769, has 
the three following reſolutions. Reſo/ved, That 
Thomas Grimes, Eſq. being elected a chief burgefs 
during the pretended mayoralty of John Leigh, 
Eſq. whom the houſe reſolved was not legally 
elected a chief burgeſs of the ſaid borough, and 
was therefore incapable of being elected mayor of 
the ſaid borough, on the 21ſt of Sept. 1765. 
Reſolved, That the Rev. Dr. Walker, and the 
Rev. Mr. John Oglander, being elected chief bur- 
geſſes during the pretended mayoralty of the ſaid 
Thomas Grimes, were not legal chief OT of 
the ſaid borough. | 
Reſolved, That the election af the 6 
free burgeſſes, objected to by the counſel: for the 
petitioners, elected during the preſent mayoralty 


of the ſaid Thomas Grimes, Eſq. at an aſſembly, 1 


in which the ſaid Dr. Walker and Mr. Oglander 
attended, and voted as two of the five chief bur- 
geſſes in the election of the ſaid twenty 3 
was illegal and void.” 

Tur conſequences of theſe different reſolutions 
were, that in the year 1617, Sir Theodore Janſſen, 
Bart. and Anthony Morgan, Eſq. were declared by 
the houſe of commons to be duly elected, in the 
room of Sir Robert Raymond and Henry Holmes, 
Eſq. In 1769, the Hon. George Lane Parker and 
Thomas Dummer, Eſq. were voted in on petition, 
in the room of Jervois Clarke, Eſq. and William 
Stroude, Eſq. | 


Bbz I 


366 HISTORY OF THE 


I x addition to what we have ſaid of the church, 
it muſt ſuffice to ſay that the endowment is very 
ſmall ; but that it has been augmented with a ſum 
of money given by colonel Henry Holmes, by 
which means the bounty of queen Anne has been 
procured. We meet with a very elegant monu- 
ment ef Sir Robert Holmes, of fine marble, in a 
ſmall- chapel, on the ſouth fide of the chancel; 
' under'ithe ſtatue of which, as large as the life, is 
the following inſcription erected to his memory. 
H. S. J. 
Robertus Holmes miles, 
Henrici Holmes de Mallow comitatus Cor- 
kenfis in Hibernia armigeri filius natu tertius, 
ab ineunte adoleſcentia acquirendam armis glo- 
riam intentus, militiæ nomen dedit; et ſub 
ſereniſſimi regis Caroli vexillis tyrocinia ponens 
contra perduelles fortiter feliciterq. pugnavit. 
Pari deinde animo, pari laude, navalibus ſe im- 
miſcuit pretiis, et ſub auſpiciis celſiſſimi prin- 
cipis Ruperti, egregie meruit. Cum vero viderit 
cauſam regiam armis ultra defendi non poſſe, ad 
exteros ſeſe principes contulit, et in Gallia, 
Germania, Flandria, rebus belli pulchre geſtis 
' inclaruit. Rege Carolo do. fauſte tandem 
proſpereque reftaurato, ab eo caſtelli de Sandon 
in Vectis Inſula præfecturam (tanquam veteris 
meriti premium) accipit et ſubinde militis titulo 
ornatus eft anno 1666. Copiarum navalium que 
rubris vexillis inſigniuntur, legatus alter con- 
ſtitutus, portum Bata vum oy Ulli exigua claſſe 
intravit, 


ISLE OF WI nr, 3 


intravit, cumq. illic naves centum et octoginta 
conc remaſſet, in Scellengam deſcendit, et Bran- 
derium iſtius inſulæ primerium oppidum incen- 
dio delevit. Ob hæc et alia multa præclare ada 
cum ſereniſſimus rex haud indebitus illius et 
virtuti et fidei premiis honoravit, inſulæq. 
Vectis ducem et gubernatorem durante vita na- 
turali præfecit, quinetiam fecialium principi 
mandavit ut ipſius gentilitiis inſignibus leo 
Anglicus adſcriberetur, necnon criſta nempe 
brachium armatum e navali corona porrectam 
et tridentam gerens. Hos honores qua arte ac- 
quifivit eadem etiam tuebatur, vir fortiſſimus 
nimirum bene merendo, fideli ſemper in regis 
et in patriam ſtudio. Obiit An. Dom. i994 
Nov. 18. | 
|  Honoratiſſimo patruo ras ſepulto hoc ma- 
numentum poſuit Henricus Holmes Armiger. 
Vectis inſulæ ann authoritate regis locum 
tenens. 


As this inſcription is little more than a hiſtory 
of the public ſervices of Sir Robert, it ſeems un- 
neceſſary, ſince we have already related them, to 
give a tranſlation of it; and, as a mark of ſpecial 
favour, it is added that the king cauſed an Engliſh 

lion“ to be added to his paternal arms, and granted 
him a creſt of an arm arrayed, extended and bear- 
ing a trident iſſuing out of a naval crown. | 


i. e. Cules, or red, as in the royal arms of England, 


B b 4 Tus 


. HISTORY OF THE 


Tur patronage of the church is veſted in the 
king; the pariſh ſome years ago had but few in- 
habitants, and we doubt if the number is ſince 


* 


Tut author of the hiſtory of the ng has 
told us, that the only reſident burgeſs of this town 


js a barber and a ſlop-ſeller; whereas the author 
of Sketches of Deſcription,” whom we have had 


frequent occaſions to quote, and in whom we ſhould 
place a fuller confidence, obſerves that the town 


was in 1792 © without a ſingle reſident burgeſs, 


but that one gentleman, Mr. Devenisn, thus dig- 
nified, retiring. from buſineſs, intends to relieve }- 
ſo grievous a reflection. After obtaining a very 
large fortune from fifty years well-conducted agri- 


culture, in the fields of Thorley, he ſeeks his re- 
poſe of life in this healthy town ;—and, by his 


munificent diſpoſition, to diffuſe bleſſings on the 


neighbourhood.” He farther adds, that “ moſt 


of the houſes offer decent gardens to the proſpect, 
but that captain UKrRyY's is the chief, who has 


countenanced a very innocent and pleaſing decep- 


tion, though himſelf honeſt, frank, and ſocial as 
the ſummer's day, and an enemy and execrator of all 


deception in high or low ſituations. He has erect- 
_cd a wall at the foot of his garden walks towards 


the ſea, and by means of the carpenter's and 
painter's arts, preſents the ſpectator withia, for- 
midable arrangement of cannon, apparently to de- 


fend the coaſt.” We are alſo informed from the 


pen of another ingenious gentleman of the iſland, 


that 


- | ISLE OF WIGHT. | 369 
that the chief ſupports of two good inns are from 
the ſhips that occaſionally anchor in the road, and 
paſſengers to and from Lymington; and that 
ſtrangers who viſit the weſtern part of the iſland, 
and find it inconvenient to return to Newport for 
the night, may here be very commodiouſly accom< 
modated.” It is eſſentially neceſſary, that our 
readers, ſome of which are doubtleſs of this de- 
ſcription, ſhould be acquainted with ſuch an im- 
portant and'agreeable fact. 

Wr are happy to underſtand, that the projected 
removal of Mr. Deveniſh to Yarmouth has been 
realized fince the publication of the Sketches. 

Bur we cannot diſmiſs this chapter of the bo- 
roughs of the iſland, without citing the obſervations 
of the author of the hiſtory of the boroughs already 
quoted under each borough, reſpecting the whole 
repreſentation of the iſland, as it is extremely pro- 
bable that this work may fall into the hands of 
many, on whoſe minds the remarks there offered 
may have made ſome impreſſion; it would ill be= 
come us as hiſtorians, to withhold our reflections 
in the opportunity we have had of reviewing the 
whole caſe. His reaſoning is contained in the 
following words. 

« FROM this ſtate of facts, it is plain that the 
four members of Newport and Yarmouth are re- 
turned by only two perſons ; three by Mr. Holmes, 
with the miniſter's aſſiſtance, and one by Mr, Jer- 
vois. The members for Newtown are choſen at 
preſent by four perſons ; in all fix members by fix 


electors 


SIG 
-— 


370 HISTORY OF THE 


electors only; and this ſmall body may be further 
_ diminiſhed. by an union of intereſts in the borough 
of Newtown, between the Worſley family and Mr. 
Holmes ; in which caſe four men would return fix 
perſons to repreſent them in parliament. If this 
unadorned recital does not impreſs on the mind 
the fulleſt conviction of the abſolute neceſſity of 
ſome reform in the repreſentation, it is ſurely fair 
to conclude, that the utmoſt power of reaſon and 
eloquence would be exerted in vain.” 
Trovcn this account is pretended to be an 
adorned, we cannot help conſidering it as poſſeſſed 
of a large portion of ſtrong colouring, and evi- 
dently calculated to ſerve the purpoſes of perſons, 
of whoſe political principles it would at leaſt be 
prudent to ſuſpend our opinion. We have already 
intimated, in a manner too plain to be miſtaken, 
the ſtriking contraſt between the years one thou- 
ſand fix hundred and one, and the time of John, 
lord Cutts, towards the cloſe of the laſt century, 
.of the general ſentiments of the iflanders. In the 
former it is required of thera to ſign a carte blanche 
as the returning inſtrument of their repreſentatives, 
to be ſupplied by the governor of the iſland, and 
the price of this unreſerved .confidence was only, 
that they ſhould be exonerated from any expence 
or pay which might accrue or be due for their at- 
tendance in parliament. In the latter, the gen- 
tlemen of the ifland, if we pay attention to the 
tenor and circumſtances of their petition to the 
ſaid parliament, complain of an undue uſurpation 
. and 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 5 371 


and unjuſt authority, which had been exerciſed by 
a ſucceſſor of that very governor, on thoſe liber- 
ties which, on that former occaſion, it appears, 
they ſo little eſteemed, that they were when: ſub- 
ſervient to his will. 

Bur, admitting the fact, for the ſake of RAT 
ment, to be as the writer of this hiſtory has ſtated 
it; does the concluſion he has drawn, and wiſhes 
to impreſs on his readers as the concluding reflect 
tion, fa rly follow from a r ſtate of the premi- 
ſes? Does it appear that, under the particular 
deſcription he has given, the preſent condition of 
thoſe boroughs is in any reſpect tobe compared 
with their ſtate in the time of lord Hunſdon? Or, 
does it any way follow that, from theſe circum- 
ſtances alone, any ſolid foundation exiſts for the 
poſitive aſſertion he has inferred ; or that there 
ariſes, from ſuch a partial review of the caſe, ſuch 
a full conviction of the abſolute neceſſity of ſome 
reform in the repreſentation,” as he has concluded? 

Sven are the obſervations which have occurred 
to our minds, on reviewing this ſubject. Other 
arguments, which weare free toacknowledge might | 
be produced, of far greater moment, will be much 
better adapted to accompliſh ſuch a meaſure, than 
thoſe haſty and partial Aights which manifeſtly low 
from as partial a view of the general ſtate of the 
repreſentation; unconnected with the objects to 
be attained by it, and regardleſs of the primitive 
deſign of ſending perſons to repreſent them in the 
national council. From the facts we have ſtated, 


we 


2372 MfS TORT OF THE 


we think there are ſtrong grounds for a demurrer; 
and we are inelined to doubt, if any of the towns 
of this iſland would experience more advantages, 
though every inhabitant, paying ſcot and lot, were 
permitted to vote for members, than at preſent, 
But as we wave the idea of diſcuſſing the political 
expediency of any particular meaſures, in this work 
which is profeſſedly hiſtorical, and therefore ſhall | 
not preſs; other arguments which occur to us on 
this ſide of the queſtion; we cloſe this chapter 
with proteſting againſt every intention or deſign 
in theſe remarks, of giving offence to any party 
or deſcription of men, either for or againſt the ad- 
miniſtration of public affairs. 
Yoke | BY: % 


CHAPTER 


18611 or WEGHT; | | 373 k 
CHAPTER XII. 


OF THE HOUSE OF INDUSTRY. 


25 
- 


| \ \ E referred to this place in the preceding 
chapter of the hiſtory of the boroughs, under the 
head of Newport, for an account of this excellent 
and laudable inſtitution. As the hiſtory and prin- 
ciples on which it is conducted cannot be too 
much diffuſed, we think it our duty to trace them 
in as copious a manner as our limits will admit; 
and as we have founded our narrative on eſtabliſh- 
ed and authentic facts, we have the more confidence 
in recommending this admirable plan for reducing 
the oppreſſive taxes to ſupport the poor, ſo gene- 
rally complained of throughout the kingdom. 

. Ovn firſt object ſhall be to ſtate the facts; and 
from thence to deduce ſome of the numerous argu- 
ments in favour of it, which occur to us on con- 
fidering thoſe facts. 

Ar a general meeting of the gentlemen, of the 
iſland in the yeat one thouſand ſeven hundred and 
ſeventy, it was unanimouſly reſolved and approv- 
ed, that it would be for the mutual advantage of 
the landholders and the ſick or infirm poor, to 
. conſolidate the ſeveral rates then levied and paid 
in the various pariſhes of this iſland for ſupporting 
the poor; and for that purpoſe to obtain powers 

from 


374 HISTORY OF THE 


from parliament, to enable them to erect, at a 
common expence, ſuch houſe or houſes of induſtry 
as might be judged or deemed neceſſary for main. 
taining and employing the poor in general of ſuch 
ifland. 

Tue preamble of the act obtained in conſequence 
of this refolution, in the ſucceeding ſeſſion of par. 
liament, ſtates the advantages which they hoped 
to accompliſh by ſuch an inſtitution. It repreſents 
* that the providing a place for the general recep- 
<« tion of the poor, would tend to the more effec. 
« tual relief of ſuch as by age, infirmities, or 
« diſeaſes, were rendered incapable of ſupporting 
« themſelves by their labour; to the better em- 
% ployment of the able and induſtrious; to the 
« corre&tion and puniſhment of the profligate and 
« idle; and to the education of the children in 
« religion and induſtry ; and thereby making the 
« poor, inſtead of being totally ſupported by the 
public, contribute to the ſupport, aſſiſtance, and 
relief of each other; and be of ſome advantage 
*« to the community, to which they had before 
« becn only a heavy and grievous burthen.” 

As the introduction of manufactures, and the 
convenience of procuring the neceſſary accommo- 
dations for a body of pecple, muſt be principal 
objects of ſuch an inſtitution, no place could be 
more proper for the fituation of ſuch a building or 
buildings as ſhould be found neceſſary, than the 
vicinity of the town of Newport. Its nearly cen- 

tral poſition in the iſland, its markets, its inbabi- 
; tants, 


SLE OF WIGHT. 375 


tants, and contiguity to the fine navigable river 
Medina,—all pointed it out as the moſt eligible 
ſpot. N 3 

Tat next conſideration was, to determine ma- 
turely the preciſe ſituution, which would probably 
prove hereafter the moſt advantageous to the pur- 
poſes of the inſtitution. The foreſt of Parkhurſt 
could not fail of becoming an object. on fuch an 
occaſion. Its immediate communication with the 
town of Newport, and numerous other advantages 
which ſuch a fituation evidently afforded, left no 
room for heſitation. But this foreſt, as we have 
had cauſe frequently to obſerve, was veſted in the 
crown, and could not be alienated ; to obviate 
which, aclaufe was introduced into the act of par- 
liament, with his majeſty's concurrence, that en- 
abled him to make a grant or leaſe, under the ſeal 
of the exchequer, of ſuch a part or portion of the 
foreſt, ſo as not to exceed eighty acres, as the 
truſtees named in the act ſhould allot and ſelect 
for that purpoſe. Of theſe truſtees the governor 
for the time being was always to be one; to whom 
his majeſty was empowered, notwithſtanding the 
limitations of the civil liſt act made in the firſt 
year of the reign of queen Anne, to grant a leaſe 
of the land ſo allotted for ſuch term and time as 
he ſhould think proper, and under ſuch a reſerved 
rent and other conditions as ſhould be agreed upon. 

By this act, the land was to be ſet out within 
| Ex months by the ſaid truſtees, and a corporation 
was thereby erected, under the title of“ The 

| guardians 


& * 


LR OY 84 * n 
* ro 5 128 © 7, _ . =_ 
Sr 
ww n me 


wo * 7 * 2 A 
EIT. D 5 T 
. 2% 3 - - — 8 2 . N . 
2 3 Ar Þ W Ar F Nn 1 * bl a 4 $4.44 PI 0 
ſe 1 * — oa - on + 
note onthe bo We * han : 
0 4 2 Sj 1 2 r * , 
Y > "0 II : 1 OP TEAK Fon 


} 
4 
I 
: ' 5 
1 
+ 
4 
11 
Ki 
4 
* 
4 
'# 


| 376 | HISTORY oF THE 


Y guardians of W poor irithin the iſle of Wight.” 2: 


A memorial was, in conſequence, preſented on 


behalf of this corporation to the lords of the trea- 


ſury, praying that a grant might be made to them 
of the portion of land in the faid foreſt, ſo to be 
allotted by the ſaid truſtees, for a long term of 


years, with powers of renewal for a fine certain.— 


The ſpot ſelected, by virtue of theſe powers, was 
as near to the town of. Newport as conveniently 


could be; on the eaſt fide of and adjoining to the 


road leading from thence to the town of Cowes. 
A grant of eighty acres was accordingly made to 
this new-created corporation, for the purpoſe of 


carrying the proviſions of the act into execution; 


and a leaſe for the term of nine hundred and 
ninety- nine years was confirmed to them, under 


the annual reſerved rent of eight pounds ſeventeen 


ſhillings and nine pencc. 
Tut piece of ground, of the content or area al- 


ready mentioned, being bounded on the weſt by 


the road to Cowes, and on the eaſt by the fence 
which on that ſide terminated the ſaid foreſt, be- 
came conſequently irregular on thoſe two ſides ; 


on the north and ſouth it is baunded and incloſed 
by ſtraight lines. But the plan, which is depoſited 


in the office of his majeſty's ſurveyor general, par- 


ticularly points it out. 


An extenſive garden, for the purpoſe of by. 
ing the houſe with vegetables, is the ſouthern limit 


of this ground. The buildings next attract our 
attention. The principal one is three hundred 


feet 


181 f or wenn J 


feet in length from eaſt to weſt,” and twenty-ſeven 
feet within the walls. Tt has windows" on both 
; ſides, for the purpoſe of admitting a thorough cut. 
rent of? air, to render the apartments ſalutary and 
wholeſome. Of this length only two hundred feet 
of the building is open to the ſouth<weſt;; at which 
a middle or croſs range of building runs to the 
ſouth to the extent of one hundred and ſeventy | 
feet. This is in width twenty=four feet; on the 
eaſt ſide of which is a court of the ſame length from 
north to fouth and fifty feet wide, having a part 
of the principal building on the north, the offices 
of dairy, waſn-houſe, brew-houſe, -wood=houfe, 
ſtore- rooms, &c. on the eaſt, and a plain wall on 
the ſouth. Parallel to the principal building from 
the end of the middle or croſs range of building; 
the work-ſhops for the manufacturers and mecha- 
nics run weſtwards; which, with the walk on the 
weſt fide, where conſequently the view is open, 
together form a parallelogram or oblong of two 
hundred feet by one hundred and ſeventy. -: We 
ſhould have noticed in our general view, that on 
the caſt fide of the offices, the appendages. of the 
barn, ſtables, hog-ſtyes, and other conveniences 
of that deſcription are judiciouſly placed. 
To come to the particular parts, we muſt: ob- 
ſerve that in the principal building, you enter the 
dining hall by a north door; which is one hundred 
and eighteen feet in length, and of the whole breadth; 
from whence you may paſs into the other apart- 
ments on the ground floor, ſuch as ſtore: room, 
Ne, g. | E ſteward's 


378 ts roꝶ r or THE 


fieward's room, committee room, a common ſitting 

room for the' impotent and aged poor, and others 
of leſs extent. The cellars for beer, meat, &c. are 
under the eaſt end of this building, and are cighry 
feet long and the whole width; over which are the 
laundry, governor's and matron's lodging rooms, 
ee and ſick wards. 

On the north fide of the principal building, and 
joining to it is a Chapel of fiſty- feet in length by 
twenty- ſeven in breadth; to which a chaplain is 
appointed with a ſalary of fifty pounds per annum, 
whoſe duty is to perform divine ſervice therein 
twice every Sunday, with a ſermon in the morning, 
to read prayers every Wedneſday morning, to ad- 
miniſter the ſacrament four times yearly, to cate. 
ehiſe the children once a month, to viſit the ſick, 
and to perform all other occaſional duties of his 
profeſſion. The room over the chapel is made uſe 
of as a ſtore room, 

Taz middle or croſs range of building contains 
the ſchool rooms, apothecarics ſhop, kitchen, ſcul- 


lery, bakchouſe, bread-room, governor's and ma- 


tron's ſitting room, pantry, &c. on the ground 
floor. The lying-in rooms, ſick wards, and twenty 
feparate rooms or apartments for married men and 
their wives, with two common fitting rooms ad- 
joining for the old and infirm who lodge in thoſe 
apartments, and are unable to go down fins, are 
over theſe. 

A LARGE gateway, by which through the gardens 


you enter the large open area already mentioned, 
1124 5 is 


x * 
+ 
x S 5 & 


FE or WIGHT: 379 


is ſituated in the centre of the workſhops. or. build. 
ings on the ſouth fide. As theſe buildings. run 
parallel to the principal ene on the north, the 
maſter.weaver's room and fpinning room are on 
ite eaſt fide of the gateway, which.comprehend a 
ſpace of ninety- ſix feet long hy eighteen feet wide; 
over them in like manner are ſtore rooms. The 
ſhoemaker's and taylog's ſhops, with. a ſpinning 
room, one hundred and fifty. feet long by eighteen _ 
feet wide, having weaving rooms and ſtore rooms 
over. OCCupy that part of this range of buildings 
which is ſituate onthe. weſt of this gateway. 
PERHAS we ought to have noticed that at ths 
diſtance” of about three or four hundred yards from 
the principal building there is a peſt houſe erected 
far the reception of thoſe poor, who may be found 
to have contracted any contagious or epidemical 
diſorder, to prevent the ſpreading of the variolous 
matter, ſo as to affect the whole of the members 
of the eſtabliſhment. Contiguous to this is a bu- 
rial ground, walled in, to prevent its being uſed 
to foreign purpoſes. | Wo 
To the north of the peſt houſe another building | 
bas been lately erected, for the admiſſion of per- 
ſons under inoculation, at the times when the ſmall 
pox makes its appearance 1n the iſland, and at 
other times, as an intermediate ſituation far thoſe 
who are recovering from any putrid or infectious 
diſorder. It conſiſts only of four rooms, two on 
each floor, being of equal fize, about fiftcen feet 
e by 


380 nis rokr or rut 
by fourteen, and ſeparated by 2 paſſage of fix feer 
in breadth. 
I Iy an earlier ſtate of this CET ENG. their 
manufactures principally conſiſted in making ſacks 
for corn, flour; and biſeuit, for which the great 
corn and flour trade of the ifland always enſured a 
ready demand; beſides which, they made kerſeys, 
ſtockings, and other things of that nature, chiefly 
for the uſe of the paupers in the houſe. Since that 
time, we find from the annual report of one thou. 

ſand ſeven hundred and ninety-four, eee 


9 „% ga 


that of the checaling year, chat linen of various des 
fcriptions, ſuch as dowlas, ſheeting, linen ſocalled, 
mops and mop ſtaves, and many other minuter arti. 
cles, have been added to their former manufactures 
of linſey, ſacks, coal and biſcuit bags, &c. ; the 
ſtrongeſt poſſible demonſtration of _ effects of 2 
regular ſyſtem of induſtry. fk 
Bestots the chaplain already mentioned, and 
the governor and matron to whom we have ſuffi- 
ciently alluded, the domeſtic officers conſiſt of a 
| ſteward and ſchoolmaſter ; befides which there are 
two ſurgeons and apothecaries, with-a ſecretary 
and treaſurer. The ſalary of the governor is fifty 
pounds a year, and of the matron thirty; the ſur- 
geon and apothecary one hundred and ſeventy, and 
the ſecretary only thirteen pounds annually. The 
treaſurer is the only officer who has a reſponſible 
ftuation without a ſalary. The manufacturer has 
- 


I or vrenra 787 
E — of. twenty pounds a year, and the ſchool- 
maſter of eight pounds. In relating this laſt arti- 
cle, we feel a- little uncomfortable, which we con- 
ſider as a very inadequate recompence for the time 
and talents of any one who is fit to be an inſtructor 
of youth, even of the loweſt claſſes, in the princi- 
plex, and ptonunciation of their native language. 

Tar accommodations of the houſe are ſuch, as 
| to contain near ſeven hundred people: indeed the 
five hundred and fifty, but ſomewhat varies with 
the ſeaſon, and as the country. in general is more 
or leſs healthy. The proportionate number, on a 
ſuppoſition of its containing five hundred and fifty, 
has been found to be nearly as follows; namely, 
ſixty- four men, one hundred and thirty- fix women, 
eighty-four girls of nine years old and upwards, 
and ninety- five under nine years old, fifty- five boys 
of nine years old and upwards, and one hundred 
and ſixteen under that age. 

[T will readily be conceived from what has hee 
mentioned, that the erection of ſuch a quantity of 
buildings muſt have been attended with a very. 
great expence. The corporation were enabled and 
authorized to borrow any ſum of money not exceed- 
ing twelve thouſand pounds on the ſecurity of the 
poor's rates, at an intereſt of four per cent. ; but 
this ſum was found to be very inſufficient to ſo 
large an undertaking. Application was therefore 
made to parliament for freſh powers and additional 


authority to enable them to borrow any farther. 
CC 3 ſump 


382 | HTSTORY OF THY 


| ſam, not exceeding eight thouſand pounds more, 
and a bill was accordingly prepared to be laid be- 
fore parliament for their ſanction. But as ſeveral 
defects and inconveniences: had been diſcovered in 
the former act, it was deemed expedient” that the 
whole of the former act ſhould be repealed, and a 
new one obtained which was better calculated to 
remedy the evils that reſulted . from the former. — 
This was done by an act of the ſixteenth” of his 
preſent majeſty, which recapitulates the ſubſtance 
of the preceding act, ſtates the cauſes which. occa- 
fioned the application for this new. act, continues 
and confirms the old corporation which that act 
created, and provides in every reſpect for its ma- 
nagement and direction in all things which the 
former act had done, and gives new powers and 
regulations in caſes wherein that had been found 
by experience to be defective. So that it may be 
tonfidered as an excellent model or precedent for 
other eſtabliſhments of a ſimilar kind, and on that 
account highly deſerving the attention of the pub- 
lic, as well from its improved theory as from its 
- beneficial effects. 

Tur governors or members of the corporation, 
known by the name of & The guardians of the 
poor within the ifle of Wight,” are by this laſt act 
ſuch inhabitants of the iſland as are ſeized in fee 
or for life, or of leaſehold upon lives, in their own 
or their wives right, of lands or property rated to 
the poor's rate at fifty pounds per annum; heirs 


apparent to lands or property ſo rated at one hun- 
„ red 


TSLE OF WIGHT. | 333 


dxed pounds per annum; all reQors and vicars of 
the iſland for the time being; and all oceuplers of 


lands or property rated at one hundred pounds, 


whether in one or more pariſhes within the ſaid 
— 

Ox the laſt Thurſday in june in every year, 
twenty-four directors (of whom twelve are to be 
ſuch as were not directors in the preceding year), 
thirty-ſix acting guardians (of whom twelve were 
not guardians in the year laſt preceding), a clerk 
and other neceſſary officers, are appointed; fuch 
directors and guardians being divided and ſub- 
divided into quarterly, monthly, and weekly com- 
mittees, each to conſiſt of two directors and five 
acting guardians. Theſe are to meet at the houſe 
every Saturday, to ſettle the governor's and ſtew- 
ard's accounts of the preceding week, to give 
directions for the enſuing week, to hear complaints, 
to grant occaſional relief to perſons out of the 
houſe, and to do ſuch other matters and things as 
are of an immediate and temporary, nature. 

Ir any matters come before the weekly com- 
mittee, which the act does not give them cogni- 
zance of, they are to be referred to a quarterly 
committee, which muſt not conſiſt of leſs than five 
directors diſtinctly, nor leſs than fifteen directors 
and ating guardians jointly. We ſhall in this 
place ſubjoin the names of rhe acting guardians 
and directors, which were appointed to ſerve for 
the ſeveral months from July the firſt one thou- 
and ſeven hundred and ninety-four, to the ſame 

| ce4 day 


i 
£ 


4 
8 j 

3 
A 
* 
2; 
i. 


r * 
* 


— 


4 


1 


, —— 
— 2 1 N oY 


— — 


ay 7 LE CY INE. 22 
r 
— 1 - 


— hee th 
R 
E 

r * > 


N — 


” e ge 


e 


384 | HESTORY OF THE 


day in the following year, at the general annual 
meeting held at the Sun inn, in Newport, on the 
| n ſixth day of June laſt. 


Ar GUARDIANS, 
Between MipsUMMEs. and MIGHABLMAS. $i 


Joly: Meſſrs Thomas G feed, Priory 
8 William Chipp, 4149 er 2 
Iams Urry, Em Y 
S907 £775 Richard White wood, Nitoa 
| Thomas Low, Place Street 
"Aug: Meſſrs. Joſeph Major, —_— 
William Sharp, ditto | 
William Clarke, ditto 
Thomas Day, Cowes 
James Urry, Werror 
"Sept. Meſs. ES Major, Newport | 
i f William Sharp, ditto 
ns William Clarke, dirto 
£3 James Wilkinſon, Shalfleet 
Between MiCHAELMAsS and CHRISTMAS. 
0. Meſſrs. James Legg, Idlecombe 
- Benjamin Cotton, ene | 
lohn Jolliffe, Park 2 
4102 William Player, Troublefield 
bd James Dallimore, Hill Farm 
Kor. Meſſrs. William Jolliffe, | Yaverland | 
5 8 William Stephens, Brooke 
5 William Hillier, Sheat 
| William Jacobs, Perreton © -  / 
Robert Cole, Dean 7 
Dee. Made, James Cole, Cheverton E 
David Brown, Bord wood # ELLE 
William Brown, Cridmore . 
Barnabas Beere, Thorley xf 
©.) " Robert Granger, Faiflee bnd 07734 L164 
> > Between 


1 


\ 
1 


1811 OF WIGHT. 


1 Between CHRISTMAS and Lady Dar. 
ow Meſſrs. W. Jollife, Northgrounde 
James Urry, Werror 
John Young, Morton 
James Urry, Elm 
| Jonathan Jolliffe, Guildford 
Feb, Meſſrs. Henry Roach, Redway 
William Chipp, Marſbgreen 
John Gubbins, Wroxall 
Thomas Low, Place Street 
William Urry, Shalcombe 
Mar, Meſſrs. John Theatle, Rowlands 
Robert Jacobs, Newchurch 
Thomas Hollis, Wootton _ 
William Hardley, Whitwell Farm 
William Hillier, Sheat 
Between Lany Dar and Melt 
Apr. Meſſrs, William Stephens, Brook 
James Legg, Idlecombe 
John Jolliffe, Park 
James Dallimore, Hill Farm 
| William Jacobs, Perreton _ 
May, Meſſrs, Robert Granger, Fairlee 
Henry Roach, Redway 
James Cole, Cheverton 
David Brown, Bordwood 
Jonathan Jjolliffe, Guildford 
June. Meſſrs. W. Jolliſſe, Northgrounds | 
John Thearle, Rowlands 
William Urry, Shalcombe 
Thomas Hollis, Wootton 
Robert 1 Newchurch 


1 ' DIRECTORS. 

July. Reverend Henry Oglander 

- Reverend James Worſley, Stenbury 
Auguſt, Sir John Barrington, Baronet 
Rererend John Barwis 


385 nrsrohr or THe. 


Thomas Dickonſon, abe eee 
October. Right Honourable Thomas Orde 
NS Joſeph Kirkpatrick, Eſquire 
November. Leonard Troughear Holmes, Eſquire 
Beddingfield Bromley Frith, Eſquire : 
December. Reverend Andrew Gother R 
William Thatcher, Eſquire 
January, Reverend Doctor Worſſeß 
James Kifkpatrick, Eſquire 
February, William Clarke, Eſquire 
Daniel Collins, E fquire 
March. Reverend Richard Walton 
5 John White, Eſquire 
April. Edward Ruſhworth, Eſquire 
William Cooke, Eſquire 
May. "Reverend Noel Digby 
Reverend Holmes, Freſkwater 
June. Reverend Doctor Walker 
Reverend James Worſley, Hill. 


ANNEXED to this liſt is the following informa- 
tion to the acting guardians of this corporation. 

Tus ſeveral acting guardians appointed for each 
month, are requeſted to attend at their reſpective 
meetings, and be' punctual in their attendance at 
the Houſe of Induſtry, by half an hour after ten 
o'clock in the forenoon, every Saturday, or they 
will be ſubject to a penalty for non-attendance. 

Oo readers, who are not immediately acquaint- 
ed with the nature and conſtitution of this corpo- 
ration, will from hence diſcern the diſcreet and 
prudent management of this inſtitution. Their 
bye laws or ſtatutes, for the purpoſe of regulating 
their internal government, in circumſtances not 
adn n particularly 


TSLE OF WIGHT, 387 


particularly provided for by the act of parliament, 
amount to ſeventy-two; to which an appendix is 
annexed of the bill of fare, forms for admiſſion, 
relief, recommendation, receipts and diſburſements 
of the treaſurer, &c. according to the models of 
the beſt precedents in the management of mn 
charities. 

Ix would be tedious, and to many of our friends 
not very intereſting, to deſcribe more fully the 
proviſions of the act; ſince thoſe who may be in- 
- duced to conſider it from our favourable report of 
the conduct and good management of this exten- 
fire buſineſs, will be farther ſtimulated to procure ' 
the act and peruſe the ſtatutes or bye laws for their 
fuller ſatisfaction, and not to reſt barely on our 
account of it. If they wiſh to inform themſelves 
of its practicability in any other hundreds or diſ- 
tricts of the kin om, they will not-ſtop ſhort of 
, procuring the moſt ample intelligence; in which 
we heartily recommend their moſt ſtrenuous exer- 
tions. From our ſubſequent remarks we are allo 
led to entertain a hope of convincing all who are 
thus well diſpoled, that the-moſt ſtriking features 
of humanity and benevolence are therein diſplayed, 
the moſt advantageous policy purſued, and the 
temporal comfort, happineſs, and contentment of 
the preſent race of our fellow- mortals obtained, as 
well as a ſecurity, if well directed, for the moral 
and civil obedience and religious conduct and be- 
haviour of the riſing generation. 3 2 


Taar 


=—_ - 1f13TORY or THE 


Thar the eſtabliſhment is replete with good po, 
Iicy, muſt be manifeſt on a very little confidera- 
tion. The poor's rate, if we are rightly informed; 
was advanced to the amazing proportion of five 
ſhillings and fix pence in the pound, within the 
town of Newport, before the firſt act of parliament 
was obtained, about twenty-four years ago. It is 
now reduced to half the ſum, or two ſhillings and 
nine pence only, The ſum borrowed on the au- 
thority of the two acts was twenty thouſand pounds, 
the annual intereſt of which amounted to eight 
hundred pounds, The principal is now reduced 
to twelve thouſand five hundred pounds, and the 
annual intereſt to five hundred pounds, notwiths 
ſtanding the great diminution of taxes. This alone 
is a full demonſtration of its policy. 

Tnar it is replete with humanity muſt be al. 
lowed, without any argument of ſufficient impor- 
tance to create a ſhadow of objection. To the 
aged it is a laſting aſylum, if they are unable to 
provide for themſelves; and affords every aid of a 
medical or religious nature which can be deſired. 
Temporary relief is alſo held out to thoſe, who 
are ſo fituated as to render a removal to this re- 
treat from the cares of life an eſſential inconveni- 
ence ; and no perſons are hurried hither by com- 
pulſion, or deprived of ſuch a reaſonable aid as 
unforeſeen misfortunes or diſtreſſes may produce. 
Ho it may be productive of advantages in the 
moral and religious world, and prove ultimately 
beneficial to the intereſts of ſociety, let the nume- 

rous 


1 4 
„ 6.155 


4. 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 389 


tous arguments which have been adduced in alk 
parts of the kingdom in favour of Sunday ſchools, 
whether in letters; tracts; ſermons,” or other forms 
of publication, beadverted to. Whatever they con- 
tend for is here far more extenſively and effectually 
provided for; and we will not diſappoint our 
readers of exercifing their own reaſon and judg- 
ment, by «nes. ma has been fo univerſally 
inculcated. * 
To come now to the annual report of this efta- | 
bliſliment. We find that the average rates for one 
year ending either at Midſummer one thouſand 
ſeven hundred and ninety-three, of the year pre- 
ceding, for the whole iſland, amounted to five 
thouſand one hundred and forty-two pounds ſix 
ſhillings and three pence; that the total expences 
of the houſe and arrears of intereſt for one year 
were but four thouſand nine hundred and fifty-five 
pounds four ſhillings and eight pence, ending at 
Midſummer one thouſand ſeven hundred and 
ninety-three ; that the goods and materials in ſtore 
belonging to the manufactory were not leſs than 
three hundred and eighty-eight pounds five mil 
lings and nine pence halfpenny, excluſive of goods 
taken for the uſe of the houſe to the amount of 
two hundred and twelve pounds ſeventeen ſhillings . 
and four pence; and that in one year there had 
been gained by the manufactory, after deducting | 
every expence, one hundred and ninety-three 
pounds three ſhillings and eight pence halfpenny. 
We have only farther to remark on this fubject, 


8 2 088 that 


390 HIATORY OF THE 


chat the balances in the hands of the treaſurer and 
governor had alſo increafed in that year more than 
three hundred and thirty-cight pounds, beſides an 
' Increaſe of near ſeventy pounds i in the produce of 
the manufactory, remaining in the houſe. 
Tnovon the annual report for the enſuing year, 
ending at Midſummer 1794, is likewiſe extremely 
favourable, it affords ſome particulars which ought 
properly to be noticed.. A deficiency of balance 
in the treaſurer's hands from the ſucceeding year's 
ftatement, of about 2 col. may ſeem to call for ex- 
planation. But the expences of the year have been 
extraordinary to that amount, without any alter- 
ation in the rates, from inaculation only; beſides 
which, excluſive of the exceſs of nearly as much 
on account of the families of militia men (that may 
continue in the enſuing year, and therefore cannot 
at preſent be reckoned), the building for receiving 
patients in the occaſional ſmall pox, or for other 
purpoſes, at an expence of 210l. has been erected. 
Some part of theſe expences have indeed been de- 
frayed by adjuſtment of the accounts of the late 
treaſurer; but others have been applied in a way 
to enſure future advantages, excluſive of which 
every fair ground of concluſion is afforded, that 
more than a ſaving of the militia expences muſt 
continue to be made. Our general arguments are, 
therefore, no way affected by the preſent ſtate of 
the buſineſs of this very important inſtitution. 

As panegyriſts, we might have indulged our pen 


in the pathetic and ſublime, by expatiating on the 
wonderful 


* 


* 
wonderful. advantages of this eſtabliſhment.., Pog- 
try would here find an ample field whereon to dif- 
play its beauties, without having recourſe to agp 
fictious embelliſhments, or conſiderably exerciſigg 
itſelf in metaphorical expreſſions. But our buſh» 
neſs, in the character of hiſtorians, is only te ro- 
late facts, in a plain and intelligible manner; 5 
digeſt and arrange thoſe facts, ſo as to deſcribe and 
place them in the moſt intereſting point of view: 
and to avoid every rounded phraſe or ſtudied ro- 
tundity of words, that has a tendency rather to 

obſcure and diſguiſe them, than to inform and in- 
ſtruct the readers. 
Wr ought not to diſmiſs this ſubje, mikous 
making ſome general reflections from the whole 
view of the management under this corporation, 
Does it not from hence occur as an eaſy and, prac» 
ticable bufinefs, to purſue the ſame meaſures in. 
every other county in the kingdom. And might 
not this buſineſs be effected gradually by the union 
of two or three hundreds, rapes, wapentakes, or 
by whatever other names the diviſions of a county 
may be known? Might not fimilar fituations of 
waſte or common ground. be found, in ſome eligi- 
ble part, in almoſt any of theſe diſtricts ſo intended 
to be appropriated for ſuch laudable purpofes ? Or, 
if not, would it not be practicable to make choice 
of a ſituation in ſome part of ſuch diſtricts reſpec. 
tively, as would have the convenience of a naviga- 
ble river or canal, or be contiguous to ſome po- 


pulous or manuſacturing town, which would afford 
full 


TY or WIGHT, 


I Ars rar or THE 


Alt employment to the labouring peer in much 
houſe or houſes? It is ſcarce poſfible to imagine, 
chat a fituation of this nature would not preſent 
itſelf in ſuch an extent of ground as the iſland 
; _ in almoſt every other part of Great Bri. 
We will not ſay that it ſhould be central, 
| Ta ar material advantages are to be derived from 
3 different ſituation, though it might otherwiſe be 
deſirable as moſt convenient to all perſons con- 
_ eerned in it; for thoſe perſons muſt indeed be 
ſelfiſh, and unfit to manage ſuch an excellent in- 
ſtitution, either as directors or acting guardians, 
uho could object to ride fix or eight miles beyond 
a central ſituation, four or five times in a year, 
when ſuch advantages were to be gained from its 
poſition, though it might be attended with ſome 
inconvenience to them as individuals. | 
Hax alſo mentioned the great diminution 
of the poor's rate, we ought to conſider this ſub. 
ject, as reſulting from the adoption of ſuch a plan 
in a general view. For if the taxes of this iſland 
are in ſo ſhort a time reduced to one-half, beſides 
paying off three-eighths of the principal or ſum 
borrowed, ought we not, as philanthropiſts and 
admirers of all humane inſtitutions, to apply this 
ſubject to the poor's rates of the whole kingdom, 
which have for many years paſt conſiderably ex- 
eeeded two millions of money, and are ſtill rapidly 
increaſing. It ſurely behoves the civil and landed 
intereſt, on which this burden muſt principally 
fall, ro pay every attention to this growing cala- 
mity, 


 TSLE'OF WIGHT... 393%. 


mitv, and to apply ſome radical remedy to check * 
the progreſs of ſo increaſing and heavy a-malady. 


Tuts inſtitution holds out to the whole ee = 
a pattern or model for their imitation; and, to the 


honour of the gentlemen vf the iſle of Wight, who : 
promoted and matured: it, the page of hiſtory | 
ought never to be cloſed till it has diſplayed. the 
benefits and advantages of ſuch an eſtabliſhment: 


SupPpoSING the amount of the poor's rates in - 


England, as ſtate in the laſt returns to parliament, 
to be only two millions (we are ſorry that we have 
miſplaced our papers containing the report, which 
ve believe were conſiderably more), we have an 
example before us, which points out a mode of 
reducing them to one million in the ſhort ſpace of 
twenty-three years. What a national acquiſition 
would this be! What a numerous train of advan- 
tages would it be productive of! And as theſe 
might be reaſonably expected to diminiſh ſtill 
more, ſo as not only to cancel the principal, but 
to eſtabliſh funds, in their corporate capacity, for 
| aiding the maintenance of the poor, —perhaps it 
may not be too much to ſay, that theſe rates might - 
be farther diminiſhed in the courſe of thirty years 
more to at leaſt one-third leſs. At the end of about 
fifty years, then, it is fair to infer, that the poor's 
rates of the other parts of the kingdom might be 
reduced to one-third of their preſent ſtate, admit- 
ting that powers and authority were immediately 
obtained from parliament to eſtabliſh Houſes of 
Induſtry, ſimilar to this, throughout the nation; 


Ne. . D d and 


394 HISTORY OF THE 


and that no delays were ſuffered to retard the exe. 
cution of thoſe powers. Are theſe advantages 
realized to us, and ſhall we refuſe to hold out a 
hand to embrace them? Can men complain of the 
oppreſſion of taxes, and will they not ſee the means 
of ſoftening a moſt eſſential part of them? Strange 
infatuation |! 

Ovcur not the example we have thus fully diſ. 
cuſſed, to rouſe all the landed and perſonal inte- 
reſt, as one man, to apply a remedy to this op- 
preſſive evil? And can there poſſibly be a doubt of 
its ſucceſs, with common prudence and diſcretion, 
after ſuch an excellent model is preſented to us? 
It muſt certainly be the fault of thoſe, who are 
uſually moſt clamorous in complaining of oppreſ. 
five taxes, if they do not profit by this example. 
Humanity, policy, morality, and every thing that 
is dear to man, are, as we have obſerved, equally 
intereſted in the promotion and execution of ſuch 
meaſures; and every lover of his country, every 
true patriot, would rejoice to hear that ſuch eſta- 
bliſhments and inſtitutions are univerſally forming, 
and that the next ſeſſion of parliament ſhould be 
occupied in diſcuſſing and paſſing bills from every 
county for ſo laudable a purpoſe. 

Wr are happy to add, that in the laſt ten years 
a a ſaving of 16,0001. has been made in the mainte- 
nance of the poor of Shrewſbury, and that they 
have alſo a balance of 2,4751. in hand in favour of 
the houſe. This 1s a ſtrong inſtance in ſupport of 
our general arguments, 


CHAPTER 


18LII OF WIGHT, a 395 


CHAPTER XIII. 


OF THE PRIVILEGES OF THE GOVERNORS, 


| Hawn treated ſo fully in a former chapter 
of the lords, or captains, or governors, of the iſland, 
it may be proper to take notice, before we proceed 
to a parochial deſcription, of the rights and fran- 
chiſes which they poſſeſſed, by virtue of ſuch ap- 
pointment. As this will beſt appear from a rela- 
tion of occurrences at different periods, deſcribing 
the enjoyment of thoſe privileges, we ſhall endea- 
vour to collect and arrange the facts for the infor- 
mation of our readers. 
Wurd king Henry the Firſt granted his lands in 
the iſle of Wight to Richard de Redvers, and in- 
veſted him with the dominion of the iſland, to be 
held in eſcuage, at fiſteen knight's fees and a half, 
from that period the crown was deprived of all 
claims or demands on the landholders of the iſland. 
The pecuniary ſatisfaction or compoſition, which 
was anciently paid by the landholders in lieu of 
perſonal military ſervice, and called ſcutage or 
eſcuage from the word /cutym,'a ſhield or buckler, 
was only due from the lord, according to the ſti. 
pulated rate and number of fees, ane the tenants 
were chargeable only in aid to ſuch lord. Theſe 
held their lands as of the caſtle of Cariibrooke, and 
| D d 2 from 


396 HISTORY OF THE 


from thence it is frequently met with under the 
title of the honour of Cariſbrooke. They were 
alſo liable to be charged towards making the lord's 
eldeſt ſon a knight, and to the marrying his daugh- 
ter. All heirs of lands and property which were 
minors, were under the wardſhip of the lord of the 
iſland. The tenants were alſo bound to defend 
the caſtle of Cariſbrooke for forty days, at their 
own expence and charges, whenever it ſhould be 
attacked, and were farther required to attend the 
lord at his coming into, and at his leaving, the 
iſland. The lord had alſo the return of the king's 
writs, nominated his own bailiffs and conſtable, 
and was coroner within the iſland. He poſſeſſed 
a Chace, which is now called the foreſt of Alving- 
ton, or Parkhurſt, or king's foreſt ; and a fence 
month, not only there, but in certain moors, with 
a free warren on the eaſt ſide of the river Medina. 
He had alſo wrecks, waifs, and ſtrays, with fairs 
and markets at Newport and Yarmouth. 
Ax inſtance of the return of the king's writs to 
him is met with in the ancient rolls of the fifth 
year of king Stephen, under the title of 1n/ula de 
Wicht ; wherein it is related that“ Pagan Trenchard 
. owes four pounds for the paſt danegelds of the 
iſland for five years from the time of Hugh de 
Vernon. And the ſaid Pagan compounds for the 
new danegeld of the iſland in the treaſury eleven 
pounds and eight ſhillings; and in free gifts by 
the king's writ to William de Vernon thirty-two 
ſhillings, to Ralph de Billinghurſt twelve ſhillings, 
| | and 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 397 


and is ſatisfied.” And as this danegeld had not 
been paid forfiveyears preceding, it is very probable 
that it was charged from the time when Baldwin 
de Redvers had forfeited the lordſhip of the iſland 
for oppoſing king Stephen, ſince it is not found to 
have been charged with this tax but when it was 
in the hands of the crown. 

Tue privileges and immunities of the lords of 
the iſland, which we have juſt ſtated, were duly 
proved and allowed. But king John, whoſe ideas 
of juſtice and equity were not the moſt conſcienti- 
ous, in defiance of theſe grants, exacted two dif- 
ferent fines for the livery of lands in the iſland.— 
He fixed a fine of forty marks and a palfrey on 
Margery Vernon, the heir of John Arſie, for livery 
of the manor of Freſhwater; and John Argenton 
was alſo fined forty marks and two palfreys, for 
his lands in Cariſbrooke. 

Is the firſt year of Henry the Third, immediately 
after the death of William de Vernon, the king 
ordered the caſtle of Cariſbrooke to be delivered 
up to the ſheriff of Southampton, and by him to 
Walleran, warden of the iſland. But it ſhould be 
remembered, that the kingdom was at that time 
in a very unſettled ſtate, and may be conſidered 
only as a prudent and neceſſary precaution, to ſe- 
cure the iſland from being poſſeſſed by Lewis, the 
Dauphin of France, who was then in England with 
a very powerful party, and had been crowned king 
in the midſt of the diſtractions of the preceding 
year. It was known that William de Vernon, the 

D d 3 late 


398 HISTORY or THE 


late lord of the iſland, was a favourer of his cauſe, 
and that king John had obliged him to deliver up 
his grandſon as an hoſtage; and nothing could be 
ſo probable, as the idea of his leaving the ifland 
in cuſtody of perſons of the ſame party. A farther 
reaſon depends on evidence, which exiſts to the 
preſent day, though almoſt ſix hundred years ago, 
and proves his adherence to the party ↄf the barons; 
for in the windows of the church of Boldre, on the 
Hampſhire fide of the, water, which at that time 
was under his patronage, the arms of Lewis the 
Dauphin are painted with thoſe of the lords of his 
party. The king was alſo juſtified in this meaſure, 
of taking the iſland into his hands, becauſe Bald- 
win, the heir, was at that time a minor, and Dug- 

dale adds that he was alſo a ward of the crown. 
Is the thirteenth year of the ſame reign, the 
charge of the iſland was committed to Savary de 
Malo Leone, and the wardſhip of Baldwin, the 
young earl of Devon, to Gilbert de Clare, earl of 
Glouceſter. It has been repeatedly aſſerted, on 
the authority of Prynne, that our kings, in former 
ages, appointed from time to time ſpecial guardi- 
ans of the ifland ; that they erected and repaired 
caſtles and forts, and, in time of war and danger, 
were very careful to ſend forces, and to array the 
inhabitants, and to do every thing neceſſary for 
the defence of the iſland. A record of the year of 
that reign, of which we are now treating, is con- 
fidered as his voucher; and intimates it to be the 
return of an inquiſition, though it is certainly no 
A | more 


ISLE OF WIGHT, | 399 


more than a precept to the ſheriff of Southampton. 
It recites, © that whereas, in the times of Henry 
our grandfather, Richard our uncle, and John our 
father, the ſheriff of Southampton never diſtrained 
black cattle in the iſle of Wight for the uſe of the 
king, but for the uſe of the lord of that iſland 
and that there were no coroners in that iſland in 
the times of the aforeſaid kings ; therefore we 
command you, that if you have diſtrained any cat- 
tle in that iſſand, you deliver them without delay 
to our beloved and faithful S. de Malo Leone, to 
whom we have entruſted the cuſtody of the iſland, 
and that you permit no coroners to be there, &c.“ 
From the nature of this precept, nothing injuri- 
ous to the rights and privileges of the lords of the 
iſland can be inferred. The young earl of Devon 
was at that time ward to the king, and therefore 
there could be no impropriety in committing the 
care of the iſland to S. de Malo Leone. All fines 
and forfeitures were delivered to him who had, 
during any minority of the lords of the iſland, the 
cuſtody or wardenſhip of it. We meet with no 
inſtance before this of any warden being appointed 
from the time that the Conqueror granted it to 
Fitz-Oſborn. Theſe lords were frequently called 
Comites Inſule, as engaged to take care of the 
ſafety and prorection of the iſland. 
We may paſs on to the twenty-third year of the 
following reign, when king Edward the Firſt pur- 
chaſed the iſland, with all its appurtenances, from 


Uabella de Fortibus, counteſs of Albemarle and 
D di Devon. 


400 HISTORY OF THE 


Devon. And as we cannot find, unleſs at this time, 
that any warden was appointed by the crown when | 
the iſland was under its proper lords, it may fairly 
be concluded that the iſland was entirely under the 
government of thoſe lords. This is abundantly 
corroborated by the return of an inquiſition in the 
ſeventh year of king Edward the Second, wherein 
it is declared, that whilſt the iſland was under the 
earls of Devon, they conſtantly ſupplied ſeventy- 
ſix men from their county for its defence“. After 
it became the property of king Edward the Firſt, 
| It alſo appeared that the king furniſhed theſe men 
for its protection ; nor can we find any appearance 
or ſhadow of proof from the time of Firz-Oſborn 
to that of Iſabella de Fortibus, that the crown of 
England took any meaſures or uſed any precautions 
whatever for the defence and ſecurity of the iſland. 

IT may be neceſſary to give the tranſlation of a 
record, which Prynne makes ule of to. juſtify an 
opinion, that the iſlanders claimed an exemption 
from contributing to an aid for marrying the king's 
eldeſt daughter, on account of their ſervices and 
great expences in warding and defending the 
iſland. That the iſlanders defended themſclves by 
ancient cuſtom, will never be diſputed ; but the 
reaſon was not ſuch as he has ſtated it, but becauſe 
they diſcharged all theſe ſervices to the lord of the 
iſland. No plea of the former kind is ſtated, or 
fo much as hinted at in the record. The lord paid 


See chap. 4, p. 40-42. 


the 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 401 


the king ſcutage for the iſland, as we have already 
obſerved“, which was rated at fifteen knight”s fees 
and a half in the reign of Henry the Firſt; and 
whenever that tax was impoſed, the landholders, 
who held under him, contributed their propor- 
tions, | 15 


« The King's Writ of the 31ſt of Edward the 
Firſt for an Aid for marrying the King's eldeſt 
Daughter, in the Tower of London. | 

EDWARD by the Grace of God, King of 

England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitain, ; 
to the Perſon holding the Place of Treaſurer and ; 
his Barons of the Exchequer Health. | 

Whereas it has been ſhewn to us on the Part 
of our beloved and faithful Ralph de Gorges, 
that ſince he and his Tenants within the Iſle of 
Wight, or any other Men and Tenants of the 
ſaid Iſland, ought not to contribute any Aid for 
marrying our eldeſt Daughter on Account of their 
military Fees or Lands or Tenements in the ſaid 
Iſland by Reaſon of the Grant lately made to us 
for an Aid of this Nature, neither have they, or 
any other Perſons holding Fees of this Sort, or 
Lands or Tenements in the ſaid Iſland, been ac- 
cuſtomed in Times paſt to contribute any Aid 
of this Sort to our Anceſtors heretofore Kings of 
England for marrying their eldeſt Daughters; 
the Collectors nevertheleſs of the Aid aforeſaid 


See p. 395» 


demand 


402 HISTORY OF THE 


demand from the aforeſaid Ralph and others 
holding Fees and Lands and Tenements of this 
Nature in the Iſland aforeſaid, and oppreſſively 
cauſe them to be diſtrained upon, contrary to 
Juſtice on that Occaſion, and than hath hereto- 
fore been accuſtomed to be done. And becauſe 
we are defirous that it may more fully appear 
what is right and fitting to be done with Reſpect 
to the Premiſes, and to the aforeſaid Ralph and 
the Tenants aforeſaid of the aforeſaid Iſland, we 
command you, that having ſearched our Rolls 
of the Exchequer concerning the Aids of this 
Nature granted to our Predeceſſors aforeſaid, 
namely, whether the Tenants of the aforeſaid 
Iſland have accuſtomed to contribute any Aid 
of this Sort to our Predeceſſors aforeſaid or to 
any of them, as holding of our Crown, or not; 
and if ſo, then to whom or to which of our Pre- 
deceſſors aforeſaid, and at what Time? And if 
they have been exonerated from the ſame, on 
whatAccount, and wherefore, and by whatMeans? 
Of that which ye ſhall find thereupon ye ſhall 
cauſe to be made known unto us, under the Seal 
of the ſaid Exchequer, clearly and plainly, at the 
Feaſt of Pentecoſt next enſuing, returning to us 
there this Writ, Witneſs ourſelf at Caſtlehunte 
on the fourteenth Day of March, in the thirty- 


firſt Year of our Reign. 
By Writ of Privy Seal. 15 


Ou 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 403 


© Ovn readers will be convinced, from the peruſal 
of this record, that there was no juſt cauſe for 
Prynne to maintain an opinion, which abſolute 
facts ſo ſtrongly contradicted. What the return to 
this writ was, we do not find; but there is no 
foundation whatever to ſuppoſe, from any ſubſe. 
quent part of hiſtory, that the claim of an aid was 
eſtabliſhed, as we meet with no inſtances whatever 
of its payment. The turbulent reigns of king 
John, Henry the Third, and Edward the Firſt, 
were productive of demands more than the iſlanders 
could well ſupport, under the ſervice of ſcutage ; 
for, as we have obſerved, whatever was demanded 
of the lord of the iſland was to be made good by 
his tenants. A particular complaint, from the 
nature and repetition of thoſe exactions, was tranſ- 
mitted to the laſt-mentioned King, in the eighth 
year of his reign, alledging that in the thirty-eighth 
and thirty-ninth years of king Henry, James de 
Norton and Richard de Borhunt, collectors of the 
King's ſcutage, had unjuſtly diſtrained upon Ralph 
de Gorges and Peter D*Evercey ; whereupon the 
king's council, to whom this complaint was re- 
ferred, gave orders that the treaſurer and barons 
of the exchequer ſhould call the collectors before 
them, and if the allegations in the petition were 
found to be true, the complainants were to have 
full juſtice done to them. 
For the ſatisfaction of our claſſical readers, we 
think it our duty to lay before them the original 
latin record, taken from the rolls of parliament. 


« Ad 


404 HISTORY or THE 


« Ad petitionem Radulfi de Gorges et Petri 
de Vercey pro ſe et tota communitate inſula 
Vectæ ſugerrentem, quod cum teneant terras 
ſuas in dicta inſula de domino dictæ inſulæ, pro 
inſula illa cuſtodienda, abſque aliquo alio ſervi- 
tio forinſeco alicui faciendo, Jacobus de Norton 
et Ricardus de Borhunt collectores ſcutagii regis 
ibidem de annis Hen. reg. 38 et 39, prædictos 
Radulfum Petrum, et communitatem diſtringunt 
p. ſcutagio illo ſolvendo; unde petunt remedium 
ſibi fieri. 
Re ſponſum per Concilium. 
Mandetur theſaurio et baron de ſcaccario, 
quod vocatis coram eis collectoribus infra ſcrip- 
tis, et inquiſita ſuper contentis in pctitione, fi 
neceſſe fuerit plenius veritate faciant, inde con- 
querentibus juſticiam.” Rot. Parl. 8 Edw. I. 


ArTtr Edward the Firſt had obtained the lord. 
ſhip of the iſland, in the twenty-ninth year of his 
reign, he gave orders that the knights of this iſle 
ſhould be ſummoned to attend him in his wars, 
and to march with him to Berwick. We find the 
names of Peter D'Evercey, John Trenchard, Jor- 
den de Kingſton, Robert de Glamorgan, Roger de 
Langford, Henry de Oglander, and Adam de 
Compton, within the iſle of Wight, who were re- 
quired on this occaſion to render their ſervices to 
the king. But the moſt diligent ſearch has not 
been able to diſcover that any of them paid obe- 
dience to the ſummons. | 
ES | WHETHER, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 405 


Wurrnurx, in conſequence of the king's baving 
purchaſed the iſland, it was ſuppoſed by the official 
ſervants, that the nature of the tenures of the 
landholders was. altered, cannot be aſcertained ; 
but it is manifeſt, that the king's eſcheators had 
frequently taken inquiſitions on the deaths of the 
inhabitants, that the parties had refuſed to ſubmit 
to their deciſions, and had been haraſſed and vexed 
with actions at the king's ſuit. In order to ſettle 
this matter, which afforded much cauſe of anxiety 
and diſturbance, and was often productive of much 
perſonal animoſity and diſcontent, a bill was pre- 
pared for parliament in the year one thouſand ſix 
hundred and forty-one ; but the diſtractions of 
thoſe times, which were then riſing to a great 
height, proved an impediment to its taking effect. 

As the draught of this bill recites the hiſtory of 
the tenures of this iſland, and the nature of the 
ſervices under which it was poſſeſſed, it is entitled 
to a place in this work, and forms a diſtinguiſhing 
feature on this ſubject. 


« Draught of a Bill intended to have been 
brought before Parliament, 16 Car. 1. to aſcer- 
*+ tain the true State of the Tenures in the Iſle of 
Wight. 

_ WHEREAS Henry the Firſt of that Name 
King of England after the Conqueſt did graunte 
the Seigniorye Dominion or Lordſhip of the Iſle 
of Wight in the Countie of Southampton, 
(among other Things) unto Richard de Ripariis 
DA: 


406 HISTORY OF THE | 


Earle of Devon, to hould of him the ſaid King 
his Heyres and Succeſſors Kings of England, in 
Chiefe by Knights Service as of his Crowne of 
England, the ſaid Ifle after the Death of the 
faid Richard, deſcended and came unto Bald- 
wine his Sonn and next Heyre, which Baldwine 
had Iflue Richard his eldeſt Sonn, Henry that 
died without Iſſue, and William ſurnamed de 
Vernon, Richard Sonn of Baldwine had Iffue 
Baldwine and Richard, they were both ſucceſſive- 
ly Earls of Devon, and both died without Iſſue, 
after whoſe Deceaſe the Seigniorye of the Iſle of 
Wight deſcended and came to the ſaid William 
de Vernon their Uncle, Sonn of Baldwine the 
ſecond *; which William had Iſſue Baldwine his 
eldeſt Sonn, who had Iſſue Baldwine Marie and 
Jane, and died before his Father, and then Wil- 
lam died; after his Deceaſe the Seigniorye of 
the Iſle deſcended to Baldwine his Nephew + by 
his Sonn Baldwine, which Baldwine had Iſſue 
Bald wine, Iſabel married to William de Forti- 
bus Earle of Albemarle, and Margarite a Nunn 
at Lacocke; this laſt Baldwine was the fifte of 
that Chriſtian Name Earle of Devon, and created 
Earle of the ſaid Iſle of Wight by King Henry 
the third, and did hold the ſaid Iſle and the 
Honour of Chriſtchurch in the ſaid Countie of 


* The fit, for Baldwine the Second is juſt before ſaid 


to die without iſſue, 
+ This was a term anciently uſed for grandſon. 


Southampton 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 407 
* 


Southampton in Right of the Service of fifteen 
Knights Fees, as appeareth by the Book of 
Knights Fees pertayning to the Caſtle of Careſ- 
brook remayning in the Exchequer, and died 
without Iſſue: by and after whoſe Deceaſe, the 
ſaid Iſle, and other his inheritable Lands de- 
ſcended unto the ſaid Iſabel his Siſter, then the 
Wife of William de Fortibus, whoe by Reaſon 
that Margarite her yonger Siſter had entered 
into Religion, became ſole Heyre to her Bro- 
ther, then William de Fortibus died, and the 
ſaid Iſabel him ſurvived. And that after the 
Death of the ſaid William de Fortibus without 
Ifſue by the ſaid Iſabel, being ſole and in her 
pure Widowhood, Edward the Firſt of that Name 
after the Conqueſt King of England, about the 
twenty-ſecond Year of his Reign, being Lord 
Paramount of the ſaid Ifle, did purchaſe the 
Meſnaltie of the Seigniorye of the ſaid Ifle, of 
the ſaid Iſabel de Fortibus, and that by and after _ 
the ſaid Purchaſe, all the Knights, Lords of 
Mannors and free Tenants of the ſaid Ifle, that 
at that Time and ever ſince the Conqueſt untell ' 
the ſaid Purchaſe, had holden of the ſaid Earles 
of Devon and ſome other Lords meane, between 
the Kings of England and them, did then after 
the ſaid Purchaſe become imediate Tenants to 
the King, and to hold of the ſaid King by ſuch 
Service as they before held of the ſaid Earles of 
Devon. And the Knights, Lords of Mannors, 


and other the free Tenants that now are, fay, 
thev 


408 © HISTORY OF THE 


they will averr maynteyne and prove, that be- 
fore the ſaid Purchaſe ſoe made of the Meſnaltie 
of the ſaid Ifle from the ſaid Iſabel de Fortibus, 
by the ſaid King Edward the Firſt, it cannot be 
proved by any Record or otherwiſe, that any 
Mannors Lands or Tenements within the ſaid 
Ife, were holden imediately of any of the Kings 
of this Realme in Chiefe by Knights Service or 

' otherwiſe, or that any of the Knights, Lords of 
Mannors or free Tenants of the faid Iſle before 
the ſaid Purchaſe, did hold any their Lordſhips 
Mannors Lands or Tenements within the ſaid 
Tile of any other then of the ſaid Earles, and of 
the Earles of Hereford before them ; or that the 
ſaid Knights, Lords of Mannors, and free Tenants 
of the ſaid Iſle, did doe any Service in any of 
the retroacted or former Tymes, either unto the 
ſaid Earles or Counteſſes, Lords or Owners of 
the ſaid Ifle before the ſaid Purchaſe, or ſince 
the ſaid Purchaſe unto the ſaid King Edward 
the Firſt, King Edward the Second, or King 
Edward the Third unto the ſeaventh Year of his 
| Raigne, out of the ſaid Iſle in any of the ſaid 
Kings Armies or Warrs, or were charged or did 
pay Eſcuage to any of the ſaid Kings or their 
Progenitors after the ſaid Purchaſe : neither 
was any Eſcuage ever leavied uppon any of 
them, as may appear uppon a Preſentment then 
made of all the Tenures and Service then due 
to the ſaid King by any the ſaid then Knights, 
Lords of Mannors, and free Tenants of the ſaid 
| Iſle, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 409 


Ille, or any other Service other then that the ſaid 
Kaights, Lords of Mannors, and free Tenants 
did uſe to conduct the ſaid Earles and Counteſſes | 
Lords of the ſaid Iſle, when at any Tyme they 
came into the ſaid Ifle unto the Sea, ad partes 
exteras ; and did defend and keep the Lords 
Caſtle of Careſbrooke within the ſaid Ifle, and 
the Lands of the ſaid Iſle by the Space of forty 
Days in the Tyme of Warr, and make and doe 
their free Suite at the Lords Court of the Bur- 
roughe of Newporte, from three Weeks to three 
Weeks. And the ſaid Knights, Lords of Man- 
nors, and free Tenants now being, doe further 
ſhewe, that it doth appear to be the Uſe and 
Cuſtomes of thoſe Tymes, uppon all Evidence, 
Writings, Surveys, and Preſentments, made af- 
ter the Death of any Knight, Lord of Mannor, 
or free Tenant, that died ſeized of any Lands 
within the ſaid Ifle before the ſaid Purchaſe, to 
fynde that the ſaid Mannors and Lands, whereof 
the ſaid Tenants ſo dyed ſeized, were holden 
de comite, vel de comitiſſa in capite ; and that by 
the Subtiltie of the Eſcheators of thoſe Tymes 
that imediately followed the ſaid Purchaſe, the 
- Jurors upon Inquiſitions taken after the Deathes 
of divers Knights, Lords of Mannors, and free 
Tenants, that dyed ſeized of any Mannors, or 
Lands, that before the ſaid Purchaſe of the ſaid 
Iſle by the ſaid King Edward the firſt as afore- 
ſaid, were preſented and found to hold the ſaid 
Mannors and Lands de comite ve! de comitiſſa in 
No. g. e capile, 


} 
. 
/ * 
| 
< 
4 
* 
+ 


1 
£ 
. 
- Vi 
"| 45 
f 
+> 


N ah 
(2 IT * 
Ny — — 


——— — 


— — 
— 


—_ HISTORY OF THE 


capite, did find thoſe very Lands to. be holden 
die domino rege in capite fimply. And although 
afterwards Tyme and Experience in the next 
ſutceeding Age did make the Jurors of that Tyme 
to fynde their Ertor, and that then they did be- 
ginn to fynde thoſe Mannors and Lands that by 
former Inquiſitions taken imediately after the 
ſaid Purchaſe were found by former Jurors to be 
holden de domino repe in capite, ſimply, to fynde 
that thoſe very Mannors and Lands were there- 
after holden of the King, ut de caſtro ſuo de 
Careſbroobe, in the ſaid Iſle. Nevertheleſs, di- 

vers Feodaries, Informers, called Perſecutors, 
and evil diſpoſed Perſons belonging to the Court 
of Wards, by Rewards and Encouragements uſed 
to be given and allowed to them by the ſaid 
Court, taking Advantage of the Ignorance of the 
Jurors and their erroneous Veredicts given upon 
the ſaid Inquiſitions taken imediately after the 
faid Purchaſe of the ſaid Meſnaltic of the ſaid 
Iſle, by the ſaid King Edward the firſt, by Co- 
lour of the ſaid erroneous Veredicts given upon 
the ſaid Inquiſitions, taken imediately after the 
| ſaid Purchaſe of the Meſnaltie of the ſaid Iſle as 
aforeſaid, have grievouſly vexed divers of the 
ſaid Knights, Lords of Mannors, and free Te- 
nants of the ſaid Iſle, by intituling his Majeſtie 
to the meane Rates of all ſuch of the ſaid Iſland 
Lands as by the ſaid erroneous Inquiſitions were 
found to be holden of the King ix capite ; al- 


though it doth playnly appear by that which 
hath 


- ISLE OF WIGHT. | 411 


hath bynn before declared, that the Intention ef 
the faid Jurors upon thoſe Inquiſitions taken ſoe 
imediately after the ſaid Purchaſe, was noe other 
than that thoſe Lands were holden of the King 
by the ſame Service they were formerly held of 
the Earles of Devon, Lords of the ſaid Ifle, be- 
fore the ſaid Purchaſe, and noe otherwiſe. © By 
Reaſon of which Inquiſitions the. moſt of the 
Knights, Lords of Mannors, and free Tenants 
of the ſaid Ifle, doe lye open and are ſubject to 
moſt grievous Vexations, and further to be ruined 
and undone. For Prevention whereof, and for 
ſettling the ſeveral Eſtates of all the Knights, 
Lords of Mannors, and free Tenants within the 
ſaid Iſle, concerning their Tenures, and of the 
grievous Miſchiefs and Oppreſſions that have 
already happened to ſome of them, by long and 
tedious Suits in the ſaid Court of Wards, wherein 
the Relator or Proſecutor hath always the Ad- 
vantage and Favour of the Court againſt the 

Defendant : May it pleaſe, &c. | 

That it may be enacted, &c. 

That if it cannot be made appear to this moſt 
high Court of Parliament that any Mannors, or 
Lands within the ſaid Ifle, were holden imedi- 
ately of any the Kings of this Realm in Chief by 
Knights Service or otherwiſe, which may 
amount unto a Tenure in capite (other then the 
whole Seigniorye, Dominion, and Lordſhip 
thereof granted to the Earles of Devon), during 
all the Tyme the ſaid Earles and their Heyres 

Ee2 | were 


412 HISTORY or THY 
1 


were Lords thereof, and before the Purchaſe of 
the Meſnaltie thereof by the ſaid King Edward 
the firſt ; that then the Inquiſitions and the er- 

roneous Veredicts upon them given may be va- 
. cated; and that the ſaid Knights, Lords of Man- 
nars, and free Tenants of the ſaid Ifle may be 
reſtored to their ancient Tenures, and by the 
ſame Rents and Services they held their ſaid 
Mannors and Lands of the ſaid Earles of Devon, 
Owners of the ſaid Iſle. The Knights, Lords 
of Mannors, or other the free Tenants, for any 
their Mannors, Lands and Tenements within 
the ſaid Ifle, did doe no other Service to the 
Lords of the ſaid Iſle, fave that the Knights and 
Frecholders of the ſaid Ifle did uſe to conduct 
the ſaid Earles and Counteſſes, Lords and Owners 
of the ſaid Iſle, when they came into thoſe Parts, 
unto the Sea paſſing over the ſame into forreigne 
Parts.“ ! be, 


Axorhkx privilege which was enjoyed by the 
lords of the iſland was that of the franchiſe of foreſt. 
Whether the foreſt of Parkhurſt, which conſiſts of 
about three thouſand acres, is ſtrictly entitled to 
that denomination, has been very much doubted. 
By a warrant of the duke of Suffolk, chief juſtice 
of the king's foreſt in the reign of Henry the 
Eighth, directed to the warden of Cariſbrooke 
foreſt, it appears that a court of ſwainmote was 
formerly held there; and that a rayger and two 


foreſters were appointed. And among other liber- 
| 8 


ISLE OF WIGHT:* 413 


ties which were claimed by Iſabella de Fortibus, 
and allowed her by the itinerant. juſtices in the 
eighth year of Edward the Firft, is that of a free 
chace in the ſaid foreſt, with various other privi- 
leges, as in the ſaid record are more fully NY 
and contained. I ana © ob 40 
As the tenor of the warrant contains little 1 more 
of importance than the form of the writing, of 
which we have already given many ſpecimens; it 
may be unneceſſary to recite it; but the records ſo 
far as it relates to the preſent ſubject, is worthy of 
our attention, and merits a place in the narrative 
of theſe occurrences. . 

« Liberties claimed by Iſabella de Fortibus, 
Lady of the Iſland, and allowed her, 8 Edw. I. 
by the itinerant Juſtices. >< 2 

LIBERTIES allowed to the Counteſs Iſabella | 
1400 of the Iſle of Wight before the Juſtices 
itinerant, which ſhe claims to have. Feb 

A full Return of the Writs of our Lord"the 
King Pleas of ND and of the 
Tenements of ß , View of Frank 
Pledge, Aſſize of Bread and Ale, Soke, Sake, 
Toll, and Theme, Infangthef, . 
Pillory, $, Tumbrel, Wreck of the 


* Naemu vetiti, perhaps for elit which mak rele 10 
maiming. 

+ Averiorum. 4 Fourcheſs perhaps means callous. 

$ Tribuchah | | „ 


| Ee3 5 Sea, 


414 HISTORY or THE 


Sea, Waif, free Chace. So that no one ought 
to take or drive Stags or Harts, but the Coun- 
teſs, and to have in her Chace, 
and in the Marſhes anciently confidered for its 
Defence. So that no Perſon may enter in them 
or do any Thing without the Will and Licence 
of the ſaid Counteſs or her Bailiffs. She hath 
alſo free Warren throughout the Iſland on the 
Weſt Side of the Medina. Alſo a free Market 
in the Borough of Newport, on Saturday in 
every Week, and a Fair in the fame for three 
Days at the Feaſt of Pentecoſt. Alſo a free Mar- 
ket in the Borough of Yarmouth on Monday in 
every Week, and a Fair in the ſame for three 
Days at the Feaſt of Saint James, and whatever 
appertains to a Market in both Boroughs. The 
Counteſs alſo claims of old that her Conſtable 
be the Coroner of the Iſland to preſent Acci- 
dents to the Coroner of the County and he to 
the Juſtices itinerant.” 
Tux reſt of the record, which is very 3 we 


think it unneceſſary here to repeat, as irrelevant 
to the ſubject we are now confidering. 


I the time of Edward the Third, at which pe- | 


riod the lordſhip of this iſland was in the hands of 
the crown, that king required John Maltravers, 
en account of certain lands which were held of the 


king in the county of Dorſet, to attend him at the 
caſtle of Cariſbrooke, in the iſſe of Wight, for one 
day, during the ſeaſon for buck-hunting. This 


* Menjam velitam, in the * 
was 


ISLE OF wienr. 413 


was to be done at his own expence and charge, 
both for himſelf and his horſe. He was alſo to 
remain there during the king's pleaſure, but to 
have maintenance after the firſt day both for him- 
ſelf and horſe at the expence of the crown. 

Taz whole of this foreſt was in more ancient 
times known by the name of the Park, in which 
Nate it was probably put in or before the reign of 
William the Conqueror. It is ſo ſtyled in Domeſ- 
day-book, under Watchingwood, which was at 
that time lowered in the rate, becauſe part of the 
land formerly belonging to Watchingwood, was 
then taken into the king's park. For the laſt 
three hundred years it has acquired the name of a 
foreſt; it is ſo called in a grant of the twentieth 
year of king Henry the Sixth to Henry Trenchard, 
ol the office of conſtable of Cariſbrooke caſtle, and 
of keeper of the king's foreſt in the iſland, with a 
ſalary of ten pounds per annum. We find men- 
tion made alſo of a ſalary paid to an officer, ſtyled 
ranger of the foreſt, and to two others as under- 
keepers, in the twenty-third year of Henry the 
Seventh, in an account of rents, iſſues, and dif- 
burſements of the iſland. | 

Tarr is a foreſt called Bordwood alſo on the 
eaſt ſide of the iſland, but there is no account on 
record of any appointment of a keeper or ranger. 
It ſeems to have obtained this name from its being 
a large extent of waſte land belonging to the lord, 
overgrown with wood, and ſerving as a place of 
ſecurity for red deer. In the third year of Henry 

ge the 


416 HISTORY OF THE 


the Fifth, it was called the foreft of Bordwodd in 
the grant to Philippa, ducheſs of Vork. The 
queen's bower, which is a ſmall building on the 
ſummit of an eminence, is moſt probably the place 
from whence ſhe might be accuſtomed to view 
the chace. | | . 

AxoTn#R of the rights and franchiſes which was 
claimed by the lords of the ifland, was that of 
wrecks of the ſea. This extended throughout the 
iſland, though it had been reſiſted in the time of 
the counteſs Iſabella. It was therefore tried by 
guo warrants at Winton on the octaves of Saint 
Martin, in the eighth year of Edward the Firſt, 
before the itinerant juſtices. John de Inſula, Tho- 
mas D'Evercey, Robert de Glamorgan, Thomas de 
la Haule, and the abbot of Quarr, were the per- 
ſons who reſiſted this claim, on the plea that each 
of them was entitled to one-half of whatever ſhould 
be wrecked on their reſpective lands, as a com- 
penſation, or ſalvage, for preſerving the other half 
for the uſe of the lord. But theſe claims were not 
ſufficiently ſupported by evidence, and the verdict 
was therefore given for the countels. 

Tur moſt important privilege, conſidered as an 
appendage to the lordſhip of the iſland, ſtill re- 
mains to be related. This was the power of hold- 
ing a judicial tribunal, called the knighten court, 
or more properly the knight's court*. It is ſtyled 

1 5 4 91 curia 


* Such a court is held twice in every year, under the biſhop of 
H-ceford, at his palace there; wherein the lords of manors and 


their 


' TSLE OF WIGHT. 417 


curia militum, becauſe the judges were ſuch as held 
a knight's fee, or part of a fee in capite, from 
the lord of the iſland, who gave judgment, as 
courts of equity, without a jury. The juriſdiction 
and proceſs of this court were different from thoſe 
of a court leet, and diſtin from each other. The 
curia'militum is mentioned in the grant or allow. 
ance to Iſabella de Fortibus, beſides the vi/us 

Tranci Plegii, &c. It is extremely probable, that 
this court was firſt inſtituted by William Fitz- 
Oſborn, on whom this iſland, as we have hereto- 
fore mentioned, was firſt conferred by William the 
Conqueror to be held as freely as he himſelf held 
the kingdom of England. He might not deem it 
neceſſary, in forming ſuch a tribunal, to obſerve 
the national cuſtom of trial by jury; and from 
ſuch a peculiar conftitution, we can ſcarcely be at 
a loſs to determine the original founder. 

HavixG ſaid ſo much upon the privilege of 
holding ſuch a court, it may be neceſſary to add 
that the improvement of its juriſdiction became a 
ſubject of conſideration about the year one thou- 
ſand fix hundred and twenty-fix. The conſtitution 
of the court, as it then exiſted, and as it ſtill exiſts, 
was repreſented, and tranſmitted to lord Conway, 
on the twenty-firſt of Auguſt of the ſanie year, who 


their tenants, holding by knight's ſervice, are ſuitors. This court 

is mentioned in Butterfield's Survey, p. 244. If the ſuitor fails in 

his appearance, he pays two ſhillings ſuit-ſervice, for the reſpite 
of homage. Cowel's Lay Interpreter, and Jacob's Law Dictionary. 


Was 


418 HISTORY or ru 


was at that time captain or governor of the iſland, 
We ſhall lay the particulars before our readers as 


follows. 


KNIGHTEN COURT. 
iT; Ir hath been always kept by the captain's 
fleward of the iſland, or his ſubſtitute, by virtue 
of the captain's patent, and by no other Pexticuſar 
patent, for ought we know. | 
2. Ir hath been always kept in the 8 of 

Newport, on the Monday every three weeks, un- 
leſs that day happen on a feſtival day, and then it 
is adjourned for ix weeks. 

3. Ir hath juriſdiction throughout the whole 
iſland, the corporation of Newport excepted; 

. Fr holdeth plea of all actions of debt and 
treſ] foaſs, under the value of 40s. and upon replevins 
granted by the ſteward or his ſubſtitute that Keeps 
the court. 

5. Tus proceſs in actions of debt and treſpaſs, 
are ſummons, attachments, and diſtringas, to bring 
the defendant: to appear, which if he do in perſon, 
he muſt confeſs the action, or elſe he is condemned 
by default; if by an attorney, he is admitted one 
eſſoine, if he prays it, and the next court muſt 
appear, or be condemned by default. And in 
actions upon replevins, if the defendant appear not 
in the three firſt courts, he is condemned by de- 
fault: and in theſe actions upon replevins, no o eſ- | 
ſoine is admitted. 


6. Taz 


18IE OF WIGHT. 419 


6. Tur pleadings are Engliſh bills and anſwers; 
and, if the caſe require, replications and re- 
| joinders. 

J. ALL the actions are entered, proſecuted, and , 
pleaded, by certain attorneys, allowed in that court. 

8. Tat actions of debt are tried by proof of plain- 
tiff or defendant, or the defendants wager of law 
with two hands, if he pray it; and in treſpaſa by 
proof only. 

9. ALL the actions are adjuged by the court, 
without jury; which it is conceived will be better 
with jury, as in other courts of record, if the value 
of actions be increaſed. 

10. Tur judges are freeholders, which hold of 
his majeſty's caſtle of Cariſbrooke ; whereof there 
are known to the ſteward, not above eighteen. The 
which freeholders, for their better caſe, have been 
appointed by the captain of the iſle to fit by four 
or five at a court by turns: but ſome being aged 
and impotent, one under age, ſome live out of the 
ine, and ſome of the reſt being negligent of that 
ſervice, there hath been much defect in their at- 
tendance; which is to the great prejudice of the 


court, and hindrance of the People, by delay of 
trials. | 


THEREFORE, under favour, we conceive, that a 
certain form of election of a certain number of 
judges, of other ſufficient men of the country, be 
added; and a ſtrict order taken for their due at- 
tendance will be very neceſſary, eſpecially if the 
'value of actions be raiſed : and that if there be not 

an 


420 HISTORY OF THE 


an eſpecial reſtraint of removing actions in that 
court triable from thence into higher courts, that 
court will do little more good than it doth already. 
Is conſequence of theſe repreſentations, inſtruc- 
tions were given by the lord treaſurer, viſcount 
Grandiſon, to the king's attorney-general, to pre- 
pare a grant for enlarging the juriſdiction of this 
court © to all caſes whatſoever, civil or criminal, 
under the value of 20l. provided that the ſame 
extend not to the life, member, or freehold of any 
of the inhabitants.” But the court ſtill "remains 
in the ſame ſtate, and nothing was effected for 
the benefit 1 advantage of me bre of the 
Hand. * | k 0 
Br the tenth article of the bene; report, the | 

names of the following gentlemen were found to 
be competent, as appears from the court book, 

1 * I. 3X 


Sir al Worſley, Bart. 
Sir Jo. Oglander, Knt. 
Sir jo. Leigh, Knt. 
Jo. Worlley, Eſq. 


Sir 5 1 Knt, 

"Sir Jo. Richards, Knt, 
_ Wm. Bourman, EI. 

2. ables Eſq. 


Sir Wm. Liſle, Kat. Sir Ed Dennis, Kat. R 
ir Rob. Dillington, Bart. # Sir Hen. Knowles, 
* Capt; Mann, Tho. Newnham, 


'm. Stephens, Eſq. Rich. Gaid, 
Tho. Knight, Gen, 


Will. N utt, 


4 


Bor in the reign of queen Elizabeth, as appears 
from the firſt page of a court book of that time, 
the names and number were as follows; which 
lac vs that there were - three more re gentlemen com- 

; Boy ane "= erent 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 421 


petent in one thouſand fix hundred and twenty-ſix 
than at the preceding period. 


Tho. Worſley, Ar. Rob. Dillington, Gen. } 
Anth. Lifle, Ar. David Urry, Gen. | 
ohn Erliſhman, Gen, Tho. Dennis, Ar. 
d. Richards, ar. John Mewes, Ar. 
o. Heron, Gen. John Rice, Gen. a 


ill. Oglander, Ar. 5 Tho Levybond, Gen. 


Tho. Urry, Tho. Cheeke, Gen. 


Mich. Kite. 


Turs court has a common ſeal of office, having 
the impreſſion of A caſtle triple towered,” with 
this device round it, © Sigil. curiæ mil. in Hula 
Vegis.” 


88 CHAPTER 


. HISTORY OF THE 


CHAPTER XIV. 


0 THE RELIGIOUS HOUSES OF THF ISLAND, WITH AN 
ACCOUNT OF THEIR FOUNDATIONS AND ENDOW- 


MENTS. 


Brroxr we proceed to give an account of par- 
ticular pariſhes, we think it will be more agreeable 
to diſpoſe of theſe ancienter matters in the firſt 
place. OR, | 

Nox will our accounts of the religious hiſtory o 
the iſland be of very remote date. All we know 
is, that the iſle of Wight did not receive the Chriſ- 
tian faith before the year 686. | 
Ir is recorded in Domeſday-book in 1086, that 
this iſland was at that time poſſeſſed of ten churches; 
but that William Fitz-Oſborn, lord of the iſland, 
who had founded the abbey of Lyra, in Normandy, 
gave the profits of {ix of them to that abbey. Theſe 
were under the direction of the priory of Cariſ- 
brooke, which he had in like manner founded and 
endowed. What churches thoſe were we meet 
with an account in a general charter of confirma- 
tion, the ſubſtance of which we ſhall hereafter 
mention, that William de Vernon, earl of Devon, 
granted to the abbey of Lyra, in the reign of king 


John, 
Is 


ISLE OF wW1onr. 423 


IN ſpecifying the tithes which they at that time 
enjoyed, the churches of Arreton, Whippingham, 
Newchurch, Godſhill, Niton, and Freſhwater, are 
expreſsly mentioned; together with that of Cariſ- 
brooke and ſeveral chapels, which had probably 
been erected between the period of the foundation 
and the year of this grant or confirmation, in the 
ſpace of one hundred and thirteen years. In that 
record we alſo find the names of Brading, Calbourn, 
and Shalfleet. The profits of the churches of Godſ- 
hill, Arreton, and Freſhwater, had been aſſigned 
by the abbot and monks of Lyra, to the laudable 
purpoſe of making a proviſion for the poor, and 
to ſupport hoſpitality. At the requeſt of the ſaid 
abbot and monks, the aſſignment was confirmed 
by Pope Celeftine the Third, and Pope Innocent 
the Third. 


| CARISBROOKE PRIORY. 

Tur chartulary of the priory of Cariſbrooke, 
contains between two and three hundred charters, 
grants, or confirmations of grants; but very few 
of them are of any material importance. We wiſhed 
to ſelect ſuch of them as comprehend the moſt im- 
portant matters; of theſe the moſt intereſting are 
the following, — the charter of earl Baldwin in the 
reign of king Stephen, of William de Vernon in 
the reign of king John, and the ſaid William de 
Vernon's general charter of confirmation of his 
own acts and thoſe of his predeceſſors, but our 
limits forbid us from enlarging. 

From 


424 Mis rokv OF THE 


Fo the terms of earl Baldwin's chart, and of 
many others which are recited or have been refer- 
red to in the courſe of this work, it is manifeſt that 
the nature of the tenures by which the ſeveral re- 
ligious houſes held and enjoyed thoſe lands and 
other poſſeſſions that were granted to them, was 
frequently changed and varied; and, therefore, it 
ſeems that the poſſeſſion of thoſe lands or privi- 
leges was often precarious, and depended more on 
the religious zeal of the times than upon the ſecu- 
rity of the grants, or the legality of the charters. 
At leaſt, if they were legal, the various inſtances 


of their being changed is a demonſtration that le- 


gal ties were not always binding, or ſufficiently 
ſtrong to compel intereſted perſons to abide by the 
conditions of the grants of their predeceſſors. Per- 
| haps, however, it ſhould be added, as matter of 
conjecture, which the tenor of ſome charts leads 
us to ſuppoſe probable, that in the inſtances of 
ſuch changes, where ſome ſubſequent conditions 
ſeem to be introduced, that muſt very ſenſibly 
affect the value, other valuable conſiderations 
might be made on that account ; but of theſe we 
have not ſufficient evidence to amount toa demon- 
ſtration of the fact. 

On the claim of earl Baldwin, by which he al 
fers a right of nominating the monks to the priory 
of Cariſbrooke, ſome obſervations may be natu- 
rally inferred. It is probable, that he made this 
claim, under the idea of his being heir to the 


founder. On the ſame ground alſo it ſeems to 
$6514 have 


ISLE OF WIGHT; 425 


have been, that Iſabella de Fortibus, ſome years 
afterwards, claimed a right of approbation of the 
poor“. A complaint is entered in the chartulary 
of this priory, purporting that Richard de Perans, 
who had been appointed prior of Cariſbrooke by 
the abbot and convent of Lyra, was diſturbed in 
his poſſeſſion by the ſaid counteſs, who had cited 
him to appear and anſwer in her courts, by what 
right he claimed to be rightfully poſſeſſed of the 
ſaid priory, and had amerced him; that the faid 
Iſabella at the. ſame time ſet up a pretence, that 
the houſe was in her hands on the vacancy of 4 
prior, and that the advowſon of the prioty belong 
ed to her by inheritance; that the prior, in con- 
ſequence of theſe vexatious proceedings, obtained 
an injunction in the ſeventh year of king Edward 
the Firſt, till the matter ſhould be fairly deter- 
mined; Ir-afterwards appears, that the diſpute 
was accommodated, to the ſatisfaction of the coun- 
teſs; for in the releafes which were exchanged 
between the ſaid counteſs and the prior, ſhe re- 
ſerved to hetſelf and her heirs or aſſigns the right 
of advowſon and lordſhip over the prioty. Theſe 
releaſes are dated in the ninth year of king Edward 
the Firſt. | 

Nox is it without precedent, that a patron, or 
repreſentative of the founder of religious houſes, 
ſhould claim a right to their temporalities on 2 
Vacancy, as a matter reafonably attached to the 


* See p. 135, 136, chap. 6. 
DIS 20.-:: F right 


426  / HISTORY OF THE | 


Tight-of advowſon. In the decrees of the ſynod 
which was called by Ottoboni, in the fourth year 
of king Henry the Third, it is declared in the ſixth 
canon, that patrons ſhould not retain the profits of 
vacant benefices, unleſs they were by ancient 
uſage entitled to them ; which is an implied al- 
lowance, that where fuch cuſtom could be demon- 
ſtrated, the right to the temporalities was not to 
be diſputed. 

Ir we farther conſider, that the nobility of Eng- 
land were commonly the heirs to the founders of 
religious houfes, and to thoſe who had given the 
advowſons of churches to monaſteries, we need not 
be ſurprized that they ſhould take offence at the 
eonduct of the monks ; for it was conceived gene- 
rally, that thefe monks had abuſed their truſt in 
applying the profits of thoſe churches to their own 
uſe, of which they had procured the appropriations, 
as theſe bequeſts and' grants were not deſigned to 
be conferred as ſinecures, but in truſt that they, as 
the beſt judges, might preſent the fitteſt perſons. 
to the ſeveral livings as they ſhould from time to 
time become vacant. But theſe kinds of appro- 
priations, as the monks had thought proper to 
conſider them, were totally contrary to the deſigns 
and intentions of the donors, which were thereby 
totally defeated, and the churches conſequently 

neglected. 
I the time of Pope Alexander the Fourth, about 
the year 1259, the nobility, who were juſtly incenſed 
at this general uſurpation * the monks, preſented 


& remon— 


slr or Wicit: 427 


x remonſtrance to the ſaid Pope on the ſubject of 
theſe grievances; wherein they ſet forth, “that 
they and their predeceſſors, out of reſpect to the 
appearing ſcarcity of the religious ſocieties in Eng- 
land, had liberally conferred on them their right 
of patronage ; that by ſuch means they might have 
the opportunity of chuſing fit perſons, and pre- 
ſenting them to the biſhops, as a moſt effectual 
proviſion for the cure of ſouls, and relief of the 
poor: whereas they found this pious intention 
fruſtrated, not only by papal proviſions, that in- 
terrupted the right courſe of preſentation, but 
chiefly becauſe the religious, by clandeſtine and 
indirect ways, with the neglect or contempt of 
their own biſhops, had obtained thoſe churches to 
their properties, by conceſſions from the apoſtolic 
fee: on which account they thought themfelves 
obliged to reſume the patronage of fuch converted 
churches, and reunite the advowfons to their own 
demeſnes ; becauſe they ſaw the good intentions 
of themſelves and their. affe intirely de- 
feated.” 

In anſwer to this ſpirited but reſpectful decla- 
ration, which the neceſſity of the times ſeemed 
fully to warrant, the tenor of his holineſs's reply 
was to this effect; and he therein proteſted * a pure 
and finceredeſign in ſo appropriating ſome churches 
to religious places, with the afſectionate bowels of 
piety and mercy ;. firmly hoping and believing, 
that ſuch conceſhons of charity might relieve the 

wants of the religious, and promote the worſhip 

Ff 2 of 


428 ufs rok or THY 


of God within the reſpective churches: and there- 
fore, if their complaints were true, he was ſorry 
the apoſtolical judgment ſhould be deceived, and 
the ſacred intention of the ſee of Rome be ſo per- 
verſely diſappointed'; but far be it from them, 
obedient ſons, for this cauſe of appropriations and 
proviſions, to revoke and take into their hands the 
right of patronage, beſtowed on ſuch religious 
houſes, ſince they had no authority to diſpoſe of 
eccleſiaſtical affairs, and muſt not preſume to touch 
any ſacred thing. However, with the aſſiſtance of 
the biſhops, he would ſo effectually labour to re- 
dreſs all abuſes, as to leave no juſt matter of com- 

plaint or ſcandal.” | 
 CavrrovsLy as this Pope thought proper to ex- 
preſs himſelf, and carefully as he introduces the 
barrier againſt ſacrilege, which was plainly inti- 
| mated to check the proſecution of their declared 
intentions; we have little grounds to conſider 
him in this reſpect as a patron or defender of the 
boaſted privilege of infallibility. Suppoſing the 
juſtice of their complaints, he expreſſes a concern 
that ** the apoſtolical judgment ſhould be deceived, 
and the ſacred intention of the ſee of Rome be ſo 
perverſely diſappointed,” and concludes with the 
promiſe that he would fo effectually labour to 
redreſs all abuſes, as to leave no juſt matter of 
complaint or ſcandal.” Neither have we any rea- 
{on to conclude, that he did not fulfil the promiſe 
he had made; for we find him complaining, in an 
epiſtle which he wrote two years afterwards, of the 
A conduct 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 429 


conduct of the monks, in a language amilar to the 
preceding remonſtrance of the nobles. 

Sour of the monks themſelves indeed, whoſe 
fouls of propriety and prudence was not wholly 
obliterated by their ſelfiſh and avaricious paſſions, 
could not vindicate or countenance the ſcandalous 
practice of ſome convents; to ſo ſhameful and 
ſcandalous a height was the habit of procuring ap- 
propriations ariſen. From the parochial antiqut- 
ties of biſhop Kennet, we are ſupplied with an 
inſtance wherein Hugh de Levon, abbot of Meaux, 
in Yorkſhire, was anxiouſly defirous of beſtowing. 
the appropriation of the church of Eſſington on 
that abbey ; in which deſign the monks themſelves 

ſtrenuouſly oppoſed him for five years together, 
and conſtantly repreſented the heavy and enormous 
injuries which would ariſe, to be lamented by per- 
ſons yet unborn. 

NerTHsR were the laity alone affected with this 
ſpirit of diſcontent, which had ſo juſt a foundation 
for its origin. The biſhops likewiſe intereſted 
themſelves, for the credit of their profeſſion, and 
exerted themſelves on many occaſions to procure 
a redreſs of thoſe grievances, and to apply ſome 
remedy for checking the evil. Many canons were 
conſequently enacted in the ſynods for that pur- 
poſe; againſt which the monks were generally re- 
fractory, and exerted themfelves to refiſt thoſe 
canons, which militated with their private advan- 
tage, with much violence and oppoſition. Indeed, 
they were ſo tenacious of what they had procured, 

© +2 that. 


430 HISTORY OF THE 


that nothing but force had any effect upon them, 
The monaſteries, which had by any means obtained 
poſſeſſion of churches, not only appropriated the 
rents to their own uſe, but very frequently diſ- 
poſed of them to tenants, for a certain conſidera- 
tion; by which meaſures, which were only calcu- 
lated to enrich themſelves, the benevolent inten- 
tions of the donors were entirely fruſtrated. 
As proofs of the endeavours of the biſhops to 

effect a reform in the abuſes we are treating of, we 
may go back to the time of the ſynod aſſembled 
at Oxford by archbiſhop Langton in 1222; of 
which ſynod the 13th canon forbids the vicarage 
of any church to be given to a vicar who ſhall not 
ſerve the church; the next canon obliges to reſi- 
dence thoſe who have benefices ; the 1 5th appoints 
a ſufficient portion of the benefice to be allowed 
for the maintenance of ſuch vicar; and the 4oth 
forbids the letting to farm, except it be done for 
cauſe which ſhall have the ſanction and approba- 
tion of the biſhop for the time being. They were 
farther confirmed and ordained by the ſynod con- 
vened at London, by Otho, the Pope's legate, in 
the year 1237, and by that of Ottoboni, to which 
- we have already referred, in the year 1268. Both 
theſe require that churches ſhould be ſupplied by 
a reſident vicar, 

Tux regiſter of William of Wykeham affords in- 
ſtances of the operation of theſe canons. The 
biſhop, when the patrons, or thoſe in whom the 
preſentation was yeſted, neglected to pay attention 
| | to - 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 431 


to them, collated to the churches which fell to him 
by lapſe. The vicarage of Cariſbrooke, it is ex- 
preſsly ſaid, was collated to on this account. 
This occaſioned great diſturbances in the iſland. 
It is recorded in the regiſter of biſhop Woodlock, 
in the year 1307, that the monks and their friends 
held the church of Godſhill by force. The biſhop's 
letter to the king on that occaſion, with another 
on a ſubſequent one, are ſtill in being; and orders 
were given by the biſhop to the dean of the iſland, 
to put the clerk, which he had collated in conſe- 
quence of the lapſe, into poſſeſſion of the church 
of Godſnhill, GY to the canon of the general 

council. | 
Bur this did not quiet the reſtleſs and graſping 
ſpirit of the monks, who, in the following year, 
attempted the ſame meaſures at the church of Ar- 
reton, by which means it came to the biſhop by 
lapſe. On this occaſion alſo, as before, the biſhop 
iſſued his mandate to the dean of the iſland to in- 
duct the clerk by him collated againſt all oppoſers, 
contra omnes et ſingulos contradifores et rebelles.— 
Neither did the buſineſs end here; for the biſhop 
excommunicated no leſs than nine perſons for ob- 
ſtructing the clerk which he had collated, with all 
thoſe officiating in the ſaid church ; and com- 
manded the dean of the iſland to denounce this 
excommunication in all the churches of his dean- 
ery, at the time of high maſs. The ceremony 
which was uſed on ſuch occaſions was calculated 
to _— the minds of the ſpectators and audi- 
FI 4-- ence 


432 HISTORY or FHE 


ence by its awful folemnity ; for in the firſt place, 
the croſs was to be elevated, and then the bell was 
rung, the candles firft lighted and then extinguiſh- 
ed, and all other circumſtances ſuited to ſuch an 
act of diſcipline, The churches of Freſhwater and 
_ Godſhil} were afterwards ſequeſtrated for contempt 
of the canons, and thoſe who violated the ſequeſ- 
tration were excommunicated by the biſhop. 

A REVOLUTION in the ſtate of many of the mo- 
naſteries, for which it is manifeſt there was great 
cauſe, occurred in the reign of Edward the Third. 
When that monarch laid claim to the crown of 
France, one of his firſt objects was to ſeize on all 
the alien priorics, and to convert their revenues 
and effects to his own uſe. Cariſbrooke, as a priory 
within this deſcription, with all the churches in 
this iſland, which have been already related, paſſed 
by this means into the hands of the crown of Eng- 
land, and the king in conſequence preſented to 
them. The priory of Cariſbrooke was afterwards 
granted to the abbey of Mont Grace, in the county 
of York, which abbey had been founded by Tho- 
mas Holland, duke of Surrey. But it was reſtored 
in the firſt year of Henry the Fourth, with others 
which had been ſeized on the ſame account, as a 
means perhaps of removing all cauſes ofdiſcontent 
between the two courts of England and France. 
Wr have ſeen the copy of a curious grant by 
Richard Triſtram, to the monks at Cariſbrooke, 
which may be thought to exceed every thing that 
conjecture could deviſe of the extreme ſuperſtition 


of 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 433 


of thoſe times, of himſelf and all his lands at Afton, 
which he ſwears to at the holy altar of the priory. 
Bur however ſome of the laity at that time'might 
be abſorbed in ignorance and ſuperſtition, we 
have ſeen in this chapter, and in a former one 
which refers to the diſputes of Iſabella de Forti- 
bus, with the ſeveral priories founded by her pre- 
deceſſors, that the nobility in general had a better 
conception of their own dignity and importance. 
Io return to the ſubject of the priory of Cariſ- 
brooke, we find that it was again reſumed, as an 
alien priory, notwithſtanding the timid reſtoration 
of it by Henry the Fourth, in the reign of his ſuc- 
ceſſor, and given to the monaſtery of Shene, which 
had been founded by the king. It remained in 
their hands till the time of the diſſolution. In 
the time of Henry the Eighth, that abbey leaſed 
it, together with the tithes of Godſhill and Freſh- 
water, to Sir James Worſley, at the annual rent of 
two hundred marks. This leaſe was renewed by 
his ſon Richard, the widow of whom having mar- 
ried Sir Francis Walſingham, ſecretary of ſtate to 
queen Elizabeth, it came into his poſſeſſion. 
Havinc given this account of the priory, we 
muſt obſerve, that it was afterwards purchaſed by 
Sir Thomas Fleming, and from his family it de- 
ſcended to the preſent poſſeſſors; but the vicarage 
remained in the patronage of the crown till the 
time of Charles the Firſt, who gave it to Queen's 
College, Oxford. The chapels of Northwood, 
Weſt Cowes, and Newport, belong, ſtrictly ſpeak- 
ing, 


- „ 
, — — — 
— 4 


oY - . . 1 2 " _ * _— 
EIT Er DER EAT ang on On 


EA 


434 HISTORY OF THE 


ing, to this church. In the time of cardinal Beau. 


fort, the church or priory of Cariſbrooke was valued 
at twenty marks per annum, the vicarage at ſix- 


teen marks, and the procuracy of Lyra at forty 
marks. For as this priory was founded at a time 


when there were not above nine or ten churches 


in the iſland, the monks enjoyed a more extenſive 
juriſdiction than thoſe of later inſtitution; becauſe 
that moſt lords of conſiderable poſſeſſions built 
new churches for the accommodation of their own 
families and dependants, and appropriated the 
tithes of their lands to them. 


QUARR ABBEY. 


WHETHER this abbey obtained its name from 


the ſtone quarries in its neighbourhood, which is 


called Quarraria in ſome of the oldeſt grants, is 
not caſy to determine, though ſuch a conjecture is 


very probable, It was of the Ciſtercian order, and 


one of the firſt monaſteries which was founded in 
England belonging to them. Baldwin, carl of 
Devon, provided for its erection in the thirty- 
ſecond year of king Henry/the Firſt, by a grant 
of the manor of Arreton to Geoffrey, abbot of 
Savigny, in Normandy, for that purpoſe. It was 


dedicated to St. Mary. An old charter of Engler 


de Bohun, who gave Haſely to the monks of this 
abbey, probably ſoon after the grant of Baldwin, 
is ſtill extant. Richard, the ſon of Baldwin, con- 


firmed this and many other benefations to Quarr 


Abbey. This deed is without a date, but it muſt 
| | | have 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 435 


have been executed in the reign of Henry the Se- 
cond, and conſequently within thirty years from 
the firſt grant. The introduction or preamble of 
theſe two charts or grants being in a ſtile, diffe- 
rent to any of thoſe we have yet noticed, it may 
be at leaſt entertaining to give a tranſſation of that 
part of them, before we ꝓroceed. 


The Chart of W e de Bohun of Hlaſeley 
Since the Life of mortal Men in this World 
is confined within a very ſhort ſpace, and our 
Anceſtors deprived of their bodily Habitations 
demonſtrate this by moſt certain Proofs, it be- 
hoves us their Survivors yet in Exiſtence to pro- 
vide with all Care of Reſolution for the full 
Exerciſe of Charity, and profitably to conſider 
beforchand how we may obtain Pardon in the 
Preſence of the divine Majeſty as we are taught 
by Authority of the holy Fathers, that this active 
Life of Mortality may be a certain Means of 
Aſcent to a contemplative State of Exaltation, 
and ſo are delivered to us by the Gift of the 
divine Bounty tranſitory Goods that we may 
exchange them for eternal and Things truly ad- 
viſable in making a Return to God by the Duty 
of Charity.“ 


A cna RTER of King Henry the Second, confirm- 
ing all theſe grants, is alſo to be met with in the 
ſame work, which is very ſcarce, and but in few 
hands; but it conſiſted of nothing conſiderably 

| | diſtin 


436 HISTORY or THE 


diſtinct from what is contained in the laſt preced- 
ing charter of the lord of the iſland, of which it 
1s almoſt a literal repetition. 

From this charter it is manifeſt, that the chapel 
of St. Nicholas, with its endowments, had been 
given to Quarr by the chief men of the iſland, who 
are therein ſtyled his barons. And it 1s probable 
that moſt of the lands, with which the abbey was 
at that time endowed, were given during the reign 
of king Stephen, when the Ciſtercian monks had 
obtained a very high. degree of reputation. In 
this reign Henry, duke of Normandy, who after- 
wards ſucceeded to the crown of England, granted 
a place called Locwelle, in that province, for the 
monks of Quarr to build an abbey there; by whom 
alſo, after he came to the crown, the charter of 
confirmation of all theſe grants was made, as we 
have juſt mentioned. 

Ix has been conjectured, and not without very 
fair grounds, that Henry's liberality might proceed 

from a ſenſe of honour and gratitude to earl Bald- 
win, the founder, on account of his attachment to 
the cauſe of his mother, the empreſs Maud ; for 
the ſaid car] had, on that account, been baniſhed 
and his lands and property confiſcated, or at leaſt 
wreſted from him. Henry, no doubt, was in com- 
mon juſtice bound to reſtore the ſaid earl to his 
honours and eſtates ; and it ſeems ſufficiently well 
authenticated, that he was not unmindful to diſ- 


charge thoſe obligations. 


NUMEROUS 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 437 


'NuMERous are the chartets and inſtruments 
which ſtill exiſt, of grants and gifts to this abbey 
of Quarr. It is with much concern that we can- 
not preſent them to our readers ; as they would too 
much interrupt theconnex1on of hiſtory in this place, 
and our limits will not permit us to defail them. 

Turs abbey is called “ the daughter of Savigny,“ 
on the authority of the annals of St. Werburg, by 
Sir William Dugdale. But it is not from hence 
to be concluded, that it was in any reſpect depend- 
ant on the abbey of Savigny, becauſe the grants 
to that abbey make no mention whatever of any 
ſuch relation to Quarr. But as the co- founder of 
Quarr was abbot of that houſe, and alſo as the firſt 
monks of Quarr were brought from Savigny to in- 
troduce the diſcipline of the Ciſtercian order, which 
was at that time new and unknown in this coun- 
try, it might very properly bear ſuch a name as 
the Annaliſt has given to it. 

A Bur of Pope Gregory the Ninth is in being, 
dated 6 Kalend. Feb. Pont. 10. A. D. 1238, which 
authoriſes the abbot and convent of Quarr, in the 
ille of Wight, to chuſe a confeſſor from their own 
body. We have, on the ſubject of this abbey, a 
very curious obſervation by Lambard, in his to- 
pographical and hiſtorical dictionary of England 
under the article Wight. © Finally, faith he, al- 
though Paulus Jovius wrote that the inhabitants of 
this iſland be wont to boaſt merely, that they ney- 
ther had amongeſt theim, Monks, Lawiers, Wolfes, 

nor Foxes, yet ſind I theim al fave one, in one 
| Monaſterie, 


438 HISTORY OF THE 
Monaſtetie, called Quarr, valued at 134 Poundes 
of yearly Revennue, and founded in the Veare 


1132, after thorder of Savigniac, in Fraunce, as 


the Chronicles of Cheſter have Mention.” | 
Axen the diſſolution of this abbey, it was pur- 
chaſed by Mr. George Mills, a merchant of South- 
ampton, who deſtroyed it for the ſake of the ma- 
terials. It is to be lamented that no regard was 
paid to the ſepulchres of the various illuſtrious 
perſons, whoſe bodies had been interred in the 
chapel; within whoſe walls, as a ſacred repoſitory, 
the earl Baldwin, the founder, his counteſs Adeliza, 
and their ſon Henry, had ordered their remains to 
be ſecurely placed. William de Vernon alſo be- 
queathed three hundred pounds (a vaſt ſum in thoſe 
days !) for the erecting here a tomb for himſelf and 
his father. The chapel alfo contained a monu- 


. ment to the lady Cicely, ſecond daughter of king 


Edward the Fourth. All theſe were demeliſhed by 
one general wreck, and the manſions of the dead 


- violated to ſatisfy the rapacious avarice or enthu- 


ſiaſtic ſavageneſs of the unfeeling purchaſer. The 
lord chief juſtice, Sir Thomas Fleming, afterwards 
purchaſed it of his ſon, in whoſe deſcendants it 

ſill remains. | £4 
Ox our viſiting this ſpot, which we could not do 
without ſome degree of veneration and reſpect, as 
we entered within the walls from the ſouth, we 
could diſtinctly obſerve that they had formerly in- 
cloſed a parallelogram, perhaps nearly a pproach- 
ing to a ſquare; and that ſixty acres is not too 
great 


ESLE OF WIGHT. | 439 


great an eſtimate of the internal ſpace. We re- 
gretted that our time would not allow us to aſcer- 
tain this fact with ſufficient preciſion to ſpeak more 

poſitively. _ | 
Tnovo the buildings are in a great meaſure 
demoliſhed, an attentive obſerver cannot be at 2 
loſs, from a ſurvey of the remains, to ſatisfy him- 
ſelf as to the ſituation of many of the offices. But 
the only building, which is preſerved apparently 
in an entire ſtate, is the refectory or common hall, 
now converted into a barn. It has been generally 
ſaid, that the church or chapel of the monaſtery 
ſtood to the eaſt of this building, in the place now 
uſed as the farm yard; and the circumſtance of 
finding a row of ſtone coffins within a very few 
years paſt, laid in order acroſs the yard, affords 
ſtrong grounds for this concluſion. But perhaps 
it ſhould be conſidered, that theſe coffins had not 
contained the remains of any of the venerable per- _ 
fonages before-mentioned, but of ſome others of 
the monks or their attendants ; that theſe had been 
interred in the yard or area on the ſouth ſide of 
the church; and that the church was on the north 
fide of what is now the farm yard. Our reaſons 
are, that one column and pediment of an arch are 
_ diſtinguiſhable between the ſtables and the houſe 
on that ſide, which, from the ſize, might probably 
be the grand entrance into the church; that the 
remains of a wall parallel to this on the north are 
ſufficiently obvious to warrant ſuch a conjecture; 
and. that probably the intermediate ſpace was that 
which 


| 440 |  Hisfoky or THE 


which thews the breadth of the church in that part. 
In this view it ſeems rational to conclude, that the 
ruins which appear further to the eaſtward were a 
continuation of it; and that the remains of the 
founders and their families were depoſited within 
the church, ſomewhere within the limits we have 


| aſſigned to the building. 
Wr were ſorry to learn that the tenant of the 


farm, who rented the eſtate at the time when theſe 


coffins were diſcovered, but has fince removed 
elſewhere, applied one of them to the purpoſe of 
a trough for feeding his hogs ; and that on his 
leaving this venerable place, he took it away, and 
ſtill makes the ſame uſe of it. As the repoſitories 
of the dead ought to be ſacred, and are uſually ſo 
| eſteemed by all civilized nations, we could not 
help lamenting with much concern the unfeeling 
and inconſiderate diſpoſitions of ſome of our fellow 
creatures. | 1 = 

Vrsrroks of ſome ſtone vaulted cellars are alſo 
ſtill remaining; but whether thoſe on the north of 
the ſituation we have aſſigned to the church were 
of that deſcription, or particular chapels or chant- 
ries belonging to the church, we cannot take upon 
us to determine. 5 | 

Ir is neceſſary juſt to obſerve, that the gate 
facing the ſea has been armed with a portcullis ; 
and that the ruins of a fort, which was built in the 
reign of king Edward the Third, by virtue of a 
licence obtained from the crown, to which we have 


e alluded, appear Jon above high water mark. 
BARTON 


187 E or WIGHT. 441 


BARTON or BURTON ORATORY. 

As this convent or oratory had been diſſolved 
long before the general ſuppreſſion of monaſtic 
foundations, the ſilence of Dugdale, Speed, Tan- 
ner, and other writers on religious houſes, muſt be 
attributed to that cauſe alone. Nor would it, 
under ſuch circumſtances, have been ſurprizing, if 
the memory of its exiſtence had been quite defaced, 
and the knowledge of its foundation wholly obli- 
terated. But the regiſter of John de Pontiſſera, 
biſhop of Wincheſter, about or ſubſequent to the 
year 1282, has preſerved the hiſtory of this con- 
vent. It had been founded by John de Inſula, 
rector of Shalfleet, and Thomas de Winton, rector 
of Godſhill, and dedicated to the Holy Trinity. 
This biſhop records in that regiſter, that he had 
ſeen the charters of theſe two founders ; and he 
relates the conſtitutions or rules of the ſaid Oratory, 
which had been eſtabliſhed under their ſeals, and 
were then in full force, for the due order and go- 
vernment of the ſocicty. | 

Tus rules eſtabliſhed bor theſe purpoſes, were 
as follow : 

« I. That there ſhall be ſix Chaplains and 
one Clerk to officiate both for the living and 
dead, under the Rules of St. Auguſtine. 

2. That one of theſe ſhall be preſented to the 
Biſhop of Wincheſter, to be the Arch-prieſt; to 
whom the reſt ſhall take an Oath of Obedience. 

3. That the arch-prieſt ſhall be choſen by the 
Fg js: there reſiding, who ſhall — him 
90 10. G 8 8 to 


a HISTORY or THE 


to the Biſhop within twenty Days after any Va- 
cancy ſhall happen. 

4. They ſhall be ſubject to the immediate 
Authority of the Biſhop. 

5. When any Chaplain ſhall die, his Goods 

' ſhall remain to the Oratory. 

6. They ſhall have only one Meſs, with a Pit- 
tance, at a Meal, excepting on the greater Feſ- 
tivals, when they may have three Mefles. 

A They ſhall be diligent in reading and 

Praying. 

<8, They ſhall not go beyond the Bounds of 
the Oratory, without Licence from the Arch- 
prieſt, 

9. Their Habit ſhall be of one 3 either 
black or blue; they ſhall be clothed pallio Hiber- 
nienſi, de nigra boneta cum pileo. 

10. The Arch-prieſt ſhall fit at the Head of 
the Table, next to him thoſe who have cele- 
brated magnam miſſum then the Prieſt of Saint 
Mary; next the Prieſt of the Holy Trinity; and 
then the Prieſt who ſays Maſs for the dead. 

11. The Clerk ſhall read ſomething edifying 
to them while they dine. . 

12. They ſhall ſleep in one Room. 

13. They ſhall uſe a ſpecial Prayer for their 
Benefactors. 

14. They ſhall in all their Ceremonies, ot 
in tinkling the Bell, follow the uſe of Sarum. 

15. The Arch-prieſt alone ſhall have Charge 
of the Buſineſs of the Houſe. 


16. They 


tSLE OF WIGHT, 443 


16. They ſhall, all of them, at their Admiſ- 
ſion into the Houſe, ſwear to the Obſervance of 
theſe Statutes. 

Thomas de Winton and John de Inſula, Clerks, 
grant to John, Biſhop of Wincheſter, and his 
Succeſſors, the Patronage of their Oratory, at 
Burton, in the Pariſh of Whippingham, that he 
might become a Protector and a Defender of 
them, the Arch-prieſt, and his fellow Chaplains. 

At the Inſtance of John de Inſula, the ſurviv- 
ing Founder, Thomas de Winton being at that 
Time dead, the ſaid Biſhop orders that after a 
Year and a Day from their entering into this 
Oratory, no one ſhall accept of any other Bene- 
fice, or ſhall depart the Houſe. AZum et datum 
in didto Oratorio de Burlon, a. 1289. Fordano de 
King ton et aliis teftibus.” 


Ir happened about one hundred years after, in 

1386, that the arch-prieſt was ſuſpended by the 
biſhop, the celebrated William de Wykeham ; on 
which the dean of the iſland was directed to take 
charge of his oratory in the houſe at Burton.“ 
About four years after, the arch-prieft was made a 
captive in France; at which time the houſe was 
found to be ina ruinous condition, when the biſhop 
gave orders for its being repaired, and for ſuch 
other things as were neceſſary to be done. 

In the eighteenth year of king Henry the Sixth, 
in 1439, this oratory was ſurrendered into the 
hands of the biſhop by Walter Trengoff, at that 

Go 2 time 


444 HISTORY OF THE 


time arch-prieſt; which was granted, together 
with its lands, to the. college of Wincheſter, by 
the advice and concurrence of biſhop Wainfleet, 
who ſucceeded cardinal Beaufort in the ſee of Win- 
cheſter. The endowments at this time conſiſted 
of the manor of Whippingham, in which pariſh it 
is ſituated, with the demeſne lands of Burton, or 
Barton, as it is now called, and ſome lands at 
Chale; and the ſcite and demeſnes of the oratory 
are ſtill held under a leaſe from the warden and 
fellows of Wincheſter college. A part of the old 
building was very lately remaining. 


PRIORY OF ST. HELEN's. 

Or this priory, conſidered as an alien one, which 
belonged to ſome abbey in France, very little in- 
formation has been handed down to the preſent 
times. For we are neither acquainted with the 
name of the founder, nor can we ſpeak with cer- 
tainty of the time of its foundation. All that we 
know 1s, that it was of the Cluniac order, and was 
probably eſtabliſhed before the introduction of the 
Ciſtercian order, which afterwards became more ge- 
neral. Hence we may ſuppoſe that its eſtabliſh- 
ment took place ſoon after the conqueſt. As an 
alien priory, it was ſeized by king Henry the Sixth, 
and beſtowed upon kis college of Eton, to which 
it ſtill belongs. 


PRIORY OF APPULDURCOMBE. 
As an alien priory, which was only a cell to the 
| abbey 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 445 


abbey of Montſburg, in Normandy, this alſo ex- 
perienced an early change of maſters. Richard de 
' Redvers, earl of Devon, and lord of the iſland, 
founded that abbey, and gave to them this houſe 
of Appuldurcombe. The charter of confirmation 
deſcribes the lands particularly which were given 
to the ſaid abbey by this family. They maintain- 
ed here a prior and two monks, to take care of the 
profits of their lands at Appuldurcombe, Sandford, 
and Week, where they poſſeſſed a knight's fee in 
the time of the lady Iſabella. But in the wars with 
France, in the time of king Henry the Fourth, that 
prince gave it to the nuns without Aldgate in the 
city of London; and theſe nuns afterwards obtain- 
ed a grant from the ſaid abbey of all their right 
.and title to thoſe lands. The counteſs Iſabella de 
Fortibus was extremely partial to this priory or 
convent; for it may be obſerved in the charter 
which ſhe beſtowed on her new town of Medina, 
that the prior of Appuldurcombe was expreſsly 
exempted from the toll and petty cuſtoms which 
were to be paid by others to this new borough. — 
In the time of king Edward the Third a deſcent 
was apprehended from the French In this iſland, 
as we have more fully mentioned in the chapter of 
the military hiſtory of that period ; when the biſhop 
of Wincheſter received orders from the king to 
remove the priors and monks belonging to the 
French monaſteries to Hide abbey, near Wincheſ- 
ter. At this time a prior and two monks were 


ſent from Appuldurcombe. 
Gg 3 PRIORY 


446 us rokr or THE 


PRIORY OF ST. CROSS. 8 
Tuts, like the preceding priories, affords few 
materials to deſcant upon its hiſtory. As an alien 
priory, our great monaſtic hiſtorians have wholly 
omitted to give any account of it; ſo that we can 
neither diſcover the time and period of its founda- 
tion, nor by whom it was firſt eſtabliſhed. Some 
circumſtances have led to the conjecture, that it 
probably belonged to Tirone, in France. It was 
perhaps to be confidered rather as an hoſpital than 
a priory; for we find in the time of king Richard 
the Second, that “ the king gave to John de 
Coweſhall the cuſtody of the hoſpital of St. Croſs 
in the iſle of Wight for life,” as may be ſeen in 
Pat. 6. Ric. 11, p. 1. m. They obtained a licence 
from the biſhop for burying their own dead, for 
which privilege an acknowledgement was paid to 
the priory of Cariſbrooke. On account of its be- 
Ing an alien priory, it was given to the college of 
Wincheſter before the general diſſolution of reli- 
gious houſes, 


CHURCH-HOUSE.. 

Ix the fourth year of king Henry the Eighth we 
find a deed or conveyance, of a tenement and two 
or three ſtrips of land to the ſtewards of a frater- 
nity, ſtyling themſclves “ Brothers and Siſters of 
the Fraternity of St. John Baptiſt,” by John Wynn- 
yatt. It thence appears that this was only a recent 
eſtabliſhment, which had been made in the pariſh 
of Northwood, and that the houſe ſo denominated 

was 


ISLE OF WIHr. 447 


was ſituated near the church. But the act of par- 
lia ment which granted all the ſmall monaſteries to 
the king, in the twenty- ſeventh year of that reign, 
put an end to this eſtabliſhment ; its continuance 
could therefore only have been of very ſhort du- 
ration. The building obtained the name of 
Church-Houſe; and tradition tells us that it was 


ſtanding little more than a century ago. 


CHAPTER 


448 HISTORY OF THE 


CHAPTER XV. 


or THE LOCAL OR TOPOGRAPHICAL HISTORY OF THF 


PARISHES, THEIR CHURCHES AND CHAPELS, WITH 

AN ACCOUNT OF THE MANORS AND GENTLEMEN'S 

SEATS, COMPREHENDING THE HISTORY OF THEIR 
ANCIENT AND PRESENT PROPRIETORS. 


| \ E now come to that ſtage of the hiſtory of 


this iſland, which is deſigned to include the mi- 
nuter matters of local occurrences, and to rectify 
and improve in their reſpective places whatever 
has been deficient, or inaccurately repreſented, on 


the authority of former writers, from private com- 


munications. 

Brok we proceed to a diſtinct hiſtory of the 
ſeveral pariſhes, as they are at preſent conſtituted, 
we muſt crave permiſſion to ſlate briefly an ac- 
count of the ſeveral chapels, chantries, and pariſhes, 
not now conſidered as ſuch, which heretofore ex- 
iſted in this iſland. This will occaſion us to notice 
conciſely ſome hiſtorical traits of the formation 
and foundation of pariſhes, that are immediately 
connected with this part of our hiſtory, and to 
many of our readers muſt prove an acceptable in- 
formation. 

Tux moſt natural ſource of authentic informa- 
tion in this reſpect, ſeems to be in the epiſcopal 
regiſters ; but as theſe reach no higher than to the 
time 


5 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 449 


time of John de Pontiſſera, who ſucceeded to the 
ſee of Winton 1n the year 1282, our intelligence 
from thence muſt be very defective. Of the 
churches in the iſle of Wight which were founded 
and endowed before that time, there is not the 
ſmalleſt account. But this defect is in ſome de- 
gree ſupphed from a manuſcript, which contained 
a return from the dean of the iſland, of the endow- 
ments of the ſeveral churches and chapels, to his 
ſucceſſor biſhop Woodlock, who came to this ſee 
in the year 1305. By comparing this manuſcript 
with the modern condition of the eccleſiaſtical 
foundations, we find that ſeveral churches which 
were then ſiyled chapels, and had been endowed 
with lands or tithes of land long held by one family, 
have ſince become pariſh churches, whilſt others, 
though poſſeſſing more ample endowments, never 
attained to a higher character than that of chant- 
ries. Of the ſeveral parts of this return we ſhall 
take notice under their proper heads. 
Bor there were ſeveral chapels in preceding 
times, of which no mention is made in this return. 
Some of them, probably, were not erected at that 
time; others, it is likely, were not endowed, and 
could therefore only be conſidered as private cha- 
pels. Some were alſo appropriated to abbeys, and 
on that account were exempt from epiſcopal juriſ- 
diction ; but many of them are now ſo totally de- 
cayed and ruined, that it is in many inſtances al- 
moſt impoſſible to aſcertain their ſituation. 


OF 


— ad 
FFF 
. 2 — 


450 HISTORY OF THE 


OF THE ANCIENT CHAPELS, &c. 

r. A chapel dedicated to St. Auſtin, belonging 
to the priory of Cariſbrooke, called in the ledger 
book of that houſe, Capella Sancti Auguſtini pro 
lepraſis, For Lepers.”. 

2. A chapel, pro infirmis, « For the infirm,” li- 
cenſed by the biſhop, who veſted the appointment 
of the chaplain in the abbot of Lyra. | 
3. At Knighton, in the pariſh of Newchurch, 
was a Chapel built by Sir Ralph de Gorges, lord 
of Knighton, in the year one thouſand three hun- 
dred and one. It probably was not endowed when 
the dean made his return, for which reaſon it is 
not therein noticed. But the regiſter of the dio- 
ceſe has recorded various inſtances of preſentations 
to it by that family. 

4. At Appleford, in the pariſh of Godſhill, there 
was alſo a chapel built by the family of Liſle, who 
were lords of Appleford ; to which Sir John Liſle 


\ preſented in the year one thouſand three hundred 
and thirty-one, as appears from the regiſter. Sir 


Bartholomew Liſle alſo preſented to this chapel 
afterwards in one thouſand three hundred and 


forty-four. 


5. St. Catharine's, on Chale down, was alſo a 


chapel, which Walter de Godyton ſounded in the 


year one thouſand three hundred and twenty- 
three. | | 

6. The chantry of Gatcombe was alſo a chapel 
in the church at Whitwell, and was dedicated to 


St. Radigund ; but it cannot be aſcertained whe- 
ther 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 451 


ther it was founded by the family of de Eſtur, or 
Liſle. | 

7. Brennew, in the pariſh of Freſhwater, was 
likewiſe a ſmall chapel; which was rated at one 
mark per annum in the book of cardinal Beaufort, 
who was biſhop of this ſee from one thouſand four 
hundred and four till one thouſand four hundred 
and forty-ſeven, in deſcribing the value of the be- 
nefices in the iſland. 

8. Woolverton, ] were all ſituated in that part of 

9. Middleton, pa iſland, which is now known 
10. La Wode, I by the name of Bimbridge, on 
the eaſt of Sandown level and Brading harbour. — 
They were ſo many diſtinct manors, in each of 
which, it ſeems, their lords reſpectively founded a 
chapel. Theſe lordſhips, with the advowſon of 
the chapels, were conveyed away by a deed or chart 
in the forty-ſixth year of Edward the Third, and 
are deſcribed as lying in the pariſh of Woolverton, 
though no ſuch pariſh now exiſts. It does not 
appear from the regiſter, that preſentations to 
them had ever paſſed under the biſhop's cogni- 
zZance, and therefore, it is highly probable, they 

were never endowed. 

11. A chantry at Newport, dedicated to the 
Bleſſed Virgin, founded by Jo Garſton of that 
town. 

12. A chapel, de /an#o licio, of which cardinal 
Beaufort has taken notice in his valuation of the 
benefices of the iſland, but, with ſome others, which 
are ſtill in exiſtence, and even improved to the 

rank 


452 HISTORY OF THE 


rank . of pariſh churches, was then exempted as 
inſignificant. 


Ir muſt be obſerved, that moſt of the old pa- 
riſhes in the iſland were extenſive and diſperſed. 
In ſome inſtances the tithes of particular eſtates 
were paid to a diſtant church, and thoſe of others 
to impropriators ; but the moſt uſual way was, 
when the lord of a manor founded a church for the 
uſe of himſelf and his tenants, to appropriate the 
tithes of his lands to his own church, ſo that the 
pariſh was commonly large or ſmall in proportion 
to the extent of theſe poſſeſſions. 

Wu the bounds of pariſhes are not ſubject to 
this general rule, other cauſes muſt be ſought for 
to account for theſe deviations and irregularities. 
Where monaſteries, for inſtance, had been founded 
before the pariſh church, and a grant of the tithes 
of the adjacent lands had been made to the monks 
for their ſupport and maintenance, it was then 
impoſſible they could go to the pariſh church, to 
which of natural right they ſeem to belong. 

Tas learned and induſtrious Mr. Prideaux tells 
us indeed, which muſt be obvious from the hiſtory 
of the times, that “ what was paid to the church 
for ſeveral of 'the firſt ages after Chriſt, was all 
brought to them by way of offerings; and that 
theſe were made either at the altar, or at the col- 
lections, or elſe occaſionally.” But he afterwards 
obſerves, that about the year 794, Offa, king of 
Mercia, the © moſt potent of all the Saxon kings 

| of 


ISLE or WIGHT. 453 


of his time in the iſland of Britain, made a law, 
whereby he gave unto the church the tithes of all 
his kingdom. But that tithes were before paid in 
England by way of offerings, according to the an- 
cient uſage and decrees of the church, appears from 
the canons of Egbert, archbiſhop of York, about 
the year 750; and from an epiſtle of Boniface, 
_ archbiſhop of Mentz, which he wrote to Cuthbert, 
archbiſhop of Canterbury, about the ſame time; 
and from the ſeventcenth canon of the general. 
council held for the whole kingdom at Chatchuth, 
in the year 787. But this law of Offa was that, 
which firſt gave the church a civil right in them 
in this land by way of property and inheritance, 
and enabled the clergy to gather and recover them 
as their legal due, by the coercion of the civil 
power. Yet this eſtabliſhment of Offa reached no 
further than to the kingdom of Mercia, over which 
Offa reigned, until Ethelwulph, about ſixty years 
after, enlarged it for the whole realm of England.” 
IT is manifeſt, therefore, that the payment of 
tithes is ſanctioned by the voluntary ſurrender of 
our kings to the church; that as all the lands of 
England were veſted in the crown, when the hep- 
tarchy became united in a monarchy, the grant of 
theſe demeſnes, with the condition of paying tithes 
annexed to it, ſecured the right of thoſe tithes to 
the church, and proves the weakneſs of the argu- 
ments which are urged againſt the payment. 
Tuzsz obſervations will be of ſervice to explain 


ſome of the circumſtances which hereafter may 
occur, 


454 | HISTORY OF THE 


occur, in reciting the endowments of the feveral 
pariſhes. To return, therefore, more immediately 
to our ſubject, it was not unuſual, where monaſte- 
ries had been previouſly eſtabliſhed, to transfer the 
tithes which had been appropriated to an ancient 
church to one of a later foundation, having firſt 
obtained the conſent of the biſhop. Thus, the 
church of Chale was built by Hugh Vernon, in 
the fifteenth year of Henry the Firſt, though be- 
fore that time it was part of the pariſh of Cariſ- 
brooke; and particular tithes were aſſigned to the 
new-erected church by an inſtrument of convey- 
ance which was very lately in being, and may per- 
haps ſtill continue in the hands of the rector. 
Walter de Inſula alſo built the church of Wootton, 
at that time parcel of the pariſh of Whippingham, 
which he endowed with the tithes of his own lands. 
The church of Yaverland was alſo erected by De 
Aula, though belonging to the pariſh of Brading, 
and endowed with the tithes of his demeſnes. 
Wes have inſtances alſo, where the tithes of a 
ſingle pariſh have been portioned out by various 
aſſignments. In the pariſh of Godfhill, the abbey 
of Lyra had obtained the tithes of Appuldurcombe, 
Week, and Heyno's Lands. In the pariſh of 
Wootton, Quarr Abbey had procured the tithes of 
Liſle. The rectory of St. Lawrence had acquired 
the tithes of De Aula's lands at Spann. The rec- 
tory of Gatcombe had alſo been endowed with the 


( |  "ithes of that branch of the Liſle family, which in- 


herited De Eſtur's lands at Whitwell. 
5 FROM 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 455 


From the regiſters of the biſhops of Wincheſter 
we learn, that the biſhop's licence was always ne- 
ceſſary, whenever a lay-patron preſented to any 
benefice. Several of theſe licences are there en- 
tered ; ſome of which are of a temporary nature, 
with permiſhon only to celebrate divine ſervice in 
any new-erected chapel for two or three years, till 
the biſhop could be informed from the return to a 
commiſſion of enquiry whether a ſufficient endow- 
ment was ſettled, and whether ſuch licence might 
fairly be continued, without prejudice to the mo- 
ther church. When ſuch return was favourable, 
the licence was made perpetual. 

Ar other times licences were granted, ad audi- 
endum divina in oratorio apud manſam ſuam pro ſe et 
ſua familia, in which caſes no endowment was re- 
quired. John Paulet, Eſq. and his wife are re- 
corded to have obtained ſuch a licence, that they 
might have a'moveable altar for celebrating maſs 
by a prieſt to be uſed in a proper and convenient 
place. If at any time an oratory was founded for 
perpetual maſſes, the biſhop was obliged by the 
canon law to take care that a ſufficient endowment 
was ſettled for the maintenance of a prieſt to 
officiate. J 

Brot this canon was made relative to the ne- 
ceſſity of endowments, ſeveral chapels had been 
erected without the proviſion of a neceſſary eſta- 
bliſhment. Theſe were, in conſequence of this 
fundamental defect, at the mercy of chance or ac- 
cident, and, for want of ſuch a ſettled ſupport, 

ſunk 


ad HISTORY OF THE 


ſunk into ruin. The regiſters, therefore, after the 

canon was thus enacted, could not poſſibly. take 

notice of any chapels, which wanted ſuch endow- 

ment, and are accordingly filent ; as there could 

be no neceſſity whatever for a preſentation, when 

the biſhop was prohibited by the canon __ grant- 
ing a licence. 

Such of the chapels as in any ting partook of 
the nature of monaſtic foundations, ſhared the fate 
of thoſe foundations ; they were in that caſe named 
chantries, and fell into the king's hand, by whom 
they were given away or ſold, Under this predi- 
cament was the church of eaſt Standen, which, in 
cardinal Beaufort's regiſter, ſtands as a pariſh 
church, valued at fix marks and forty pence. In 
that record we find Kingſton to be a chapel, and 
exempted from any valuation as inſignificant ; but 
it has fince ariſen to the rank of a pariſh church, 
though of the ſmalleſt value of any living in charge 
within the iſland in the king's books. Yaverland 
and Brooke are of the ſame deſcription, as chapels 
too inſignificant to be charged in that regiſter, and 
the chapel of Saint Lawrence was therein rated at 
ſix marks; but all theſe are ſince ariſen to the 
rank of rectories and diſtinct pariſhes, whilſt many 
of the chapels then exiſting, ſuch as Knighton, 
Alverſton, and ſame others, are totally deſtroyed. 

Tust changes and revolutions in the fate and 
condition of pariſhes, ſeem to demand our atten- 
tion to point out the diſtinction between a pariſh 


church and a chapel. And we need go no farther 
for 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 3 457 


for this purpoſe, than to a reference made by Mr. 
Selden, in his hiſtory of tithes, to king Edgar's 
laws, in the threefold diviſion of churches, viz. 
the cathedral, churches having the right of burial, 
and churches which had not. For it was then or- 
dained by law that every man ſhould pay his tithes 
to the mother church, except when a thane or lord 
ſhould have a church with a burial place within 
his own demeſne or fee, when he was at liberty to 
give to that one-third of his tithes ; but the other 
two-thirds were then to go to the mother church. 
And if ſuch church within the lord's fee had no 
burial place, he was obliged to maintain a prieſt 
to officiate therein at his own expence. 

Ir, then, the privilege of burial entitled a place 
of religious worſhip to aſſume the rank of a pariſh 
church, it is eafy to conceive how ſome churches 
might loſe the right of ſepulture from diſuſe, and 
others obtain it from the favour or indulgence of 
the biſhop; or, how an endowed chapel might, 
from various cauſes, eſtabliſh itſelf as a pariſh by 
cuſtom and preſcription. | 

Bur we muſt not omit to take notice, that ſome 
of theſe pariſhes, which had formerly been chapels, 
thus riſen out of others, ſtill retain the marks of 
ſubordination, by paying fome acknowledgement 
to the mother church. It was in conſequence, 
probably, of ſuch acknowledgement, that the in- 
cumbents of thoſe mother churches permitted them 
to acquire the right of baptiſm and burial, which, 
as biſhop Kennet has obſerved, gave them the eſti- 

No. 10. H h mation 


458 HISTORY OF THE 


mation of pariſh churches. For when ſuch cha- 
pels were firſt erected, an expreſs care was taken 
in their eſtabliſhment, that they ſhould neither 
have a font, bells, or any thing which eould have 

a. tendency, to prejudice the mother church. We 
need only add, that moſt of the ſmall pariſhes in 

this iſland have been formerly preſented to, under 
the name of chapels. 

Wes have but one thing more to remark, that 
the dean of the iſland, which we have had occaſion 
to mention in the time of biſhop Woodlock, was 
an officer formerly eſtabliſhed here to ſuperintend 
eccleſiaſtical affairs. We learn alſo from the re- 
giſters of the biſhops of Wincheſter, that William 
of Wykeham ſubſtituted here a ſuffragan biſhop; 
which was alſo done in the reign of lung Henry 
the Eighth. 


ut. FIFTY * 


n — 


PART I.—Of the EAST MED INF. 
Ster. IJ. Of the PARISH of BRADING. 


Ils the local hiſtory of this iſland, we commence 

our accounts with the eaſtern part, and have there- 
fore given the preference to Brading, as the oldeſt 
church, and one of the three pariſhes which com- 
prehend the eaſtern part. It is indeed, ſtrictly 
ſpeaking, the moſt eaſtern extremity, the whole 


of Bembridge peninſula, the ſmall pariſh of Yaver- 
land alone excepted, being within this pariſh. It 
was anciently wrote Brerding, or Brerdynge, and 
accurs by that time in many ancient records. 


Tag 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 459 


Tuts pariſh was anciently very extenſive, and 
it ſtill remains a large pariſh, notwithſtanding the 
reductions which it has ſuffered. Its former bounds 
included the preſent pariſhes of St. Helen' son the 
north, Yaverland towards the ſouth, and Shanklin 
and Bonchurch to the ſouth-weſt ; comprehending 
a ſweep of the whole eaſtern part of the iſland from 
the weſt of Appley on the north, along by little 
Aſhey, to the weſt of Nunwell, paſſing along be- 
tween the Queen's Bower and Lower Borthwood, 
and from thence nearly ſouth acroſs Apſe heath, 
and to the weſtward of Cliffe, and, after ſkirting 
Shanklin down, and croſſing the eaſtern part of 
Boniface down, terminating on the weſt of the 
village of Bonchurch. 

ITs preſent extent is only ſhortened on the ſouth, 
by a line drawn a little to the ſouth of Cliffe, till 
it meets the brook, which forms the boundary in 
a northerly direction about half a mile, and then 
turns eaſtward to the coaſt of Sandoun bay, on the 
ſouth of Great Languard. Shanklin pariſh is on 
the ſouth of this limit, and Bonchurch to the ſouth 
of that. Yaverland pariſh i is a ſmall oblong ſcarce 
a mile in length, and of leſs breadth, its ſouth- 
weſtern limit approaching the coaſt a very little to 
the eaſt of Sandown Fort. But the pariſh of St. 
Helen's on the north has been its greateſt enemy, 
taking from it a ſweep of coaſt for more than a mile 
in breadth in moſt places, commencing on the 
north ſide of Brading Haven; and, after paſſing 
the church ſo as juſt to include it, in a direction a 

H h 2 little 


460 HISTORY OP Tur 


little eaſt of north, it forms a parallel with the 
coaſt nearly in a direction to the north of weſt, till 
it meets the limit of the old pariſh of Brading on 
the weſt near Small-Brook. 

IT is nevertheleſs uncertain at what time theſe 
feparations commenced, as theſe ſeveral churches 
were built before any regiſters now exiſting bear 
date. Yet it is highly probable, that this partition 
was not ſettled in the moſt amicable manner, 
though we have no information to direct us to the 
fact, whether it was commanded by the Pope, in 
the perſon of his legate, or the biſhop of the dio- 
ceſe in the exerciſe of his ſpiritual power over the 
inferior clergy. The mother church of Brading 
ſil retains a ſovereignty over two of theſe pariſhes, 
which are, Shanklin and Yaverland ; who are com- 
pelled to bury their dead at Brading, and to pay 
to its miniſter ten ſhillings yearly by way of hom- 
age, beſides an obligation to attend on Eaſter 
Sunday, if demanded, and to read the firſt and 
ſecond leſſons of the day. It is farther incumbent 
on the pariſh of Shanklin, that they are alſo to 
take their own miniſter to the burial of their dead. 
Theſe reſtrictions and injunctions were certainly 
deſigned to preſerve the remembrance of their ſub- 
ordination ; and, though leſs regarded in the 
preſent times than heretofore, muſt be acknow- 
ledged as great inconveniences, eſpecially in the 
harſh and unpleaſant ſeverities of winter. 

Tus church of Brading is of very great antiqui- 
ty, of which evident marks are ſtill extant. It 
. | appears 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 461 


appears to have been built as early as the year 704, 
by Wilfrid, then biſhop of Chicheſter, or rather of 
Selſea, who was very ſucceſsful in preaching the 
goſpel to the inhabitants of the iſland, at that time 
involved in pagan darkneſs. On the very ſpot 


where this church was built, it is ſaid that he ba- 


tized nearly the whole of them, conſiſting of about 
twelve hundred families. 

Ir is built on a rock of white ſand ſtone, which 
appears at the depth of a few feet from the ſurface. 
We cannot boaſt much of the beauty or proportion 
of its external appearance, having a very long and 
flat roof; at its weſt end there is a ſquare tower, 
in which are four bells, a ſpire of more modern 
date than the other parts of the building having 
been erected on it, that has a very pleaſing effect 
on a diſtant view. It is a gothic ſtructure of three 
aiſles; and, though it appears low on the outſide, 
has a ſufficient height within, particularly the mid- 
dle aifle which is very lofty. | 

Or its monuments, we may mention two very 
ancient ones in the north aiſle, one of them being 
for John Bowles and Ann his wife, having ſuitable 
inſcriptions in old Engliſh characters, agreeable 
to thoſe times, and containing addrefies to Jeſu to 
ſave their ſouls. 

Wirulx the altar rails are depoſited, on the 
right hand the remains of th e Rev. Mr. Palmer 
formerly vicar of the pariſh, covered with a hand- 
ſome blue marble ſtone, and a ſuitable inſcription 
to his memory. On the left hand is a ſtone very 
A lately 


462 HISTORY or Tur 


lately laid down to the memory of the Rev. Mr. 
Waterworth, the late vicar, who died in 1790. In 
the centre is an engraved ſtone to the memory of 
a perſon of conſiderable rank when living, having 
the following inſcription (ſo far as we could de- 
| cypher it) round the margin, according to the 
faſhion of thoſe times. Hic jacet nobilis vir Jo- 
hannes cherolluy armiger dum vivebat 
connſtabularius caſtri de Porceſter qui obiit anno 
dni milleno. quadringen"®, quadrage®. primo die 
ultima mens. Octobris animacuus requieſcat in 
pace amen.” —— Though we cannot aſcertain the 
preciſe letters in ſome places, or the name, which 
is concealed by the altar rails, we have enough to 
Warrant our giving in ſubſtance this tranſlation of 
it. Here lies the honourable John Eſquire, 
who when li ding was conſtable of Portchefler caſtle, 
and died in the year one thouſand four hundred and 
forty-one, on the laft day October, whoſe foul may 
it reſt in peace. Amen.—lt has formerly been highly 
ornamented with the figures of the twelve apoſtles, 
ſurrounding that of his own, inlaid in armour ; 
but the braſſes, we prefume, were taken away in 
the times of the civil commotions of the laſt cen- 
tury, as the ſculpture of their effigies only remains. 
THER: is a ſmall chapel at the eaſtern extremity 
of the ſouth aiſle, and ſeparated from the chancel 
by a ſcreen of carved work, inlaid with boards, 
and by t] the monuments appears to have beenforſome 
time appropriated for the interment of the Oglan- 
der family. The figures of Sir William Oglander, 
father 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 463 


father of the celebrated Sir John Oglander, and of 
the ſaid Sir John, are each extended on their re- 
ſpective tombs at full length, in complete armour, 
and attract particular notice; and though there 
are ſeveral other monuments, their inſcriptions 
are moſtly defaced. 

Or the population of the pariſh ſome eſtimate 
may be formed from the average eſtimates of bap- 
tiſms, marriages, and burials. Though the re- 
giſter commences in 1547, it does not appear to 
have been regularly. kept till 1563, in which year 
were ſeventy burials; but the average of ſeven 
years from 1563 to 1569, amounts to thirty-one 
baptiſms, eleven marriages, and forty-ſeven burials. 
The modern average of ſeven years from 1787 to 
1794, has forty-ſix baptiſms, ten marriages, and 
twenty-four burials. But the pariſhes of Yaverland 
and Shanklin bury their dead here, as we ſhall ſee 
under thoſe ſections, and increaſe the burials of 
Brading. We have been favoured with a ſucceſſion 
of the incumbents for near two hundred years paſt, 
of which we hope hereafter to take notice. 

We muſt not omit to take notice in particular 
of Sir John Oglander, who was lieutenant gover- 
nor of the iſland, in the reign of Charles the Firſt, 
under lord viſcount Conway, and alſo lieutenant 
governor of Portſmouth, under the earl of Pem- 
broke. But he was deprived of theſe henours by 
Cromwell, and heavily fined for his attachment to 
the royal cauſe; and, after ſurviving all the trou- 


bles of thoſe times, and ſeeing a reſtoration of his 
Hha beloved 


464 HISTORY OF THE 


beloved monarchy, he died at the age of ſeventy, 
in the year 1665, leaving behind him a great num- 
ber of very curious MSS. them emory of which will 
probably outlive his wooden effigies, and perhaps 
the ſolid tomb itſelf, in the hearts of thoſe who 
can venerate antiquity, and retain a grateful re- 
membrance of departed merit. In particular, the 
hiſtorian has the moſt abundant obligations to re- 
ſpect his unwearied and indefatigable labours; and 
it were greatly to be deſired, that the preſent wor- 
thy repreſentative of his family would be pleaſed 
laudably to employ ſome active, aſſiduous, and in- 
telligent perſon, to arrange and methodize, and 
prepare for publication, ſuch papers as are calcu- 
lated to rectify the errors of hiſtory, and to give 
general information to the ſtudent, the antiquarian, 
and the lover of truth. En 

Hens is alſo another monument to the memory 
of his eldeſt ſon, George Oglander, Eſq. who fol- 
lowed the fortune of Charles the Second, and died 
at Caen, in Normandy. _ 

We have more than traditionary authority to 
believe, that the part of Brading church, called 
the minſter, had been a receptacle for the dead be- 
fore the converſion of the iſlanders to chriſtianity. 
It is not at all unſrequent to find bones of a gigan- 
tic ſize, unknown to modern ages, on digging 
lower than a cuſtomary depth. When the ground 
was opened for the vault of the late vicar, the 
bones of nine ſkeletons were found, of one or two 
of which the leg and thigh bones were of a length 

CE uncommon 


ISLE OF WIGHT, - 465 


uncommon in the preſent times; and it is remark- 
able, that one of them was incruſted with the rock 
and inviſible, till a part of the rock was removed 
to give a proper level to the bottom. But the 
bones, after the cruſt of the rock had been ſepa- 
rated from them, crumbled to duſt between the 
fingers on being expoſed to the air. 

ANOTHER inſtance of a ſimilar nature occurred a 
few years before, when a human ſkeleton of near 
ſeven feet in length, was diſcovered on making a 
vault in the church yard. It is obſervable, that 
theſe graves were paved at the bottom with ſtone, 
which, added to the conſideration of the length of 
the ſkeleton, gives reaſon to conclude, that it had 
been the grave of an ancient Saxon, and affords a 
proof that this ground was very early appropriated 
to this ſervice. Probably this conſideration, which, 
at the time of erecting the church, might be well 
known, had ſome weight in ſelecting. the moſt 
ſuitable ſituation for the eſtabliſhment of a chriſtian 
place of worſhip ; and this dormitory, by an ex 
Poſt fa#Jo tranſaction and occurrence, in its conſe- 
cration for the purpoſes of a chriſtian place of in- 
terment, and the church for a chriſtian aſſembly, 
was thereby rendered ſacred, and ſanctioned from 
the depredations of all invaders. 

Wr ſhall not trouble our readers with an account 
of the pretended grants from Ina, king of the weſt 
Saxons, to the church of Winton ; though it 1s 
related in Wharton's annals of that church, that, 
amongſt other things, he gave to it fifty hides of 

land 


466 HISTORY OF THE 


land in Brerding, in the iſle of Wight, together 
with the church, in 683. But Ina did not ſucceed 
to the kingdom till 688; and ſo many monkiſh 
forgeries have been detected of ſuch kinds of grants 
from the Saxon kings, that we ſhall not enlarge 
upon them. At this time, it is very probable, 
the church, notwithſtanding its great antiquity, 
was not built. 
Six John Oglander has wrote on the firſt leaf of 
the oldeſt regiſter book, that Wilfrid, biſhop of 
Chicheſter, erected it in 704. 

 Apovur the year 1254, the advowſon of this church 
was conteſted at law, in the thirty-ſeventh year of 
king Henry the Third. The abbot and convent 
of Wenlock, in Shropſhire, had obtained poſſeſſion 
of it, but were reſiſted by Walter Liſle and Maude 
his wife; the ifſue of this buſineſs was in favour 
of the convent. | 

Tarr appears a letter ſrom the prior of Wen- 
lock to the biſhop of Wincheſter, wherein it is 
ſtared, that the advowſon of the church of Brading 
had been claimed from them by Aymer de Valence, 
which induced them to reſign their right therein 
to the biſhop. It continued in poſſeſſion of the ſee 
of Wincheſter, being withheld from the ſaid 
Aymer, until the time of John de Pontiſſera; by 
whom, at the requeſt of king Edward the Firſt, it 
was-appropriated, about the year 1301, to the 
on Mk of Breamore, as ſome recompence of their 
great ſufferings and loſſes, ſuftained chiefly by the 
means of the lady Iſabella de Fortibus. Thus it is 

EZ | recited 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 467 


recited in the deed. We have already noticed the 
diſpute between the counteſs Iſabella and this 
priory in an early part of this work, 

Ax rx it came into their poſſeſſion, the prior 
obtained a licence from the biſhop, to let the rec- 
tory of Brading to farm, to the priory of St. Den- 
nis, near Southampton. But this condition was 
expreſsly annexed, hat the alms to be given to the 
poor ſhould in no wiſe be diminiſhed. It does not 
appear how the convent of Wenlock firſt obtained 
poſſeſſion of this church, but the biſhop ſeems to 
have conſidered their claims as juſt, and, by virtue 
of that, to retain 1t in his own poſſeſhon after it 
had been formally reſigned. At the diſſolution of 
religious houſes it was conſequently ſeized by the 
crown, and granted to Henry Courtney, marquis of 
Exeter; and we find him, as the ſucceſſor of the 
late prior, preſenting to this church. But his at- 
tainder once more brought it into the hands of the 
crown, which with other poſſeſſions, was conveyed 
to Trinity college in Cambridge, where it has ever 
ſince remained. The church is dedicated to the 
Virgin Mary. The great tithes were alſo ſold off, 
and are now the property of Sir John Carter, of 
Portſmouth, who pays a fee farm rent of ten ſhil- 
lings to the crown, in the perſon of the governor. __ 

In the return made by the dean of the iſſe of 
Wight, to biſhop Woodlock, in 1305, it is recited 
that the prior and convent of Brymore, had the 
church of Brerding appropriated to them; that 
the abbot and convent of Lyra had all the great 

and 


468 | HISTORY OF THE 


and ſmall tithes of the ancient demeſnes of Henry 
de Oglander, in Nunwell, and of the demeſne of 
Sir Robert Glamorgan, of Woolverton; and that 
the abbot and convent of Quarr, took in the ſame 
pariſh all the great and ſmall tithes in the demeſne 
of John de Weſton, in Middleton. The ſame re- 
cord al ſo takes notice of the chapels of Woolverton 
and Alfredſton, without any mention of endow- 
ment; and of the chapel of Whitfield, as endowed 
with all the great tithes of Whitfield. It had alſo 
2 chantry, which probably occaſioned its being 
ſeized into the king's hands. 

Tae commiſſioners for ſelling the plate, &c. 
of the churches in the time of Edward the Sixth, 


made the following return for 
BRARDYNGE. | 
Harry Stowers BY ſolde in ann. 1549 one croſſe 5 C. In 2 


bownd and ap- a Senſor a Shipe a Paxe and two (xxxviij. xxxviij 
poin ed for the Crewats of Silver for 11}s. &111jd, 


Anſwer Itm. one littel Bell for Iii. v. iiijd. 


Or the town of Brading, it is neceſſary to ob- 
ſerve that it is ſituated at the eaſt end of the iſland, 
at the diſtance nearly of eight miles from the town 
of Newport. The ſea flows to the quay on the ſea- 
wall at the neareſt part of the haven, about a quar- 
ter of a mile diſtant, to which veſſels of thirty or 
forty tons burden approach to receive or deliver 
their cargoes. On this quay are ſuitable ſtorchouſes 
for corn or merchandize, and a conſtant depoſit 
of coals for ſale. 

Pars town which has only one long ſtreet, of 
irregular buildings, and about five hundred inha- 

bitants, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 469 


bitants, has a market for corn on Mondays, and a 
good ſupply of that article by ſamples; and great 
quantities are ſhipped off here for the various mills 
of the iſland, or ſent coaſtways on commiſſion. 
From theſe mills vaſt quantities of flour are carried 
to the weſtern coaſts, or to the iſlands of Jerſey, 
Guernſey, and Alderney. 

Tur original grant for the market of this town, 
was, that it ſhould be held on Wedneſdays, with 
two fairs annually on the feaſt of St. Philip and 
St. James, the day before and after, with the eve 
and day of St. Matthew. Theſe are now kept on 
the 12th of May and 2d of October. They have 
alſo a power to hold a court of pie powder, for do- 
ing juſtice to buyers and ſellers on the ſpot. 

Wr find from the ancient record, called domeſ- 
day book, that William Fitz Azor, held lands in 
Berardinz (Brading) of the king, which were then 
and in the time of Edward the Confeſſor aſſeſſed 
for three parts of a yard land. In the time of Iſa- 
bella de Fortibus, John Kene held half a fee of 
the lords of Yaverland, as parcel of her poſſeſſions; 
and by a roll of the 13th of Edward the Third, 
the church (meaning the impropriation) of Brad- 
ing was to furniſh two men at arms for defence of 
the iiland, and the vicarage one bowman. 

From reſpectable ms. authority we are informed 
that king Charles the Second landed here in his 
way to Sandown fort in 1665; and we ſhall ſee 
under Niton an authority no leſs authentic, that 


he landed in that pariſh in 1675. Ho to recon- 
cile 


470 | HISTORY OF THE 


cile theſe accounts, or whether his majeſty was in 
the iſland at both theſe periods, we leave to our 
readers, as we are not in poſſeſſion of any annals, 
by which we can come to a poſitive concluſion. 
IT is a corporation town, though it ſends no 
members to parliament, and enjoys ſome privileges 
which only belong to ſuch a town ; but there are 
no veſtiges of any record or records, among thoſe 
which are ſtill preſerved in the town hall, to diſ- 
cover the date of their firſt charter. A copy of that 
of 1548, the firſt year of Edward the Sixth, is in our 
poſſeſſion, with their ſeal, but this cannot poſſibly 
be the original one, but only an enlargement- of 
former privileges; becauſe it is addreſſed to the 
bailiffs then being, without any nomination or 
appointment of ſuch officers. A ſenior and ju- 
nior bailiff, with thirteen jurats, aſſiſted by a re- 
corder, form the corporation ; the laſt of which 
is perpetual or during lite, but the two firſt are 
choſen annually. Their common ſeal, which is, 
Argent, a roſe gules barbed and ſeeded proper, is 
encircled with the words, * King's towne of 
« Braydynge; and they pay an annual fine or 
fee farm rent of 21. 13s. 4d. or four marks into 
his majeſty's court of exchequer, which is called 
the fee farm of the town of Brading. This has 
been noticed already * in other places, with many 
other fines, amounting to a very conſiderable ſum. 
The corporation alſo lay an annual aſſet on ſhops 
and trades by ancient cuſtom, ſuppoſed to have 


See chap. 8. p. 179. and chap. 13. p. 397. 
been 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 471 


been granted to them by charter ; and the day of 
collection is conſtantly devoted to mirth and feſti- 
vity. 

Havine mentioned Brading as a borough, though 
it does not at preſent enjoy the privilege of ſend- 
ing members to parliament, there cannot be a 
doubt that it was once enjoyed by this town. — 
There is a petition extant, ſigned by the inhabi- 
tants of this ancient borough, praying the houſe 
of commons to relieve them from ſending mem- 
bers, on account of their inability to ſupport them. 
We have diſcuſſed this ſubje& in the eleventh 
chapter of the hiſtory of the boroughs, p. 292, &c. 
It is ſaid that Brading allowed © four pence” a day 
to each of its repreſantatives, which was a heavy 
expence in thoſe times; as muſt immediately be 
maniteſt, if we maturely reflect on the very low 
value of lands, the ſtate of trade, and eſpecially 
the reſpective valuation of money. In additon to 
what has been ſaid in the chapter juſt referred to, 
we may note, that it was not unuſual for the ſheriff 
of a county in thoſe early times, to make a return 
on the back of the ſummons ſent him, for perſons 
to ſerve in parliament, to the following purport, 
viz,—Here is no citizen or burgeſs of , 
able to attend this parliament ; they are neither 
uſed, nor ought to be required to come, on account 
of their poverty,” 

Ir has been obſerved, on the authorita of Sir 
John Oglander, that this town contained many 
good livers in qucen Elizabeth's. time, which 

could 


472 HISTORY OF TH? 


could afford to ſpend 4ol. a year each. At thar 
time 40l. a year was accounted genteel living; it 
was perhaps equal to 200l. a year at preſent. In 
the year 1626, he has remarked in the oldeſt re- 
giſter book of the pariſh, that from March 1547 to 
1626, two thouſand two hundred and twenty-two 
perſons had been buried at Brading, being about 
twenty-eight in each year, amongſt whom were 
two knights and their wives, with divers eſquires 
and gentlemen and knights, children. He has alſo 
obſerved that in 1620, three knights lived in the 
verge of the pariſh of Brading, viz. Sir John Og- 
lander, in Brading ; Sir John Richards, in Yaver- 
land ;- and Sir Edward Dennis, in Shanklin. 

A currovus entry alſo occurs in the regiſter of 
burials, in November 1677, of Jowler alias John 
Knight of Morton, of whom, among other things, 
it is related, that © he liv'd like a miſerable wretch 
on the public charity, and pinch'd both back and 
belly to fill the purſe; and at laſt voluntarily ſa- 
crificed himſelf, and even died to fave charges.” 

Taz town hall of Brading is a {mall ſtructure, 
with a market houſe under it, and is now applied 
to the very uſeful purpoſe of a ſchool; in this the 
greater part of the children both of the town and 
neighbourhood are inſtructed in reading, writing, 
and arithmetic, making a very conſiderable num- 
ber of both ſexcs. 

Brerore we proceed to deſcribe the manors and 
other particulars of the more diſtant parts of this 


pariſh, we may turn our attention to the ſpacious 
haven, 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 473 


haven, which lays below the town, and extends to 
the ſea. It is an extenſive tract of marſhy ground, 
containing betwixt eight and nine hundred acres, 
which is overflowed by the ſea at every tide; but 
the bar which is ſituated near the mouth of the 
haven, prevents the entrance of ſhips of any con- 
{iderable burden, nor can ſmall veſſels enter it, 
but at high water, after a ſtrong eaſterly wind. 

SEVERAL attempts have indeed been made to re- 
cover effectually the land of this haven from the 
ſea. Sir John Oglander has preſerved the accounts 
of theſe undertakings. Sir William Ruſſell, who 
was warden of the iſle of Wight in the reign of 
Edward the Firſt, and lord of Yaverland, took in a 
part of it at the time when Yar bridge was erected; 
and Mr. George Oglander and Mr. German Rich- 
ards walled in another parcel from the ſea, in 1562, 
by which the north marſh and ſome adjoining 
lands were gained. Mr. Edward Richards made 
a third acquiſition of Mill marſh, and ſome other 
meadows between the ſluice and the bridge, about 
thirty-two years after ; which was the laſt ſucceſs- | 
ful attempt of this nature. 

Bur a more extenſive attempt was made by Sir 
Bevis Thelwall in the reign of James the Firſt, 
which miſcarried after a loſs of about ſeven thou- 
ſand pounds. Yet there ſeems to have been a de- 
ſign of renewing the attempt about the year 1699; 
for in that year an eſtimate was made of the ex- 
pences which were deemed neceſſary to recover it, 
including a profit or recompence to any undertaker 
| No. 11. 7 "if 


474 HISTORY OF THE 


of it of one thouſand pounds, amounting to four 
thouſand one hundred and ſeventy pounds. 
Nx of thoſe extraordinary incidents, from which 
the greateſt advantages have frequently reſulted to 
individuals, occurred about eleven or twelve years 
ago in this haven. As a fiſhing veſſel, when the 
tide was in, was failing in her accuſtomed manner 
over theſe grounds, ſhe accidentally or defignedly, 
as a matter of ſpeculation and curioſity, let go her 
dreg ; on her motion being repelled, and a diſco- 
very of the cauſe, it was hauled in, with an enor- 
mous quantity of fine oyſters. The maſter purſued 
the fortune of ſuch a favourable circumſtance, and 
loaded his ſloop in a few hours, with which he re- 
turned to Cowes. 

IT was matter of aſtoniſhment, how he could poſ- 
ſibly have accumulated ſuch a valuable cargo, in 
ſo ſhort a time; but no declaration of the buſineſs 
was made. He waited a few days for another op- 
portunity, and again, unperceived, had the like 
ſucceſs. The fiſhermen became clamorous, and 
reſolved to watch his motions, night and day ; and 
he was now convinced of the impoſſibility of keep- 
ing the treaſure to himſelf. The whole fleet of 
oyſter ſmacks propoſed to give him each a tub of 
oyſters, of about three ſhillings value, on their 
return to port, on condition of his leading them 
to this new-found ſource of riches ; to which he 
prudently agreed, and each of them, after reaping 
their golden harveſt in a few hours, gladly fulfilled 
the terms they had propoſed. 


Ox 


ISLE or WIGHT. 475 


On the diſperſion of this news, every fiſhing town 
from the iſland to the Medway, diſpatched their 
craft to ſhare the ſpoil ; and an almoſt inconceive- 
able quantity was ſoon taken and conveyed to the 
Milton and other beds near the Thames, for the 
purpole of ſupplying the inhabitants of the metro- 
polis. It is ſcarcely credible, that from one to 
three or four hundred veſſels have been employed 
at once on theſe banks, in this lucrative employ- 
ment; which might have been rendered a perpe- 
tual ſource of opulence, and afforded an annual 
ſupport to many iuduſtrious perſons, had their 
preſervation been attended to as an object of pub- 
lic importance. But ſuch an exceſſive drain has, 
in a great meaſure, deſtroyed the breed of them. 

GREAT quantities of mullet, flounders, and other 
fiſh, are alſo caught, in their proper ſeaſons, in 
this harbour; but the latter are not remarkably 
firm, being too nearly connected with the ſea. 
Cockles are here of an excellent quality, and in 
prodigious numbers; and the gathering them fur- 
niſhes employment in ſummer to many women 
and children, on the ebb of the tide. A fine ſun- 
ſhiny day proves a means of great ſucceſs; for the 
ſmall air bubbles on the ſurſace are then eaſily 
ſeen, which diſcover their ſituation. A large ſup- 
ply of them is ſent to Portſmouth, where they are 
certain of a good market; and the iſle of Wight 
cockles are traditionally famed, being not only de- 
licious, but exceedingly nutritious. 


[ i 2 Iv 


1 
| 
| 
1} 


476 HISTORY or THE 


Ix the peninſula of Bembridge, frequently called 


the iſle of Bembridge, were anciently the three 


manors of Woolverton, after wrote Woolveton, La 
Wode, and Middleton or Milton ; the two former 
of which belonged to the family of Glamorgan, in 
Somerſetſhire. The lands of Sir Nicholas Gla- 
morgan, who died in the thirty-ſixth year of king 
Edward the Third, were divided amongſt his fix 

ſiſters. Of theſe one was married to Thomas 


Hacket, who purchaſed the remaining five ſhares 
of theſe manors from the other ſiſters. By a deed 


of the forty-ſixth of Edward the Third, he ſettled 
the manors of Woolverton, La Wode, Middleton, 
and La Clyve, in the pariſh of Woolverton, with 
the advowſons of the chapels of the three firſt ma- 
nors, in his family. The heireſs of the family of 
Hacket was married to Sir John Leigh, who had 
an only daughter; we afterwards find that they 


were poſſeſſed by one Gilbert, and in the reign of 


Henry the Eighth, by marriage with Sir James 
Worſley, theſe eſtates came into the poſſeſſion of 


the family of Worſley of Appuldurcombe, i in which 


they have ever ſince remained. 
Tux northern ſide of this peninſula is low land; 


where, at the point of the harbour, is a lodging 


houſe; but on the ſouth is a ſteep chalk cliff, ad- 


; joining to Yaverland, called Culver c!iff, from the 


Saxon word culp pe, which means a pigeon, with 
which ſpecies of birds thoſe cliffs abound. It was 
alſo famed formerly for a breed of hawks ; ſome 
of which had been ſtolen in the reign of queen 

Flizabeth, 


ISLE OF WIGHT, - 2 


Elizabeth, when an order was iſſued ſor making 
ſearch for them. The eaſternmoſt point of land 
beyond theſe cliffs is called the Foreland. 

Tur two lordſhips of the name of Nunwell, and 
uſually diſtinguiſhed by the names of eaſt and weſt 
Nunwell, have been in the poſſeſſion of the family 
of Oglander from the earlieſt accounts of land- 
holders of the iſland. At the inqueſt which was 
taken at Shide bridge to aſcertain thoſe perſons 
who from ancient uſage were obliged to attend the 
beacons, and to perform ſuch other military ſer= _ 
vices as the times required, of which we took ſome 
notice in the fourth chapter, we find Robert Og- 
lander as one of the jurors; which ſufficiently de- 
monſtrates that the long reſidence of the family in 
the iſland enabled him to ſpeak to the ſubject un- 
der conſideration at that diſtant period. The man- 
ſion is ſituated on a riſing aſcent, withfits front 
towards Brading haven and the ſea, ſheltered by a 
profuſion of wood behind, on the north ſide of 
Brading down, and the eaſt of Nunwell down; and, 
with the pleaſing advantage of a fine open lawn 
before it, commands the moſt beautiful and en- 
gaging proſpects. 
Tux manor of Nunwell was rated to i two 

bowmen for defence of the iſland, in the reign of 
Edward the Third. 

Ws find the manor of Alverſton, formerly writ- 
ten Alfredſtone, amongſt the extenſive poſſeſſions 
of William Eitz Stur, in the Domeſday-book roll, 
and aſſeſſed for one hide. It paſſed from this fa- 
113 mily 


478 | ' HISTORY OF THE 


mily into that of Liſle ; but in the reign of Edward 


the Firſt it was held by William de Aumarle of 


the county of Dorſet, as part of the poſſeſſions of 
the lady Matilda de Eſtur, who held it in fee of 
the counteſs of Albemarle, and called a knights” 
fee; beſides nine-fortieth parts of a fee for the lands 
of others, as by her liberties then claimed, and by 
the itinerant juſtices allowed in that year, doth 
fully appear. William le Martre alſo appears to 
have then held the fourth part of a fee here and at 
Honningford. It ſupplied two bowmen in the 
reign of Edward the Third, and the chapel, which 
is mentioned but not charged in cardinal Beaufort 8 
roll, ſent one bowman to defend the iſland. 
From thence by marriage it paſſed into the feveral 
families of Maltravers, Stafford, and Strangeways; 
from whom it was purchaſed by Richard Broad, 
Eſq. and afterwards by lord Holmes, and is now 
poſſeſſed by the preſent Leonard Troughear 
ng Eſq. | 

Tue foreſt of Bordwood, from the 8e of that 
name in this pariſh, is contiguous to the poor and 
mean cottage in the adjoining pariſh, which ſtill 
retains the name of Queen's. bower. Of this we 
made ſome mention in a former chapter * of the 
franchiſes of the governors. There are two of the 
name; it occurs in Domeſday, as of the poſſeſſions 
given to William Fitz Azor, who then held Bourd- 
eu rde (Bordwood), Brandeflone, and Lileſland. 


* See chap. 13. P- 415 416. | 5 


Theſe 


ISI OF WIGHT. 479 


Theſe had been held of king Edward by two free- 
men in fee, and were then and now aſſeſſed at a 
hide and a yardland. His grandſon had a yardland, 
and Peurel half a hide and a yardland. It 
paid a fee farm rent to the crown of ſixty- ſix ſhil- 
lings and eight pence in the time of Henry the 
Seventh, in 1507; a tenement in Bordwood, par- 
cel of property in the hands of the crown, was let 
for five ſhillings in 1565; and in 1780, Robert 
Worſley, Eſq. paid three pounds eight ſhillings 
and four pence to the crown annually for its tenths. 
Or the name of Langard (in Domeſday, Lan- 
gareſton, or Levegareſtun), we have two; but whe- 
ther either or both of them are manors we are not 
informed. From this circumſtance, however, it is 
probable that one of them at leaſt has a manor. It 
is thus deſcribed. Two freemen held Levegareſtun 
of king Edward in fee, what was aſſeſſed at half a 
hide, now at one yardland. In the reign of Ed- 
ward the Firſt, it was held by Robert Glamorgan, 
amongſt other poſſeſſions, equivalent to a knights? 
fee, of the counteſs of Albemarle, lady of the iſland, 
from whom it came into the family of Ruſſel, and 
afterwards into that of Hacket, who held it in the 
17th year of king Henry the Sixth. It was held in 
the laſt century by the family of Knight, who ſold. 
it to William Pike, Eſq. Mr. Bonham, the pre- 
ſent poſſeſſor, enjoys it by virtue of the will of his 
predeceſſor. 
We come now to ſpeak of the manor of Whit- 
field, to the north of Brading, from which place 
114 | | the 


480 HISTORY OF THE 


the proprietors took their ſurname. It is wrote 
Witesfel in Domeſday, in which we have an ac- 

count of two manors, that were rated together at 
four hides. Chetel held one of theſe in fee of king 
Edward, aſſeſſed for one hide. Godric had the 
other alſo in fee of him, then aſſeſſed at three hides, 
but now at one.—Both theſe were parcels of the 
lands of William Fitz Stur. Whether theſe were 
meant of the two Whitfields, contiguous to each 
other, of which Little Whitfield is within the pa- 
riſh of Newchurch, it muſt be impoſſible for us, 
without very authentic records, to determine. It 
was frequently wrote Witeville; and the earlieſt 
tranſaction that we have any account of, is con- 
tained in the atteſtation of Thomas a Becket, arch- 
biſhop of Canterbury, of the grant of Hugh de 
Witeville of this manor to the church of St. Mary 
of Quarr, in the iſle of Wight. He concludes the 
charter of confirmation with an anathema againſt 
thoſe who ſhould in any reſpect violate the grant, 
or any ways injure the monks in their poſſeſſion 
of it. Such an edict or threatning, however little 
it might be regarded in the preſent day, had com- 
. monly a very different effect in thoſe times of 
| darkneſs and obſcurity ; but there were not want- 
ing, even in thoſe ages, ſome diſpoſitions more 
enlightened than the reſt of mankind, who had 
ſpirit to diſpute the authenticity of ſuch convey- 
ances, and to reſiſt the operation of ſuch interdic- 
tions. Some of the heirs of this Hugh had judg- 
ment to diſcern, or ſhrewdneſs to ſuſpect, ſome 
| | improper 


n ö 5 , 29 x nt EL TO OTST 
: a. " — 3 — — * 22 — —äÄẽ 2 * 
„ © » , 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 481 


improper management in this buſineſs ; it is cer- 
tain alſo, that the monks were deprived of it, 
though it did not revert to the heirs of the original 
owners, but was for ſome time afterwards held by 
the crown. It was then given by Edward the 
Firſt, together with Freſhwater and other lands, 
to his daughter Mary, who was a nun at Ambreſ- 
bury, for her maintenance in the convent there ; 
which ſaid manors of Whytefie!d and Freſhwater, 
with their appurtenances, were then deemed of 
the annual value of ſeventy pounds thirteen ſhil= 
lings and four pence. At the ſame time many 
other manors elſewhere were comprehended in this 
grant for her life, and during her continuance in 
the kingdom, for the ſupport of her table. This 
was alſo confirmed to her by a deed of king Ed- 
ward the Second, her brother, with ſome exchanges, 
which we ſhall notice elſewhere in their proper 
places. . N 
StR William Oglander, Bart. the preſent poſſef- 
ſor, pays a fee farm rent of twenty pounds, three 
ſhillings and eight pence, to the crown for the 
manor and woods of Whitfield ; which manor, af- 
ter the deceaſe of Mary, daughter of Edward the +» 
Firſt, paſſed into the family of Tracey, then de 
Hardington, who granted the reverſion of it, on 
account of being made conſtable of the iſland for 
life, to King Edward the Third, from whom pro- 
bably the anceſtors of the preſent Sir William ob- 
tained it. In the twenty third year of king Hen- 
ry the Seventh, the fee farm rent for this manor 
was 


_ . 


—— — 


o . IP 41-8 3 2 
—_ a s 
, - _ N 2 2 — 3 — — - < 2 
— * & r N « . — : ö 1 * LY = 


— =» == — 
w ” a> —— — —— — — 6—— —ͤ— 
„ 
— wo > ? N 


$92" HISTORY OP THE 


was but fourteen pounds nine ſhillings and three 
pence. It is probable that the chapel of Whit- 
field was ſeized into the king's hands, on account 
of the chauntry which in the dean's return of 1305, 
is ſaid to have been endowed with the great tithes 
of Whitfield. 

To turn our attention to the peninſula of Bem- 
bridge, the Hermit's Hole, on the weſt end of 
Culver cliffs, commands our notice. It penetrates 
into the rock about twenty feet, at the diſtance of 
zbout thirty feet from the ſummit of the cliffs. 
The path which leads to it from the top 1s ſteep, 
narrow, and rugged; but it is impoſſible to return 
after you have once deſcended from the brink ' of 
the precipice, till you come to the cave below, as 
the path is too narrow, contracted, and irregular 
to permit a change of poſition for the feet. Moſt 
perſons ſatisfy themſelves with the terrific aſpect 
it preſents from the ſea ſhore below, on the eaſt of 
Sandown fort; and the idea of ſuch an adventure 
is enough .to diſturb the ſtrongeſt nerves, and 
create the moſt alarming ſenfations. | 

BLackpax, as a manor, to the weſt of Royal 


 * Heath occurs in Domeſday, which was held by 


William Fitz Stur, but contained only ten acres. 
WuetTHeR the Woolverton mentioned in Domeſ- 
day-book, and there called Uſwarcumbe, was that 
which formerly exiſted in the peninſula of Bem- 
bridge in this pariſh, or that which we meet with 
in the pariſh of St. Lawrence, we are unable to 
ſay ; it ſhall therefore ſuffice to add, that William 
| Fitz 


”_ a * 4 


0 EY * * ' z 
! ' : 
— — — ———— ——————————————— —— — » ——— 223«99k 2 —ͤ— H! : So 4 —— — . — n 


ISLE OF WIGHT, | 483 


Fitz Stur held a manor of that name of the king, 
which was held in abeyance of king Edward, at 
one hide, on condition of defending itſelf, as it 
was now rated. One man at arms was the ſtipu- 
{ated defence for this manor in guarding the iſland 
in Edward the Third's reign. 

Tur pretty villa of Royal Heath, which has 
been improved with all the characteriſtic neatneſs 
for which its owner has been at all times diſtin- 
guiſhed, muſt always command the ſtranger's at- 
tention, whether its ſituation or elegance be con- 
ſidered. It is frequently known by the name of 
Mr. Wilkes's cottage, in contradiſtinction to 
Steephill, which heretofore uſed, excluſively and 
emphatically, to bear that title. It is not large, 
and is ſomewhat low; but it has received vaſt im- 
provements from the preſent chamberlain of Lon- 
don, whoſe refined taſte and ſtrong judgment have 
been ſo ſignally manifeſted in various ſcenes of 
life, within the laſt thirty years. It ſtand on the 
very brink of the precipice, which in this place is 
not lofty, at the eaſtern extremity of the heath, 
from whence 1t takes its name. 

Con MAD , as it does, the whole extent of 
Sandown bay, from Chine head and Dunnoſe on 
the ſouth-weſt, to the Culver cliffs on the eaſt, 
the middle part of which is of moderate height, 
and the termination each way conſiſting of very 
elevated downs, the ſituation has much to recom- 
mend it. The cliff, on the ſummit of which the 


houſe is erected, is gradually ſloped down to the 
beach, 


” 
„ Seo morn 0 ——˖—— 4 x — fn - 
a — * + To = — » : yo 1 
\ l l . : EV D _ — Z 4 ee 
- ——— EE i Eran — ob a 4 _ _ — ac 
- "= — =y = _ INE TR TOS - 2 
——— * £ g 4 — — 


: 
| 
4 
: 4 


484 HISTORY OF THE 


beach, and laid out in gardens and ornamental 
ſhrubberies of the dwarf kinds. Conſidering the 
extreme dryneſs of the ſeaſon, they appeared to be 
in a thriving condition ; and the more lofty ſpe- 
cies of trees and ſhrubs, which ſhelter the houſe 
on the north and the weſt, did not afford any 
grounds to conclude that the proprietor's object 
has been fruſtrated. | ; 

As a ſummer retirement, with which the wor- 
thy chamberlain ſeems to be much delighted, it 
has every convenience and accommodat ion, which 
ſuch a ſpot can boaſt of; and for that purpoſe, 
the houſe has been fitted up with much ſimplicity, 
but with every regard and attention to elegance. 
The marquee on the weſt of the houſe is deſigned 
to be occaſionally uſed as a ſummer houſe; on the 
ſides of which are ſuſpended ſome very curious 
antique engravings. An aviary, conſiſting of a 
great collection of various ſpecies of birds, imme- 
diately behind the houſe, and ſurrounded with the 
more lofty ſpecies of trees juſt mentioned, is alſo 
a ſubject of much curioſity, and highly deſerving 
of attention. This pleaſant ſpot is but about 
three furlongs to the weſt of Sandown or Sandham 
fort; of which, ſince we are ſo near, 

Berors we quit this pariſh, which has detained 
us ſo long, we ſhall endeavour to correct our for- 
mer account, and to add to the particulars record- 
ed already“ in our deſcription of that fortreſs, It 


See Chap. 5, p. 114-1 16, 


 18LP or WIGHT. Ry * 
is with the greater confidence that we are enabled ' 
to do this, from the very handſome manner in 
which the preſent governor has been pleaſed to 
accord with our wiſhes to communicate the moſt 
authentic information. What we have already 
obſerved, muſt therefore be ſuppoſed to relate ge- 
nerally to the ſtate of the eſtabliſhment, before it 
was deemed expedient to appoint its governor and 
captain under a ſeparate commiſſion, in the reign 
of king William the Third, in 1692. 

IT had been found in the time of king Charles 
the Firſt, that the ſea had made conſiderable inroad 
on the lands adjoining to this caſtle, ſince the time 
of its erection by king Henry the Eighth; ſo that 
the old caſtle was taken down and the preſent fort 
erected out of the materials. The original build- 
ing was on a much larger ſcale than the preſent, 
and contained a chapel; the fituation of which was 
to the ſouth-weſt of the new fort, and nearer to 
the ſcite of Mr. Wilkes's cottage at Royal Heath, 
but at the diſtance of a thouſand feet into the ſea. 
The remains of its foundations are ſometimes to 
be ſeen, when the tide is out, eſpecially after a 
high ſpring flood. Seventy acres of land origi- 
nally belonged to the governors, for their accom- 
modation, which was alſo a very conſiderable 
emolument in addition to their pay; but theſe are 
altogether ſwallowed up by the ſea, and nothing 
remains to the preſent governor but the ſtipend 
allowed as governor of the garriſon. 


Vir 


486 HISTORY OF THE 


Wuzx this fort was erected, no chapel was erect- 
ed in lieu of the old one. The firſt captain ap- 
pointed to it was Richard Weſton, earl of Portland, 
father of Jerom, earl of Portland, whoſe lady be- 
haved ſo heroically at Cariſbrooke caſtle. He was 
alſo captain of the ifland, in 1632, and died two 
years after. His lordſhip's arms are carved in oak 
in a moſt maſterly manner, and are in high pre- 
ſervation, in the pannels over the chimney piece 
in the drawing room; the two ſupporters are 
greyhounds, with the motto of the garter, and 
every implement of war which was in uſe in thoſe 
times. he | 

Tur preſent eſtabliſhment of this fort conſiſts of 
the governor and captain, a maſter gunner, three 
gunners from the invalid battalion of the royal re- 
giment of artillery, and twelve warders, whoſe duty 
is tobe aſſiſting to the gunners and to keep watch. 
Ix the month of January, 1664, Arthur Legg, 
at that time mayor of Newport, was confined in 
this fort by the captain, Thomas, lord Culpeper, 
for reflecting on the king. This fort was viſited 
by his Majeſty on Monday the 31ſt of July, 1665, 
after he had landed at Brading, as we have already 
mentioned, and appears from an entry in the pa- 
riſh regiſter. In the firſt year of king James the 
Second, in 1685, the garriſons of the iſland were 
accommodated with an allowance for fire and can- 
dle; and Sandown fort was allowed a ſhilling 2 

day for one guard. = 


ArrER 


ISLE OP WIGHT. | 487 


Arrzx the death of Sir Robert Holmes, gover- 
nor and captain of all the forts of the iſland, king 
William appointed in 1692 John Redſtone, Eſq. 
under a ſeparate commiſſion, excluſive of the go- 
vernors of the iſland, to be governor of this fort, 
Thomas Marſhall, Edward Trattle, Richard Ridge, 
and John Leigh, Eſquires, the Honourable Tho- 
mas O'Hara, Henry Wogan, William Stewart, 
Thomas Northey, and the preſent Thomas Field, 
 Eſquires, have progreſſively ſucceeded ſince that 
period. The preſent governor is inveſted by his 
commiſſion with all neceſſary powers and authori- 
ties in as full and ample a manner as any perſon 
heretofore held and enjoyed the ſame ; and is the 
tenth governor of this fort, under diſtinct commiſ- 
ſions, in the ſpace of about one hundred years. 

Ws: ſhall here alſo preſent to our readers, from 
the ſame reſpectable ſource of information, the 
original eſtabliſhment of Sandham or Sandown fort, 
by king Henry the Eighth. 

A captain at 48. per day. A porter at 8d. per day. 

A lieutenant at 28. A maſter gunner at 8d. 

13 ſoldiers at 6d. each. 7 gunners 6d. each. 

Bur the number of ſoldiers was augmented to 
thirty under the eſtabliſhment of king Charles the 
Firſt, when the preſent fort was erected ; and this 
eſtabliſhment continued for ſome time afterwards. 
They are now reduced to the number of twelve, 
and are ſtyled warders of the fort. It is near a 
century ſince there has been any licutenant ap- 


pointed. 
Ix 


488 uisroky or THE 


Ix cloſing this account, it may be proper to re- 
mark, that the title of captain, which was anci- 
ently given to the commanders of iſlands, caſtles, 
and forts, was the higheſt title of rank in the ar- 
my; and it is ſtill retained in the commiſſions 
of the ancient governments, ſuch as Jerſey, 
Guernſey, &c. ſome of which are ſtyled captain, 
keeper, and governor, others only captain and go- 
vernor, or governor and captain. The modern 
governments are ſtyled governor only. 

Sax DOwN or Sandham has a manor, called in 
Domeſday Sande, and was then held by the king. 
In the time of Edward the Confeſſor it had been 
aſſeſſed at two hides, but then at half a hide and 

half a yardland. In the time of Edward the Firſt | 
the heirs of Richard Mallet held one-fourth of a 
fee at Sandham of Robert Glamorgan, who held it 
of the lady Iſabella in caprte. | 


— 
— 


Scr. II. Of the PARISH of YAVERLAND. 


Tais pariſh, as we have noted, is contiguous to 
Sandown fort on the eaſt, and extends north to 
Yarbridge, which is a little on the right, within 
half a mile after we leave the town of Brading in 
our way to the fort. Except where it is bounded 
by the ſea, it is ſurrounded by its ancient pariſh, 
and contains at preſent only one farm and a few 
tenements, between the fort and Bembridge 
down. | | 


WE. 


ISLE OF WIGHT: 489 


WI find two manors of this name in Domeſday ; 
one of which was held in demeſne of the king, and 


called; Everelant, the.other of William Fitz Azor 


in fee, there wrote Evreland, rated. at three hides 
but at that time for one. 

Ir is generally ſuppoſed, that the chan was 
built and endowed by one of the Ruſſel family. 
By marriage with Eleanor, the daughter and heir- 
eſs of Sir Thomas de Auld, or Hawle (perhaps 
now called Hollis), in the reign of Edward the 
| Firſt, William Ruſſel became the lord of Yaverland 

and ſeveral other manors, amounting in the whole 
to ſix knight's fees and two parts of a fee, which 
were held in capite of the counteſs of Albemarle ; 
the manors here and at South Wath in the pariſh 
of St. Lawrence were held in demeſne. Stephen 
Hatfield, by marriage with the daughter and heir 
of Sir Maurice Ruſſel held the ſame poſſeſſions in 
the 17th year of king Henry the Sixth. It after- 


wards paſſed into the hands of one Keyner. Theſe | 


Mates devolved again to daughters, ſo that in the 
firſt year of queen Mary, German Richards, Eſq. 
purchaſed it, whom we have mentioned already as 
having gained a part of Brading | haven. The laſt 
deſcendant of this family deviſed it with the pa- 
tronage of the church, to the Rev. Mr. Wright, and 
to his heirs; but in default of theſe, it was to go, 
with divers other lands, to Exeter college, Ox- 
ford. | 
Tax value of the living was ſo ſmall in cardi- 
nal Beaufort's rate, that it is there called a chapel, 
% STEEL 7 and 


+, 

15 
Is 
' FT 


| 


" * — 
p ' 
—_— 5 WY _ . b * 
E of" - * p -> 26 _ = d . 
-— £ i. A _ * 
* — = Vu 2 _ — — — * — 
7 


oo. — 


2 — 


490 HISTORY or THE * 


and exempted from taxation on account of its ina. 
bility ; in the time of king Henry the Eighth it 
appears to have betn rated at fix pounds ſix ſhil- 
lings and ten pence halfpenny. The number of 
inhabitants in the pariſh are fomewhat leſs than a 
hundred. | 
© In the reign of king Edward the Third, we 
find the church of Yaverland was obliged to fur- 
niſh, one bowman for the defence of the iſland; 
but the lords of Yaverland were to find two arm- 
6d men and two bowmen. 
Tur inhabitants of this parifh bury at Brading, 
to Which pariſh they originally belonged, and are 
obliged to bring their own minifter for the pur- 
poſe; ; they alſo pay ten ſhillings yearly to Brading 
as an acknowledgment of ſubjection and m—_—_— 
h ance. 


; CS 1 ; 
F — — — @- 


Ster. III. Of the PARISH of SHANKLIN. 


Tuts pariſh, which has been alſo taken from 
Brading, is bounded by the ſouthern extremity of 
that pariſh in its prefent ſtate; both this and its 
weftern limit have already been deferibed under 
Brading, and it has the ſea on the eaſt, and the 
pariſh of Bonchurch on the ſouth, from which it 
is Tepatated, about half a mile to the | ſouth of 
Shanklin church, by a line nearly eaſt and weſt, 
It is properly a chapel, annexed to the rectory of 


Bonchurch, thongh called a vicarage, but is not 
rated 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 491 


rated in the king's books. In all parochial aſſeſſ- 


ments and taxes, it is conſidered as a diſtin& pa- 


riſh; though, as we have noted, the inhabitants 


ſill continue t6 bury their dead at Brading, whi- 


ther they are to be attended by their miniſter. 
The chapel-alſo pays an acknowledgment to the 
mother church of ten ſhillings a year. 

Tuts chapel was originally built by the family 
10 Liſle at a very early period, and endowed with 
fifty acres of land, and the tithes of many of the 
tenants of the manor. It has paſſed with the ma- 


nor, together with Bonchurch and ſome other 


lands, through the families of Dennis, Broad, Al- 
corn, and Popham, and is now held in abeyance 
between Mrs. Popham and colonel Hill, who pay 
a fee farm rent of twenty ſhillings to the crown. 
At the time of Domeſday (therein called Senchiz), 


it was held by Gozelin Fitz Azor. It had been 


held of Edward the Confeſſor by ſix freemen in 


fee, and was then aſſeſſed for three hides and a 
half, but now for five yardlands and a half. We | 
meet with a chapel in the rate of cardinal Beau- 


fort, by the name of Saint John of Sentling, which 
was probably meant of this chapel; it was then ex- 
empted from payment on account of its .infignifi- 
cance. Sir John de Lifle, in the eighth year of 


Edward the Third, held a third part of a knight's 


fee in Shentlyn, part of the poſſeſſions of William 
Ruſſel, lord,of Yaverland, which he held of the 
counteſs of Devon and Albemarle in capite. In 
the thirteenth year of the ſame reign we find from 


K k 2 8 3 
= 


* - 
— — > 7 —— Pe = 
1 n urn =: . 


* — — 


— — ———————r—rð* —— — * n 
N nd = * 1 — 5 —— — = — i 


— * «o — _—_—— 4 


492 HISTORY or THE 


an ancient record, that the church of Shentlyn 
furniſhed one bowman in defence of the iſland, 
The pariſh is ſuppoſed to contain about one hun- 
dred .inhabitants, inn 1 . all de- 
ſcriptions. | 

SHANKLIN chine is the moſt elbe object 
which this place affords, being a vaſt rent in the 
roek, which here forms the ſea cliffs, about half a 
mile below the village. A ſpring which riſes above 
this village, onthe ſouth=weſt, and runs in an oppoſite 
direction to the chine, is ſhaded by a continued 
plantation of aſhes and elms, without any order 
but that which nature ſeems to have pointed out; 
When it has paſſed through a ſmall artificial arch 
made of ſtone, it forms a caſcade; which indeed 
can only be ſeen to advantage after a conſiderable | 
fall of rain. 

"I this chine has been made a Aight of Ar 
means of which the inhabitants deſcend to the 
| beach, and thence return, with as much eaſe as 
_ poſſible. About half way down to the ſea, which 
is here very ſteep, ſtands a fiſherman's hut, that 
forms a contraſt to the ruggedneſs of the cliffs on 
each ſide of it; and from its various turns, which 
one while confine the eye to the very ſpot, and at 
another open à view of the ocean as far as the eye 
dan reach, the whole is truly pictureſque and 
grand. At the extreme limits, a grand caſcade 
terminates the whole, and the water, eſpecially 
when the brook is filled, ruſhes boldly down the 
precipice. wy 


Ir 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 493 


I has been obſerved, that the ſides of the chine 
are ſtrongly impregnated with iron, copperas (of 
which large quantities are ſhipped for the London 
market), and ſulphur; a chalybeate ſpring is ſitu- 
ated about a third of the way from its head, which 
throws upon the ſurface a very ſtrong ſcum, and 
depoſits in its channel a ſtrong ſediment of iron. 
We deſpair of doing juſtice to this ſurpriſing 
phenomenon of nature, without running the hazard- 
ous ſuſpicion of exaggeration, which in a hiſtory 
ought never to be indulged; and can only recom- 
mend a viſit to this ſpot to be convinced, eſpeci- 
ally after a haſty ſhower, that we have ſcarcely con- 
veycd the outline of the ſcene. | | 
Bor as this is the firſt place, in which we have 
had occaſion to mention the word Caine, and as 
we ſhall meet with it repeatedly as we proceed 
along the ſouthern coaſt, an attempt to-diſcover 
its etymology may not be unacceptable, and is in- 
deed in ſome meaſure neceſſary. 

Ix cannot be unknown that this term is pecu- 
liarly applied to the back bone of any animal, 
which forms the higheſt ridge of the body, eſpe- 
cially to hog's fleſh, and in ſome counties to the 
ſame parts of a bullock, The ſame term alſo is 
uſed in the manege. In the ſame ſenſe likewiſe 
the French word Echine is uſed, and the word Chin- 
freneau, though marked as a vulgar word in Boyer, 
is rendered, a great cut or ſlaſh. Hence it can 
be no unreaſonable ſuppoſition, that this word was 


long ago deemed to be particularly expreſſive of a 
K keg high 


494 5 | AISTORY OF THE | 


high ridge of land cleft abruptly down. All the 
parts along this coaſt, which are ſo called, ſtrictly 
correſpond with this deſcription. It may alfo ſig- 
nify the ſame as a chaſm, and both may perhaps 
be derived from the Greek chainoo or chainu, hiſ- 
co or dehiſco, to cleave aſunder, ſo as to form a 
chaſm or chine; for we are told that the Greek 
letter chi, which is always expreſſed by our Engliſh 
ch, is pronounced by the modern Greeks, as we 
pronounce the ſoft ſound of ch in cherub, charming. 
Whether it was ſo pronounced by the ancients, it 
is not for us to determine; but if it was, our pre- 
ſent rule of reading the Greek language is certainly 
erroneous, becauſe we always read it with the 
hard ſound. | 
We ſhould not perhaps do Juſtice to our i eat. 
if we did not preſent them with an extraordinary 
ſtory, which is circulated here; they will attach 
to it ſuch a degree of credit as they think proper. 
It is this. A gentleman, during a very heavy ſnow, 
Having miſſed his road, and in conſequence de- 
| ſcending the ſteep down of St. Boniface on horſe- 
back, was extremely agitated and affected from 
the danger of his ſituation; and accordingly vowed, 
if he ſhould reach the bottom in ſafety, to purchaſe 
the land, and preſent it to the church of Shanklin, 
as a laſting memento of the kindneſs: of Provi- 
dence. It needs only to be added, that a ſmal! 
parcel of land, containing about an acre, was 
given to the living in this ſituation, and, as ſup- 
poſed, in conſcquence of that vow. 


- SxeT. IV. 


ISLE OF WIGHT, _ 


Srer. IV.—Of the PARISH of BONCHURCH. 


Tux boundary of this parith, which was part of 
the ancient pariſh of Brading, as we have already 
noted, has becn pointed out on the yeſt in ſpeak- 
ing of that pariſh; the northern limit has alſo been 
deſcribed under Shanklin, and on the eaſt and 
ſouth it is bounded by the ſea. The coaſt here 
takes a more weſterly direction near the eaſtern 
point of the village ; and the whole pariſh is 
ſcarcely more than a mile in breadth, where it 
joins that of Shanklin, from caſt to weſt, and not 
a mile and a half from north to ſouth, where it is 
contiguous to that of Newchurch. This limit ex- 
tends from the road between Wroxall and Shank- 
lin, near the ſouthern extremity of Shanklin down, 
_ acroſs Boniface down, in a direction a little to the 
caſt of ſouth, as far as the ſea cliff, leaving Little 
Town on the weſt, and the village of Bonchurch or 
Boniface on the caſt. 

Wr find in Domeſday, that We or St. 
Boniface church, of which it is an abbreviation, 
was then conſidered as a manor, by the name of 
Bonecerce, and was part of the poſſeſſions of Wil- 
liam Fitz Azor, which were held in fee. It appears 
from the rolls of the landholders of the iſland to have 
been poſſeſſed afterwards by the family of Liſle, 
who were probably deſcendants of the original 
poſſeſſors. By marriage it came into the family 
of Dennis, was afterwards poſſeſſed by one Broad, 
and then by Alcorn, before it came by deſcent to 

K k 4 the 


496 HISTORY or THE 


the family of Popham. It is now * by col. 
Hill and Mrs. Popham. 
Tus cottage of St. Boniface is the ſummer re- 
ſidence of colonel Hill, and is a plain but neat 
brick building, and is ſurrounded with grounds, 
which are well laid out, though not very extenſive. 
It is a place ſufficiently retired to be deemed an 
hermitage, but poſſeſſes every luxuriance of vege- 
tation, which the ſheltering downs on the north, 
and the trees which are randomly placed on the 
ſouth, can afford to it. The village of St. Boni- 
face or Bonchurch is contiguous to the cottage, 
though the former ſtands a little out of the direct 
Toad. | 

Ir is not improbable from the Norman arch at 
the entrance, that this church was erected ſoon 
after the general ſurvey ; but we know little of it 
till the year 1404, in the roll of cardinal Beaufort, 
when we find it rated at one hundred ſhillings, no 
notice being taken of it in the return to biſhop 
Woodlock, in 1305, by the dean of the iſland. — 
We might obſerve indeed, that for the church 4 | 
St: Boniface, one bowman was charged in defence 
of the iſland in the thirteenth year of king Edward 
the Third, about the year 1340. The Rev. Mr. 
Hewſon is the incumbent both of this and Shank- 
lin; but it ſcarcely contains one hundred inhabi- 
tants. F 
Dunwosz and Luccomb chine are places on the 
coaſt which demand particular attention. The 


former i is the moſt ſoutherly, and is well known to 
| ſeamen, 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 497 


ſeamen, as a place which they anxiouſly endeavour 
to ſteer clear of, An entry is made in Domeſday 
of the land contiguous to it, of which an account 
will appear hereafter in the pariſh of Chale in the 
Weſt Medine. The latter is to the eaſt of Luccomb 
farm, Dunnoſe is to the ſouth of it. The chine 
forms an inlet between them, into which ſome 
ſmall ſprings empty themſelves, which paſs down 
a valley not far from the farm. The chine is called 
bowlhoop by the inhabitants, but for what reaſon 
we are unacquainted ; for it has far leſs of that ter- 
ror and awfulneſs, which many of thofe chaſms 
inſpire us with, than either that of Shanklin, which 
we have noticed, or ſome others that will fall un- 
der our conſideration hereafter. The deſcent to it 
is indeed very ſteep, and ſometimes impaſſable; 
but the ſhrubs and trees prevent the view of a water 
fall from the ſprings in the vale. A cottage at the 
top of it in a ſmall wood, is almoſt concealed from 
fight; the road to it lays acroſs the chine over a 

ſmall wooden bridge, where * water has a de- 

lightful effect. 


Wr find in Domeſday, that Luccomb was held 


of king Edward the Confeſſor in fee. It was aſſeſ- 
ſed at one hide, but now at two parts of a yard- 
land. That is the only record which has come to 
our hands, in which it is mentioned diſtinctly, and 
not incluſively in the lands of Shanklin and Bon- 
church. Dunnoſe is alſo mentioned as a manor 
in Domeſday, with Atherfield and Wallpan, under 
the latter of which it will appear hereafter in the 
pariſh of Chale. Sect. V. 


— 


* 
| . 
i . 
Tat 
* 
; 
ns - 
" 7 # 
# 1 
2 
45 
1 
. - 
1 
1 7 
N. { # 
Ss, 
i 1 
* 
11 1 
3 7 1 
1 
FEM 
A 
Th © N 
i 
I * 
. 
3 1 
„ * 
l 
4 
„ . + 
[1 
1 * 
* Re 
vo g 
8 
\ 15 
1 
4 5 
230 
4 [1 
4.5 7 
| q 
46 
8 
1 
+ 1 \ * 
48D 
d 9 
'1 
* 
: | 
* 
_ 


. 7 — 8 — * 
— . 1 - - 
_ " =: __ on 
_ — 2 — 


—— tm be ets 


— 


* . 
— 


498 HISTORY OF THE 


Ster. V. —Of the PARISH of Sr. HELEN's. 


Wr are reluctantly RO in this place to break 
that chain of communication, which we have ge. 
nerally determined to preſerve ; ſince it is our wiſh 
to comprehend in one view the ancient pariſh of 
Brading, the limits of which have been already 

hid down. By commencing our local narrative 
with this pariſh, that chain would indeed have been 
preſerved ; but in that caſe we ſhould have been 
compelled to deſcribe this pariſh, as a branch, - 
before we had given the hiſtory of its primitive 
pariſh, as the ſtem or trunk from which it has 
proceeded. 

Ir will be needleſs to repeat the limits of this 
pariſh, as they have been already laid down in the 
preſent ſtate of Brading. In going to it from 
thence, it is adviſable to travel nearly north for 
half a mile; then turn on the right hand towards 
the eaſt, which leads to the village of St. Helen's, 
and in about a mile you paſs a ſtone bridge over 
a brook, which is in this place the boundary of 
the pariſh down to the harbour. From hence in 
about three furlongs you enter St. Helen's green, 
lo called probably from the old church of St. He- 
ten's which ſtood near the ſea at the eaſt end of it, 
at the extremity of the pariſh. But the waves of the 
_ dea waſhed away a great part of the old church yard, 
and encroached ſo much as to endanger the build- 
ing itſelf; ſo that the inhabitants were induced 
10 apply for 0 obtain a brief to enable them to 

exect 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 499 


erect a new church, for which they choſe a new 
ſpot, more than halt a mile to the north of the 
village, at the very angle where the boundary of 
the pariſh turns off towards the weſt. It was con- 
ſecrated by biſhop Trelawney in 1719. 

Wr ſhould have obſerved that the old church 
of St. Helen's was probably at firſt the church of 
the convent, and ſupplied from that body till the 
time when reſident vicars were declared by the 
canon law to be neceſſary. We find in the regiſ- 
ter of Wincheſter, that the biſhop licenſed the 
prior of St. Helen's 'to celebrate maſs and admi- 
niſter the ſacrament, until a vicar ſhould be eſta- 
bliſhed; on account, as it is there expreſſed, of 
the ſmallneſs of the pariſh, In the return of the 
dean of the iſland to biſhop Woodlock, in 1305, 
it is ſaid that the prior had the impropriation of 
this church; and in 1404, in the roll of cardinal. 
Beaufort, the church is rated at thirty matks, but 
this ſeems to have been for the impropriation of 
St. Helen's, rather than the vicarage. | 

IT now belongs to the college of Eton, to which 
it was given at the diſſolution of the priory, who 
pay a ſtipend of twenty pounds a year to the vicar, 
which has been augmented wjth about the ſame 
ſum by means of queen Anne's bounty. 

We ſhould not omit to mention the land mark 
at the bottom of the hill of St. Helen's, and ſome- 
times called the old church ſea mark, which is 
deſigned as a direction to mariners, to avoid the 
ſhoals of the coaſt, and enable them to fail into 

ez | the 


500 HISTORY OF THE 


| | LE 
the roads of St. Helen's and Spithead. For this 

purpofe it has lately been enlarged and whitened. 
A lodging houſe is now eſtabliſhed near it. For 
half a mile to the ſouth eaſt it is a peninſula, ter- 
minating at a place called Dover point, which is 
the northern entrance into the harbour of Brad. 
ing, by which the harbour is completely choaked 
up, and the paſſage of ſhips of burden obſtructed, 
From this point the harbour has every appearance 
of a large lake; and from hence you have a view 
up the valley of Newchurch, and clearly diſcover 
the hill of St. Catharine's at the diſtance of twelve 
miles. Et 

GRRAr quantities of poultry and other proviſi- 
ons are taken in at St. Helen's by outward bound 
ſhips ; and their water, which is generally prefer- 
red to any other, is of ſo pure a nature, that it has 
been carried to the Faſt Indies and back again, 
and continued in as ſweet a ſtate as when taken 
from the ſpring. It alſo recovers itſelf at ſer 
much ſooner than any other. . 

Tnovc this village conſiſts but of about 40 
ſmall tenements containing 210 inhabitants, which 
are conſtructed principally of ſtone, dug from the 
quarries in the vicinity, and covered with thatch, 
it appears to have been of more importance in 
earlier times than its preſent appearance would 
induce us to ſuppoſe. In the fourth volume af 
Rymer's Fœdera, page 718, we find there is men- 
tion made of a writ of king Edward the Third, in 
the tenth year of his reign, entitled, “ the king's 

writ 


1SLE OF WIGHT, cOx *--. 


writ to the mayors and bailiffs of Yarmouth and 
St. Helen's in the Ifle of Wight for ſending * (or 
fitting out) their ſhips to Portſmouth. What 
farther concluſions are to be deduced, or conjec- 
tures formed, from this circumſtance, we ' muſt 
leave our readers to form for themſelves; as too 
many ſpeculative arguments offer themſelves" ti to 
our notice to permit us to enlarge. 10 £ 

Tux priory at the eaſtern part of the darth 
which was formerly ua cell to an abbey in Nor- 
mandy, ſaid to be of Cluniac monks, and the ſeat 
of Sir Naſh Groſe, Kt. one of the judges of the 
court of king's" bench, is the firſt object of atten- 
tion to ſtrangers.. Its ſituat ion is remarkably 
pleaſant, and the gardens are laid out with much 
taſte; and its views of Portſmouth, Spithead road, 
St. Helen's road, and the more diſtant coaſts of 
Hants and Suſſex, as well as the ſea which bounds 
the eye to the eaſt, render it in many reſpects a 
moſt deſirable reſidence. After the diſſolution of 
monaſteries and other ſimilar foundations, that 
any way related to the alien priories, this manor 
and priory were beſtowed upon Eton college, who 
are now lords of the manor, and patrons of the 
vicarage. It was charged with a bowman, in the 
thirteenth year of king Edward the Third, for the 
defence of the iſland. | 

A little to the ſouth-eaſt from the priory is a 
point of land, called the watch houſe point, which 


* Mzutando, is the word, probably for mittendo. 


ſeems _ 


802 Hisfory or THE 


"FEA to have derived its name from the watch 
and fire which were kept here in times of danger 
or alarm, of four men by night and two men by 
day. At the ſame place alſo a watch with two 
men was appointed in the year 1638. 
Arx a diſtance of little more than half a mile 
from this priory, was the ancient priory of Nettle- 
ſtone, the approach to which has much to recom- 
mend it, and gives hopes of ſeeing ſome venerable 
remains ef antiquity; but it docs not afford the 
ſmalleſt traces of its former condition, though the 
hamlet has 31 houſes and 143 inhabitants, and un- 
leſs the ſtranger is directing his attention to A ppley 
and Ride, after leaving the priory, his Jahonr 
would be loſt in viſiting it. =—_Y 
Wr ſhould not omit the elegant little villa of 
Fairy Hill, about a hundred yards from the road, 
though not viſible from it, from which the views 
to the ſea are moſt delightful. The Rev. Henry Og- 
lander, the preſent poſſeſſor, has laid it out with 
great taſte and judgment. 
A little to the eaſt of the road between Bradiag 
and Appley, is Barnſley, of which we have two 
entries in Domeſday. One of theſe is thus repre- 
ſented. The king: holds Benveraſei (Barnſley), 
which Godum held of the confeſfor in fee, then 
aſſeſſed at one hide, but now at half a hide and 
half a yardland. William Fitz Azor held the 
other, and Roger of him. Ulnod held it of king 
Edward in fee, and it was then and now aſſeſſed 
at one hide. It is now a farm houſe, 


LravinG 


ISLE OF WIGHT. : 503 


- Lzavixc the ſalterns about half a mile to the 
north, where is a country reſidenee of James Kirk- 
patrick, Eſq. and proceeding from hence to the 
weſtward, after croſſing the brook; in about a mile 
or little more to the north-weſt and weſt, the road 
from Brading unites near Troublefields, a village 
of 15 houſes and 86 inhabitants, on the left, and 
continues to Appley and St. John's on the right. 
The weſtern road goes on directly for Ride, from 
which this junction is not farther diſtant than three 
quarters of a mile. | 

ApPLEyY is but a fhort diſtance 8 hence, di- 
rectly to the north, and contiguous to the ſea.— 

Mention is made, in the record of king Edward 
the Third's reign, containing the claims of the 
lady Iſabella, that William Mallet held half a fee 
in Apeleigh near Sandbam, part of the poſſeſſions of 
the lady Matilda de Eſtur, as of the ſaid counteſs; 
which, we ſuppoſe, cannot have reference to any 
other place, though at the diſtance of near five 
miles from Sandham. The houfe of Dr. Walker is 
not large, though it is called Great Appley, but 
elegant; and the view of Spithead road and the 
town of Portſmouth appear from hence to the 
greateſt advantage. Little Appley is only a cot- 
rage 

ST. Jonn's lays ncarer to the road. in the way to 

Ride, but on the right hand, and on a riſing 
ground, from whence are many extenfive views. 
It was poſſeſſed by the family of Amherſt for a 
great many years, but 1s at proſent the habitation 

of 


504 HISTORY or THE 


of the lord chief baron of the exchequer; and the 
ſituation is moſt deſirable for a ſportſman, being 
almoſt ſurrounded with woods which afford plenty 
of game. It is a plain and neat building, and has 
every Oconee to render 1 it a complete re- 
tirement. 0 E! IF; - 


22 


»-* - "2" 4 a - ok 
g * 2 8 — 3 ——— 
- W _— Fs a at 


S:cr. VI.—Of the PARISH of NEWCHURCH. 


Havinc now deſcribed the hiſtory and preſent 
ſtate of the whole eaſtern extremity of the iſland, 
and diſcharged our obligation with reſpect to the 
ancient and entire pariſh of Brading, as it was o- 
riginally formed, we now come to take notice of 
another pariſh of great extent, which reaches from 
| ſhore to ſhore, being more than nine miles from 
north to ſouth, but its breadth is diſproportionate 
from one to two miles only. On its eaſtern limit 
are the pariſhes of St. Helen's, Brading, Shanklin, 
and Bonchurch, already deſcribed ; and on its 
weſtern boundary are thoſe of Binſted, Arreton, 
and Godſhill. On the north and ſouth it is bound- 
ed by the ſea. 

Tur limit between this pariſh and Binſted 1s 
formed by the courſe of the brook between Binſted 
church on the weſt and Ride farm on the eaſt, and 
continues in a ſouth-weſt direction nearly as far as 
Black Bridge on the road towards N ewport, at 
which place it falls in with Fiſhborn creek or rivu- 
tet. It is thence bounded in a line to the ſouth 

towards 


ISLE OF WIGHT. - _ $09 


towards the head of this brook, as far as Duxmore 
farm, where it tends a little weſterly from the ſouth 
for about half a mile till it croſſes the road from 
Newchurch village near the eaſt end of Arreton 
down. The line of ſeparation is then due ſouth 
to the brook above Newchurch, where that be. 
comes a limit for about half a mile to the ſouth- 
weſt near Tulford, and from thence it turns ſouth- 
eaſt till it meets the ſmall brook, which runs from 
Winford in Newchurch pariſh, above Wetlands. 
For about three furlongs that becomes a limit, 
when it diverges to the ſouth-weſt, leaving Stone 
on the weſt, till it meets the Wroxall Branch of 
the rivulet, which waters this extenſive valley. 
This becomes now the grand boundary of the pa- 
Tiſh to that village for more than three miles, hav- 
ing Appuldurcombe on the weſt, and Shanklin 
beacon on the eaſt. From that village it croſſes 
Boniface or Bonchurch down in a ſouth direction, 
with a little variation, till it reaches the cliffs be- 
tween Ventnor and Steephill.. | 
Tur village of Newchurch is ſituated nearly in 
the middle of the pariſh, and contiguous to the 
brook that waters the whole extenſive valley from 
the weſtern branches of Whitwell and Niton, and 
the eaſtern branch of Wroxall, which unite below 
Stone, to the level of Sandown, and into Brading 
haven. The church ſtands on a riſing ground fac- 
ing the north, ſo as to command ſome very exten- 
ſive views. Little can be ſaid of it, except that 
it is old; though it is tolerably large, and built in 
Ne. 11. EI 3 the 


C9 


= x l * + 4 
? "_ n a — 5 1 . 
. . "01 * r * — ad; T0 4 — r FY BE r * —_— = 
5 1 x 4 . © + y . Va © + > % *. k : = " (3 - 
— os 5 = 4182 1 ＋ * 3 G 4 * Tall £ N 7 K 
5 — = . * * 5 Senn 2 * : „ 
2 r 3 — / A 
: — _ 8 — 0 0 
—_ — Ic — — * had 
* = l _ - 1 * —— — 
* 
p * : 


a. 
» 
4 F PIs 
» . 

— 0 (tiny — a. neg 4 mY 
—— — — — 
4 — 
— 


the firſt are about one-third more than for the firſt 


£00 HISTORY or THE 


the form of a croſs, but has no ornaments. In its 
wooden tower, from about eighteen foot above the 
ground, are three bells. The burial place of the 
Dillington family, at the north end of the croſs 


aille, has eight inſcriptions, from 1674 to 1749, 


which our limits preclude us from giving. At 


the ſouth end is the monument of lieutenant-gene- 


ral Bocland, who died in 1765, and had been twice 
member for Yarmouth, and once for Lymington; 
and in the ſame vault are the remains of ſeveral of 
his family, but without infcriptions. An epitaph 
for Mr. William Thatcher, who died in 1776, is 
in the body of the church, and another for William 
Bowles, Eſq. who died in 1748, is in the chancel; 
both of them deſerving of notice. a 

Some charities have alſo been given to this pa- 
riſh ; amongſt others, the intereſt of col. left by 
Mrs. Mary Dillington, 20s. yearly out of Wack- 
land farm by Mr. Thomas Davis, 20s. annually 
out of Blackpan in Brading pariſh by Mr. Richard 
Gard, of Princelade,. 10s. ditto out of Gard's land 
annexed to Princelade; and the intereſt of 1001. 


by William Bowles, Eſq. of Langbridge, to ten 
poor fam: lies of the pariſn. His widow left the 


annual intereſt of 1001, for a ſchool to inſtruct poor 
children; and the Rev. John Swinton, vicar, who 
died in 1777, the ſame. The ground for building 
the ſchool was given by general Bocland. 
AvtRact of baptiſms for the laſt thirty years 
have been about 48, 10 marriages, and 20 burials; 


fifty 


ISLE OF WIGHT. - 407 


fifty years of the laſt century, and the laſt about 
one-fourth more. Of marriages before the act of 
1754, Which confined them to the reſpective pa- 
riſhes, we can only obſerve, that no eſtimate can 
be made, becauſe every one then married where 


they pleaſed. 
Tur hills of Gatcombe and Arreton appear from 


hence to be united, and Knighton in front, with _ 


Aſhey down behind it, has ſome advantages of 
proſpect. Beſides the vale below, the Culver cliffs 
to the eaſtward: have a fine effect. This was one 
of the ſix churches of this iſland, which were given 
to the abbey of Lyra, in Normandy, by William 
Fitz Oſborn“; and afterwards, when the duchy 
ſo called was loſt to the crown of England, the 
abbey of Beaulieu in the New Foreſt obtained it, 
and that body preſented a vicar to it in the year 
1447, as may be ſeen in the regiſter. 

In the time of cardinal Beaufort the church was 
valued at one hundred marks, beſides which it 
paid a penſion of four marks; and the impropria- 
tion belongs to Daniel Collins, Eſq. of Egypt, 
though the patronage of the vicar is veſted n the 
biſhop of Briſtol. In the firſt year of king Edward 
the Sixth, one hundred and forty ounces of plate, 
conſiſting of a croſs, chalice, cenſor, paxe, and a 
pair of crewats, were ſold for thirty pounds, and 
a ſuit of veſtments for ſix pounds. The nun ber 
of inhabitants in the pariſh at large, excluſive of 
Ride, is ſuppoſed to exceed a thouſand, 

* See chap. 6, p. 120, 121. 


L 12 Is 


508 | _ HISTORY OF THE 


' In 130+ it appears, that the abbey and convent 
of Lyra, as then ſtated by the dean of the ifland, 
had all the great and ſmall tithes of the manor of 
Wroxall, with the great tithes of the manor of 
Appuldurcombe, near Stone, and the great tithes 
of the ancient demeſnes of Apſe, Holloway, and 
Knighton. 
Rive is the firſt place which ſtrikes our atten- 
tion, after the pariſh church, in this extenſive pa- 
riſh. It is ſituated on the north part of the iſland, 
nearly oppoſite to Stoke's bay. We meet with it 
under the name of La Rye in ſome ancient records, 
particularly in that of the inquiſition of the 18th 
of Edward the Second, where we find that a watch 
of ſix men by night and two by day, was appointed 
there to guard the coaſt. A watch of two men was 
kept at Ride in the year wr 
Tuis manor was at firſt obtained by the monaſ- 
tery of Whorwell, and afterwards, on the diſſolution 
of the monaſteries, came into the Worſley family. 
Sir Robert Dillington probably poſſeſſed it in the 
time of Charles the Firſt, fince we find that he had 
command of the watch there and at Knighton. It 
was afterwards ſold by Sir John Dillington to Henry 
Player, Eſq. whoſe ſon Thomas built a ſmall neat 
chapel there, in 1719, and charged the manor with 
an annual rent of ten pounds, payable to the vicar 
of Newchurch, to officiate therein, or to provide 
ſome perſon to officiate for him. This is now much 
too ſmall for the inhabitants; the duty of which 
has been performed for near thirty years paſt by 
the 


IsTE OF WIGHT. $09 


the preſent miniſter, uſually in the afternoon, the 
inhabitants raiſing a ſmall additional ſubſcription 
to the endowment. From the ſpecial information 
tranſmitted to us by another intelligent and aſſi- 
duous correſpondent, we are afſured that this farm, 
with ſeveral ſmall tenements, were part of the de- 
meſnes of the manor of Aſhey. It appears from 
theſe valuables papers, that if Ride is a manor, it 
muſt be within that of Aſhey, and in ſome reſpects 
_ dependant on it; under which head we ſhall peak 
farther of it. The number of inhabitants in and 
near Ride has been eſtimated at nearly ſix hundred. 
UR Rive, which is the principal part ot the 
place, is ſituate on the top of an eminence, in a 
clear and pleaſant air, which induces many gen- 
tlemen to have a ſummer reſidence there, and has 
occaſioned ſeveral good houſes to be built in it ; fo 
that it is become a neat and reſpectable village. — 
It is therefore an object of attention as a bathing 
place; and the great variety of fine rides which 
its vicinity affords, with the improvement of the 
roads, determine many perſons to give it the pre- 
ference even to Cowes. 
Mr. Wrypnhau, of Saliſbury, the preſent wor- 
thy member for the county of Wilts, has a neat 
houſe here, to whoſe elegant pen the public have 
been indebted for many ingenious literary produc< 
tions, and lately for a picture of this iſland, from 
which work, ſpeaking of * we make the fol- 


lowing extract ; 


F © W IIE 


510 - HISTORY OF THE 


« Wnrrz we made a pauſe at this village, we 
were recommended to a wooden bench, about a 
hundred yards below the inn. 

« From this commanding ſeat, a full, extended, 
and complete proſpect of the whole length of Spit- 
head, and of every anchored ſhip therein, and of 
the towns of Goſport and Portſmouth, burſt ſud- 
denly and diſtinctly upon our enraptured fight.— 
The field of nearly twelve acres, at the upper end 
of which this ſeat is fixed, divides the upper vil- 
lage of Ryde from the lower. This field is backed, 
and flanked on the weſt fide, with a thick grove 
of lofty and flouriſhing elms, that deſcend from 
the bench even to the water's edge, with the ſame 
gentle declivity as the field itſelf, the waving de- 
clination of which could ſcarcely be improved, by 
the ingenuity of the moſt faſhionable artiſt. It is 
a fingular circumſtance, that, though this field 
divides two parts of a populous village, yet the 
upper village is concealed from it, by a ſtrong 
| ſhade; while the lower village is almoſt overlook- 
ed, from its being ſituated clofe to the water, and 
under a ſteep bank, at the extremity cf the field. 
A lodging-houſe was, a few years fince, built in 
the field, near this bench, the windows of which 
command, without interruption, the whole view. 
It has lately been purchaſed and improved by a 
gentleman®; and the houſe is now fortunately and 
conſpicuouſly introduced in the juſtly celebrated 


panorama of Spithead.” 
* Mr. WYNDHAM, the polleſſor. 


Or 


ISLE OF WIGHT, - 511 


Or Lower Ride, indeed, we cannot ſay much in 
its favour, being a ſtraggling place, and moſtly 
inhabited by fiſnermen and coaſting ſeamen; it 
has alſo ſome flips for building ſmall veſſels, and, 
as the neareſt point to Portſmouth and Goſport, 
being only about five miles diſtant, has a conſtant 
communication with the oppoſite ſhore. Though 


the packet boats, which uſed to paſs this way to 


and from the ifland, now go from Southampton to 


Cowes, yet market and other boats regularly ſet off 


from hence for the firſt mentioned places at ſeven 
in the morning in ſummer, and nine in winter ; 
and ſupply thoſe towns with great quantities of 
butter, eggs, and poultry. A veſſel can be com- 
manded to go off from hence in any weather, or 
at any time of tide, for which they can only demand 
five ſhillings; and boatmen are liable to a heavy 
fine for requiring more, though ſtrangers have fre- 
- quently been impoſed upon, when buſineſs or ne- 
ceſſity have compelled them to ſuch a meaſure.— 
The uſual fare is ſix pence. | 

Tas bathing houſes are very commodiouſly 
ſituated at the weſtern extremity of this village ; 
and perhaps, on compariſon with any others, on 
the adjacent or oppoſite ſhores, excel both in con- 
veniences and pureneſs of water. Ships of burden 


cannot approach it to lay at anchor within a mile, 


on account of the ſhoalneſs of the water. 
Oos next object in point of geography, but not of 
importance, is the manor of Kerne, Curne, or Cerne, 


as in ſome ancient records; it is on the eaſtern ſide 
L 14 | e 


A 


kt 
"7 
AM 
9 
1 
* 
9 

| 
1 

f , 
* 
4 
. 
ö 

U 


— - _— —— — 


— — — 
= 


8 122 HISTORY OF THE | 


of the down road from Ride to Aſhey. Sir Richard 
Worſſey, in his hiſtory has taken notice of it as in 
Brading pariſh. It is called Lacherne in Domeſday, 
and was held by the king, had been rated by the Con- 
feſſorat one hide, but now at nothing. In the time of 
Iſabella de Fortibus, we find, amongſt her claims, 
that the knights templars held a fourth part of 
Curne in alms, as part of the poſſeſſions of William 
Ruſſel, lord of Yaverland, derived from her in capite, 
and that the chaplains of Burton or Barton held 
another part, under the ſame tenure. We can 
only add, that they were ſeized into the hands of 
the crown, and granted to Wincheſter college ; 
and that a leaſe of the manor is now held of that 
body by Mr. Bagſter. SA 
Ix the eighth year of king Edward the Firſt we 
find Roger de Chellingwood alſo holding of Hugh 
de Chekenhull, as part of the claims of the coun- 
teſs Iſabella, the thirteenth part of a fee in Chel- 
lingwood. The ſame account occurs in the ſeventh. 
year of Edward the Third. This and Oſborn con- 
tributed three bowmen to defend the iſland in the 
thirteenth year of that reign. | 
We now come to Aſhey manor, ſituated to the 
north eaſt of Nunwell or Aſhey down, on which a 
conſpicuovs land mark is placed, being a truncated 


pyramid of hewn ſtone about twenty feet high. It 


was erected by the government in 1735, to ſerve 
as a mark for ſhips coming into St. Helen's or 
Spithead roads; a direction on that point being 
particularly wanted, to avoid the ſhoals and ſands 

with 


ISLE OF WIGHT, $13 


with which theſe roads are ſurrounded, and to en- 
able them, by means of other marks, to keep in 
the deeper water of the channel. At this elevated 
ſpot are very extenſive views, the particulars of 
which we cannot here find room to enumerate ; 
but the coaſt of Suſſex is plainly diſcernable. The 
ridge of theſe downs commands a vaſt varicty of 
proſpects, | 


Taz name of Aſhey has been variouſly wrote 


in the court rolls of the manor, as Aſſeſbee, Asbeſ/eye, 
Asjheſey, Asfhey, and laſtly Afhey. The cite of 
the preſent farm or manor houſe of Aſhey, was 
uſed as a monaſtery or religious houſe from the 
time of Edward the Firſt. to that of Henry the 
Eighth, and was a branch of that of Whorley, near 
Andover, in the county of Southampton. It had a 
large hall and elegant painced chambers with large 
and ſpa-1ous rooms; alſo a chapel, burial ground, 
fiſh ponds, &c. Some human bones, that were im- 
mediately reinterred, were diſturbed a few years 
ago in laying the foundation of ſome buildings. 
As a manor it is both ancient and extenſive, 
having free warren and the government of the paſ- 
ſage at Ride. Its courts were held twice a year; 
and two clerks were preſented at it in the twenty- 
eighth of Henry the Sixth, for taking pheaſants 
within its limits. So late as the reign of queen 
Elizabeth, a widow, named Agnes Porter, was at- 


tainted of witchcraft, and all her lands, goods and 


chattels, forfeited ro the lord of this manor, the 
boundaries of which were as follows. On the 
| north 


——_— — 7 4 > — — 
. ³˙ ¹ä oe re ron 


[ 


—ͤñ— — — — 


- : * 5 14 
—— 2 — —— — — rr hs. — A — 


— — —— — 
: - = om 


P ee a. nn te” 


a 


— — 


— — —— — 
Pa 2 


— — - 


— — —— —a—•—ͤ—d 


— u—L[—ͤ — t& 232 — x7 


— — — 5 . N 


514 HISTORY OF THE 


north it is ſaid to have extended from the bounda- 
ry ſtone at New Mooth, near Ride, ſo far into the 
ſea beyond low water mark, as a man could reach 

the ground with an oar of eighteen feet long, and 
from thence into the boat lake by the ſame rule as 
far as Binſted lake. All wrecks of the ſea within 
theſe limits were ban property of the lords of 
2 

Tut abbeſſes of this monaſtery, and afterwards 
| * lords, as proprietors of the manor, found 
pikemen and armour compleat for the defence of 
the iſland in time of war. So late as the reign of 
king Charles the Second, that monarch granted to 
Thomas Coteile, Eſq. at that time lord of the 
manor, the privilege of protecting twenty men 
from the impreſs for the uſe of the paſſage at 
Ride. IF 
Wi are informed that there is an old writing 
among the Aſhey papers, which ſtates, that Nun- 
well took its name from the reſort of the nuns of 
that monaſtery to a well or ſpring iſſuing or ariſing 
from the lands which were then as now called 
Nunwell. 

ArrEx the diſſolution of monaſteries, the manor 
of Aſney came by purchaſe, in the 35th year of 
king Henry the Eighth, into the hands of Giles 
Worſley, a younger brother of the family of the 
Worſleys in Lancaſhire. His ſon, by his firſt 
wife, died a minor ſoon after his father. The 
heir at law, which lived in Yorkſhire, and the half 


brother, being the eldeſt ſon by a ſecond wife, 
were 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 515 


were ſoon involved in a ſuit at law; but it was at 


length ſettled by arbitration, that the half-brother 
ſhould poſſeſs two-thirds of the eftate, and that 
tae manor of Ride, the other third part, ſhould be 
given to the heir at law. This was fold immedi- 
arely, as we have ſeen under Ride, to Mr. Dilling- 
ton of Knighton, and from his family was diſpoſed 
of to Mr. Player. From hence, it is n:tural to.in- 
fer, that the diſtinction of two manors, of Aſhey 
and Ride firſt commenced, did not the court rolls 
of the 20th of Elizabeth poſitively aſſert that this 
double title begun in that year. | 


Tus other parts of the manor, which included 


Aſhey, were ſold about the latter end of James the 
Firſt's reign, by Sir Bowyer Worſley, Knight, 


grandſon of the aforeſaid Giles Worſley, to Tho- 


mas Coteile, Eſq. who ſettled it by deed of inden- 
ture on the iſſue of his ſiſter dame Mary Edge- 
cumbe, who had been married to Sir Richard 
Edgcumbe Knight, of Mount Edgcumbe, in the 
county of Devon. In conſequence of this, Peers 
Eagcumbe, ſon and heir of the ſaid dame Mary 
deceaſed, came into poſſeſſion of this manor, in 


1640, by whoſe deſcendants it has been fince held 


till it was purchaſed by Mr. Joſeph Betreſworth 
in March, 1789. 
Tux lands of Smallbrooke are noticed in the 25th 


of Elizabeth, for which a relief of thirty ſhillings 


was paid to the lord of Aſhey and Ride; and in 
the ſecond year of Charles the Firſt, a penalty of 


ten ſhillings was ordered to be levied on every in- 


habitant 


2 ths 32 1 — 
—— — r_—_ —— — 


—̃ ũ mD ů—ꝛ 
7 : 


— os 
Y ge —————— — — 


——é— — — 
_— 


= — — 2 . —ů ů Hr od 
- —— — — C44 


66 —ĩ— —— —— 
—— — —-—-—-— EG 5 * 
——— £ — > <4 * - 


£36 HISTORY OF THE 


habitant of Ride who ſhould abuſe the public well 
in the ſtreet of Ride. There are four poſſeſſors of 
lands within the boundaries of this manor, which 
do not belong to it. This appears in the court 
books of 1624, and is thus entered. 
Lands lying within the nn of Aſhey, not held 
of the ſame. 

Acres Ro. Perch, 


- Freeholder—Sir John Oglander,] 1 Samll- ? 284 0 4 
brooke Farm 5 
Robert Dillington, Eſq. hath g86 2 34 
Thos. Loving, Gent. hath ; 95 2 16 
Langbridge Farm of | 


Freeholder— Jolin Coleman, Yeoman, hath 1 
25 3 24 
a Farm in Markſley of 
The above is indorſed thus 41624 January 


The Contents of the Acres of Land lying within the Ho- 

mage and Manor of Aſhey (being 4 other Men's Lands and 
not of Aſhey Demaiflnes nor Tenements,” | 
Wr have only to add, that the aſſigns of the 
earl of Mount Edgcumbe pay a fee farm rent to 
the crown, for the tenths of Aſhey, of two pounds 
thirteen ſhillings. A captain of the name of 
Thomas Neot, of Ride, in this iſland, and, as ap- 
pears from his epitaph in the chancel of St. An- 
drew's church in Plymouth, in the county of De- 
von, a conſiderable merchant, died in May, 1674. 
We are next to take notice of the manor of 
Knighton Gorges, on the ſouth ſide of Nunwell or 
Afſhey down. It received the additional name of 
Gorges from Ralph de Gorges, who married Elen 
the daughter and coheir of John de Morville, who 
poſſeſſed it after the conqueſt, and dicd 1n the for- 
tieth 


ISLE OF WIGHT. = 


tieth year of king Henry the Third. He enjoyed 
the manor afterwards in her right; his ſon was 


Sir Ralph de Gorges, whom we find to have held 


three knight's fees in Enighton and elſewhere in 
the ſeventh of Edward the Third, and left only 
one daughter, who was poſſeſſed alſo of the ſaid 
 knight's fees as held from the Counteſs in capite, 
in the eighthyear of the ſaid king. Dame Ellen de 
Gorges was married to Sir Theobald Ruſſel. His 


fon, Sir Ralph Ruſſel, ſucceeded to Knighton, 


whoſe fon, Sir Maurice, had an only ſon Tho- 
mas, who died without iſſue. The heirs gene- 
ral were John Hacket, fon cf one of the daugh- 
ters of Sir Maurice Ruſſel, and two of her daugh- 
ters, married to John Keneys, and Stephen Hat- 
field. It is enough to fay that Knighton fell to 
the ſhare of Hacket, in whoſe poſſeſſion it 


was at the time of an inquiſition taken in the 


ſeventeenth year of king Henry the Sixth. He 
had only two daughters, of which Joan was marri- 


ed to Gilbert of Witcombe, in Somerſetſhire, with 


whom he had Knighton, and a part of Woolver- 
ton in Bimbridge. In the fifth year of Elizabeth 
the deſcendant of Gilbert ſold Knighton and other 
lands in the iſland to Anthony Dillington, Eſq. 
of Poole, in Dorſetſhire, who enjoyed it for a long 
time. At laſt it devolved on the two coheireſſes 
of Sir Triſtram Dillington, Bart. by the ſurvivor 


of whom it was bequeathed to Maurice Bocland, 


Eſq. upon whoſe deceaſe it deſcended tothe family of 
the preſent poſſeſſor, George Maurice Biſſet, Eſq. 
| WE 


: 
1 
ö 


| 
: 
5 
| 
1 


z: —T— OG 
322 . ay 


— — — — —⅛—.ẽ —U— 2 ꝗ R— 
= —— — — — — — 


__ — 4 . — E — —— — — 
Re — PX — — —— 
4 2 40 1 — = i - 


—— — . 


* — * 


o 
= 
> 
5 

o 

— 

. 

* 


r 
| 

3 N 

TY 
$ 


_—_ 


Td * — % * 


- 61 IN 
7 12 yaw tot \ 
\ 22 
«AG 
«oro Wb ©y al 2 


3 2 — 


— 


| 818 HISTORY OF THE 


| Edward the Third, and that a watch and tuo men 


_ gated by the ivy that binds its gable ends, which 


pound fix ſhillings and eight pence for the tenths 


by purchaſe, has ſince been attached to the mandr 


We find that Knighton furniſhed a bowman to 
the defence of the iſland, in the thirteenth of king 


were kept here, under the command of Sir Robert 
Dillington, in 1638. 

Taz manor houſe is an ancient building, but 
appears to have been conſtructed with much taſte 
and judgment ; and great attention has been evi- 
dently pid to it, to preſerve its original beauty, 
in the various reparations which inevitably have 
been beſtowed upon it. In particular we may ob- 
ſerve, that one part of the building is finely varie- 


perhaps, are too numerous to afford pleaſure and 
delight to the eye; and that the windows in front 
are all latticed, and retain their antique pillars of 
ſtone for their preſent ſupporters. It is finely ſituat- 
ed on the gentle riſing of a hill between ſome fine 
woods, but at a ſufficient diſtance to afford ſome 
very beautiful proſpects. | 

A ret farm rent is paid to the crown of one 


of Aſhey, by George Maurice Biſſet, Eſq. proba- 
bly for Knighton, as parcel of the manor of Aſhey. 
 Lancuripeor or Longbridge is a manor nor far 
from Newchurch, which, at the diffolution of reli- 
gious houſes, after Whorwell monaſtery, to which 
it had been given, was extinct, came into the poſ- 
ſeſſion of the Worſley family, and after coming 
into the hands of the Dillington family, probably 


of 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 519 


of Knighton, and conſidered as of the poſſeſſions of 


che lords of that manor. 


A TENEMENT at Princelade, on the Weſt of Apſe, 


pays a fee farm rent to the crown of one ſhilling 
* annually. 


Apps manor is the next which preſents itfelf to 
our attention. It is ſituated to the ſouth of the 


heath of that name, juſt within the eaſtern limits 
of the pariſh, and not far from Cliff in Brading 
pariſh, on the road from Newchurch to Shanklin. 
It is ſituated in a valley, and a ſmall ſtreams pro- 
ceeds from it, which, after running near two miles 
to the north-eaſt, falls into the larger rivulet of 


Newchurch vale below Alverſton. It is called in 


ſome ancient writings Ap/e canonicorum, from its 
having been the property of the canons of Chriſt. 
church, in Hampſhire, to whom it had been given 
by Baldwin, the firft earl of Devon of that name. 
After the diſſolution of religious houſes, the manor 
was purchaſed by Mr. Dillington, and afterwards 
fold by one of his ſucceſſors to Mr. Edward Leigh, 
of Newport, who deviſed it to Sir John Chicheſter, 
Bart. The Right Honourable Sir Richard Worſ- 
ley ſome time ago purchaſed it, in whoſe family 
it ſtill remains. Twenty pounds four ſhillings 
and four pence is charged upon it as a fee farm 
rent to the crown. 


Wr now come to Wroxall, which Sir Richard 


. Worſley has placed in this pariſh, but a great part 
of the village is in the pariſh of Godſhill. Ir is 
noticed in Domeſday book as part of the poſſeſſi- 

ons 


— ä — — — — — 
LE 2 
* 4 th 


, e e wget oy oo —————— = 


— — — 1 


— 1 


12 -—- - 


— Ao 3 Props _—_——— ER ” 4 +9 6 
„ 


" ., 
, 23 
+ .* 

A \ 
* . 
1 
Mb 
p * 

3 
p 


520 ' HISTORY OF THE 


ons of the king, and there called MWarocheſſolle, 
and ſaid to be held of earl Godwin in fee, in the 
time of Edward the Confeſſor, and then aſſeſſed at 
five hides, but now at two hides and a half. It 
ſeems to have been generally held by the lords of 
the iſland, and it was afterwards , when the ifland 
came into the hands of the crown by purchaſe, 
conferred on Edward, earl of Rutland, created 
duke of Albemarle, by Richard the Second, in the 
laſt year of his reign; from which dukedom he was 
depoſed in the firſt year of king Henry the Fourth, 
when the iſtand again returned to the crown, We 
afterwards find it in the hands of Hopſon, and 
then of Coteile, from whom by inheritance it came 
into the poſſeſſion of the Edgecumbe family, as 
we have already ſtated more at large. North 
Wroxall has been fold in different lots, and to 
different perfons; but South Wroxall, which was 
alſo appointed for ſale, was bought in for his 
lordſhip. 
_ In the old rental of crown lands, of the twenty 
third of Henry the Seventh, it is chargedat an annu- 
al fee farm rent of twenty one pounds eleven ſhil- 
lings and five pence; in the rent roll of 1780, it 
is ſtared to be twenty three pounds fifteen ſhillings 
and four pence. A ward was appointed to be 
kept on Wroxall Down, under the direction of Sir 
Edward Dennys, in 1638. 
 Pennays we ought not to overlook the ſmall 
village of Ventnor, near the ſouth ſhore of this 
pariſh, between Steephill and Bonchurch, the lit- 
tle 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 521 


tle Cove of which is ſo well known for its very 
romantic ſcenery and caſcade of ſine water. After 
this laſt has ſerved to turn a corn mill, it falls up- 
on the beach. This place is alſo noted for its 
crab and lobſter fiſhery, for the ſupply of the Lon- 
don markets. 


— 


Ster. VII. — Of the PARISH of BINS TED. 


To preſerve a communication with the adjoin- 
'ing_ pariſhes, we. will again ſuppoſe ourſelves to 
be at Ride, at the northern extremity of the pariſh 
of Newchurch; from which in leſs than a mile you 
croſs the brook forming the eaitern boundary of 
this pariſh, as already deſcribed. Fiſhborn Creek 
or rivulet forms the weſtern boundary, uniting in 
a point on the ſouth with the eaſtern limit at 
Black Bridge, over a deep torrent or brook ; and 
it has the ſea on the north. Quarr Abbey, of 
which we have already treated, is within the com- 
paſs of this pariſh. 

Tux church, which ſtands near the north-eaſt 
extremity of the pariſh, and due north from the 
road, after paſſing the brook from Ride, is a ſmall 
and plain building, and has nothing to attract at- 
tention, except a very rude but ancient piece of 
ſculpture, over the key ſtone of the north door. 
It is a repreſentation of a human figure, fitting 
with the feet on a kind of a pedeſial, which has 
ſome reſemblance of a ram's head ; but the whole 

. 13. M m does 


* 


522 HISTORY OF THE 


does not exceed about two feet and a half in height. 
The inhabitants give it the name of the idol; but 
it was more probably one of thoſe uncouth figures, 
which the Saxon and Norman architects were ina 
habit of placing on key ſtones and friezes. A re- 
port is related, that this figure was removed ſome 
years ago, when the church was undergoing ſome 
repairs; but that it was reſtored to its ancient ſi- 
tuation, on its being productive of diſpleaſure to 
the inhabitants, which can ſcarcely amount in 
number to two hundred. The church of Binſted 
furniſhed one bowman for the defence of the iſland, 
in the time of Edward the Third; and the abbot 
of Quarr four men at arms. This church was ex- 
empted from taxation in the roll of cardinal Beau- 
fort, in 1494, on account of its poverty. It paid 
an annual penſion of two ſhillings to the ſacriſt of 
St. Swithin at Wincheſter, as appears from the 
dean of the iſland's report, in 1305. | 
Binſted is noticed in Domeſday book, as part of 
the poſſeſſions of William Fitz Stur, which were 


held in fee of Edward the Confeſſor, and aſſeſſed 


for five yardlands, but now for two; but we have 
no ſubſequent accounts reſpecting it, being pro- 
bably ſwallowed up in the adjoining abbey of 
Quarr, which is only about half a mile to the 
weſtward, the intermediate ſpace being wholly 
wood. , Ihe parſonage is a ſmall, thatched, her- 
mitage-like cottage, and ina ſituation correſpond- 
ing with this idea. Its little graſs lawn is ſur- 
rounded with woods, through which fome viſtas 

| have 


ISLE OF WIGHT, $623 


have been cut towards the ſea, which afford ſome 
pleaſing views, | 

Ta1s ſmall pariſh ſeems to dans its origin from 
the grants of William the Conqueror and William 
Rufus, of half a hide of land to Walkeline, biſhop 
of Wincheſter, for the purpoſe of digging ſtone to 
repair that cathedral. In the firſt grant, the ex- 
preſſion is very general, and gives authority to 
dig the ground © not only there, but throughout 
all ns land in that iſland.” At the time of this 
grant, the whole iſland had been eſcheated to the 
crown by the treaſon of carl Roger, ſon of William 
Fitz Oſborn, on whom it had firſt been beſtowed 
for his ſervices; but the words of the grant cer- 
tainly afforded an opportunity to the biſhops of 
Wincheſter of extending their limits beyond the 
quantity firſt expreſſed. It alſo appears from the 
regiſter of Wincheſter, that when William of 
Wykeham rebuilt the body of the cathedral, he 
dug the ſtone in the iſle of Wight, and commiſſion- 
ed the abbot of Quarr to provide carriages to con- 
vey it to the ſea, The inhabitants ſtill point out 
the pits from whence it was raiſed. 

Tue proprietor of Newnham in this pariſh, with 
Quarr and Combley, and Haſcly in Arreton pariſh, 
the poſſeſſions of John Fleming, Eſq. of North 
Stoneham, near Southampton, pays for Newnham 
a fee farm rent of one pound twelve ſhillings and 
eight pence. William Ruſſell, lord of Yaverland, 
held the thirteenth part of a fee in Newnham, in 
the time of the counteſs Iſabella. | 

b M mz A 


524 HISTORY OF THE 


A waren and two men was found to be cuſto- 
mary at Fiſchowſe, now Fiſh Houſe, in 1638, un- 
der the direction of Sir William Liſle. 


Ster. VIII. of the PARISH of WOOTTON. 


Turs ſmall pariſh was moſtly taken out of 
Whippingham, at the time that Walter de Inſula 
built the chapel, in the reign of Henry the Third. 
As an acknowledgment of its dependance, it now 
pays ten ſhillings annually to the mother church. 
It was then endowed with glebe, arable, paſture, 
and woodlands, and the tithes of his demeſne 
lands at Wootton and Chillerton. It does net 
contain fifty inhabitants. 

As the church firſt built in this pariſh was con- 
ſumed by fire, and the ſmall church now ſtanding 
was erected on the ruins of it, there are conſe- 
quently no monuments of the Liſles to be met 
with in the modern building; becauſe the family 
removed to Thruxton and Manfbridge, in the 
county of Southampton, before its erection. 

A cnaptLi, dedicated to St. Edmund the king, 
with an independent endowment, was contiguous 
to the old church; and from the return of the dean 
of the iſland to biſhop Woodlock, in 1305, it ap- 
pears to have had a chaplain diſtinct from the 
rector of the pariſh church. 

WooTToN, or Odetone, is in Demef hy ſaid 


to be held of king Edward the Confeſſor, and then 
aſleſſed 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | $25 


aſſeſſed for one hide. That branch of the Liſle 
family which ſettled at Wootton in 1410, was 
called LIsLE DE Bosco, and ſometimes pe Bosco 
only, or “ of the Wood”; and from hence, ſays 
Sir Richard Worſley, the place obtained the name 
of Wood-town, ſince corrupted to Wootton. But 
with all due ſubmiſſion, we find that in the dean's 
return to biſhop Woodlock of this pariſh it was 
then called Wodyton ; 'in the account of the 
watches, reported the 18th of Edward the Second, 
it is called Woditone; and in cardinal Beaufort's 
roll of valuation of the livings about 1494, it is 
wrote Woodyton, and is there rated at twelve 
marks, and a penſion of half a mark. Poſſeſſions 
at Wodyton are alſo mentioned in the 8th of Ed- 
ward the Third, as held by Sir John Liſle, of the 
counteſs of Devon, in capite. The lord of Woody- 
ton is alſo ſaid to have furniſhed ſix men at arms, 
and the church one bowman, for defence of the 
iſland in the 13th year of the ſame king. The 
watch juſt mentioned was to conſiſt of four men 
by night, and two men by day. In 1638, we find 
that the watch at Wootton point conſiſted of a 
watch and two men. 

AN account of the conduct and fate of Sir John 
Liſle, a deſcendant of this family, who was living 
in the time of Charles the Firſt, ought not, per- 
haps, to be omitted. Active and zealous in his 
proceedings againſt that unhappy monarch, he was 
appointed one of the judges who tried and con- 
demned him. He was afterwards ſo much in 

M ma 3 flavour 


$26 HISTORY OF THE 


favour with Cromwell, as to become one of his 
lords, and a commiſſioner of his great ſeal. Bur 
the reſtoration put a period to his ill-gotten ho- 
nours, and prudence provided for his ſafety by 
flight. Securely ſettled, as he had reaſon to ſup- 
poſe, at Lauſanne, in Switzerland, he was found 
out by ſome Iriſh adventurers; who, ruffian-like, 
as th2 inftruments of Providence, and probably 
with the hopes of reaping the rewards promiſed in 
public proclamations, or otherwiſe believing that 
they ſhould be well rewarded for their ſervices, 
treacherouſly aſſaſſinated him. e 
Or his widow we have alſo this melancholy ac- 
count. The fins of her huſband were viſited upon 
her, though her ſon was in the royal army, which 
E | fought againſt the duke of Monmouth, and herſelf 
| was known to be a good and loyal ſubject. She 
| was charged with having ſecreted and ſheltered a 
Mr. Hicks, a preſbyterian miniſter, with one Nel- 
thorpe, for which ſhe was tried on the memorable 
weſtern circuit of judge Jefferys, and found guilty 
of harbouring two of his party after the battle of 
Sedgmoor. But no proof was adduced, either that 
their names were included in the proclamation, 
which they were not, or that ſhe had any know- 
ledge of their having been concerned in that re- 
bellion. Yet did not theſe ſubſtantial reaſons 
. avail. At the age of more than ſeventy years, the 
only favourable terms ſhe could obtain, were to be 
beheaded inſtead of being burned. The male line 
cf this branch of the family at leaſt became extinct 
| LE ſome 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 527 


ſome years ago, by the death of Edward Liſle, Eſq. 
of Moyle's Court, near Ringwood, in Hampſhire. 
But we are informed, that in the name of Liſle 
there is ſtill veſted property in this iſland, to the 
amount of near 600l. per annum. 


Szcr.IX.—Of the PARISHof WHIPPINGHAM. 


As one of the old pariſhes, which was given by 
William Fitz Oſborn to the abbey of Lyra, it ſeems 


to be entitled to particular notice. We ſhall give 


it all the attention in our power, omitting nothing 
of importance which we have been able to pro- 
cure; our reſources have not, however, proved fo 
ſatisfactory as we wiſhed in this and ſome adjoin- 
ing pariſhes. Of the church it muſt be remarked, 
that it poſſeſſes a peculiarity which has been ſel- 
dom, if ever, met with; for the tower has neither 
battlements nor turret, but two gable ends that 
give it all the appearance of a houſe. 

Taz inhabitants of this extenſive pariſh, in- 
cluding Eaſt Cowes, and the eaſt fide of Coppin's 
Bridge at Newport, may be eſtimated at 800. 


Tae road to Eaſt Cowes from Newport, which 


wholly runs through this pariſh, lies above the 
church and village, if it can be called a village, 
on the right ; and though from the hill the proſ- 
pects every way are peculiarly pleaſing, the curi- 
ous ſtrangers will not loſe their labour by deſcend- 
Ing to the vicarage, the front of which is towards 

M m 4 1 


8 2 _ — 
r "= 


- * 4 
F 1 4 . "4 
* 14 * 
— & 
2 „ * 


75 
4 
t 

4 


{ 
1 
| 4 4 

. = 


ons © HISTORY OF THE 


the river, and has a conſpicuous view of that and 
the oppoſite ſhore. | 
Pomrspay-BoOK preſents us with two entries 
relative to Whippingham ; in one of which 1t is 
ſaid that lands were held of king Edward the Con- 
feſſor in fee at Whippingham and Stenbury, and 
that the two manors were then affeſſed at three 
hides, but now at two. The other was held of the 
Confeſſor in fee by Bolla, and was then and now 
aſſeſſed at one hide of land. One of the watches 
of the iſland, in the 18th year of Edward the Se. 
cond, appears alſo to have been ſtationed on'the 
high lands in this pariſh, probably to the north of 
Barton, conſiſting of three men by night and two 
by day. In the $th year of Edward the Third, 
among other poſſeſſions held of Iſabella de Forti- 
bus, lady of the iſland, in capzze, we lind mention 
made of Whippingham, as the property of Sir John 
de Inſula, or Liſle ; the prior of the houſe of Portſ- 
mouth and Jordan de Kingſton alfo held a fourth 
part of a fee in Whippingham, of the lord of Ta- 
verland, as part of the poſlcſiions of the ſaid coun- 
teſs; as did Hugh de Chekenhull the eighth part 
of a fee of the counteis in the ſame parith and in 
demeſne. | | 
WurerixnGnam church contributed two bowmen 
to the defence of the iſland in the 13th of Edward 
the Third; but we have no account* of it in the 
dean's return in 130; to biſhop Woodlock, and in 
cardinal Bcaufort's tax roll, the valuation in 1404 
has been defaced, and cannot be aſcertained. — 
Whateve* 


IIS, rr oo ere” . * 3 ne Bhs * _ 
— 
* 


.. — oo TR 


—— 
—— ———— —— 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 529 


Whatever it was then rated at, it alſo paid a pen- 
ſion of ten ſhillings. 

Prennars we ſhould take ſome notice of Eaſt 
Cowes, before we proceed more particularly to the 
diſtant manors of this pariſh. Its inhabitants were 
ſome time ago reckoned at little more than 250, 
but we think they muſt now be increaſed to 300 
or more, as, beſides the cuſtom houſe, it contains 
many reſpectable houſes, though not ſituated in 
any regular form or order. Thoſe houſes which 
front the harbour are therefore the only ones nearly 
which deſerve attention. The communication 
with Weſt Cowes by means of the ferry boats, that 
are continually paſſing and repaſſing, renders this 
five of the warer a very agreeable and engaging 
ſituation as a place of reſidence; but the muddy 
ſhore which runs off from Old Cattle Point, pre- 
vents all poſſibility of bathing in the open ſea, as 
on che oppoſite ſhore, There are ſome confider- 
able merchants in it, as well as at Weſt Cowes.— 
Several houſes are alſo building on the rifing 
ground above it, which, as it were, overlook the 
harbour, and command conſiderable ſea and land 
views. Counſellor Erſkine's pretty cottage in the 
field, on the weſt of the principal road, is in a fine 
ſituation ; and Mr. Auldjo has built a handſome 
houſe lower down, on the left of the road deſcend- 
ing from Oſborne to the village. At the foot of 
this road is the garden wall and back front of Mr. 
Mackenzie's houſe, a capital merchant, the front 
of which is finely fituated near the harbour for ſuch 
an employment. We 


330 nISToRY OF THE 


We underſtand that lord William Seymour has 
lately purchaſed the farm of Norris, to the eaſt of 
the obeliſk, on the ſummit of the hill, which ſerves 
as a ſea mark. To thoſe who conſider the poſleſ- 
fion of a houſe in the iſland, on account of health, 
as an acquiſition, a more deſirable ſpot can ſcarcely 
be found. Pry "I 

OuR next attention muſt be directed to Oſborne, 
formerly called Auſterborne, which is on the eaſt 
ſide of the main road, on the ſummit of the hill, 
from Eaſt Cowes. To ſpeak of its ancient poſſeſ- 

ſors, we muſt remark that it was held by the fa- 
mily of Bowerman, and in the reign of Henry the 
Eighth came into the poſſeſſion of John Arney, 
who married the daughter and heireſs of that fa- 
mily; to whom, after a conteſt with Nicholas 
Bowerman, for the right, it was fully awarded in 
the 24th year of that reign. It was afterwards 
purchaſed by John Lovybond, in the third year of 
Edward the Sixth, and again by Euſtace Man, Eſq. 
in the fifth of Charles the Firſt. Tradition reports 
that he buried ſome valuable property in a wood 
on this manor, during the turbulent reign of that 
monarch, and that he could never again diſcover 
it. After the reſtoration of Charles the Second, a 
grant was ſolicited and obtained, of all waifs, ſtrays, 
wrecks, treaſure trove, &c. with the privilege of 
free warren for this manor, probably with a view 
to authorize his retention of it, if.it ſhould at any 
time thereafter be found, The place where it was 


ſuppoſed to be hid, ſtill retains the name of the 
money 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 


sar 


money coppice. It has been mentioned under 
Newchurch, that this and Chillingwood provided 
three bowmen to defend the iſland. 

Hrs ſon, John Man, Eſq. was poſſeſſed of great 
property, and left many charities in the year 17053 
whoſe daughter, and ſole heireſs, was married to 
Mr. Blachford, of Sandhall, near Fordingbridge, 
in Hants. Her ſon Robert Blachford, Eſq. ſuc- 
ceeded to the manor of Oſborne; and the late 
Robert Pope Blachford, Eſq. built an excellent 
houſe, the fituation of which has been thus ex- 
preſſed by a modern writer. * It may be ranked 
as one of the beſt choſen reſidences in the iſland. 
On a fine ſpacious lawn, that leads to the ſea, 
ſtands the pleaſantly ſituated manſion. The views 
from it are as extenſive as they can be on the 
northern fide. Spithead has a fine appearance 
from it; ſo has Hampton river. — The building is 
very large, and has all its offices behind it. The 
inſide is equally convenient and roomy, and is now 
(1789) receiving conſiderable improvements.” It 
is now the reſidence of the earl of Glencairn. 

Wr have ſpoken of Barton or Burton as an ora- 
tory, in a preceding chapter; and we now come to 
notice it as a mans, within the pariſh of Whip- 
pingham. It has juſt been mentioned as held by 
Bolla, in the time of the Confefſor. In the reign 
of Henry the Third, it came to Walter de Inſula 
or Liſle, by marriage with the daughter and heireſs 
of the family of Fitz Stur, or De Eſtur. Of its 


farther hiſtory we have already treated as above, 
| an 


6532 ' HISTORY OF THE © 


and how it came into poſſeſſion of the college of 
Wincheſter, under whom it is now held. On en. 
quiry we underſtood that the tenant of the farm 
had the charge of the houſe, which he occupied. 

The manor of Pann, whether from its contiguity 
to the river Medina, or to the town of Newport, 
is uncertain, was always retained by the lords of 
the iſland; and always was in their own hands, 
whether held by the crown, or granted to any ſub- 
ject. We find that it was valued at ſeven pounds 
thirteen ſhillings and eight pence in the time of 
Henry the Seventh, in 1507. In the ſeventh year 
of king Edward the Sixth, it was granted to the 
truſtees of Thomas Carew, Eſq. who fold it to a 
perſon of the name of Colnett. Thomas Kemp, 
Eſq. purchaſed ir of his ſon, from whom it came 
by marriage with the heireſs of Kemp, to Henry 
Bromfield, Eſq. of Haywood. It once more 
changed maſters, by the purchaſe of Mr. Gilbert, 
from whom it was afterwards purchaſed by Mr. 
Rolleſton, of Southampton. The manor houſe 1: 
but a ſhort diſtance from Newport, croſſing the 
river at Coppin's mill, from the bottom of Pylc- 
ſtreet. 

THERE are a few particul-rzs more within this 
pariſh, which ought not to be overlooked. On 
the north-eaſt ſhore, a rivulet or brook, which we 
mentioned as a partial boundary to the pariſh, falls 
into the ſea at King's Key or Quay, that took its 
name, which it ſtills retains, from the following 
hiſtorical fact. After king John had been com- 
| pelled 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 533 


pelled by his barons to ſign magna charta, and 
whilſt he was negociating with the Pope to obtain 
abſolution and a releaſe from his engagement, he 
retreated for ſecurity to this iſland, and is ſuppoſed 
to have reſided in this neighbourhood. At this 
time the earl of Devon, who was lord of the iſland, 
had taken part with the confederate barons; ſo 
that he feared to venture far into the iſland, and 
kept near the coaſt. As the country was open to 
the water on three ſides, and on account of a land- 
ing place here, it is probable that he could not 
then have choſe a more eligible fituation. He 
had reaſons to be apprehenſive, that his deſigns 
might be diſcovered, or at leaſt ſuſpected, ſo that 
during his reſidence here he had little converſation 
but with fiſhermen or failors; and his diverſions 
chiefly conſiſted in walking on the ſhore with his 
domeſtics, for the three months that he expected 
the return of his agents, and the arrival of the 
foreign troops he had been led to hope for. 


FariRLEE, the pleaſant ſeat of John White, Eſq. 


on the caſt fide of the river Medina, nearly oppo- 
ſite to Hurſtake, has the next claim to our atten- 
tion. It is on the weſt fide of the road from New- 
port to Eaſt Cowes, and ſcarce three quarters of a 
mile diſtant from the former, between it and the 
river. Its views down the water to Cowes har- 
bour are exceedingly pleaſing. The front of the 
houſe is towards the river; but we could not ad- 
mire the buildings attached to it on the other parts. 
Irs lawn, which extends to the water, is ſpacious, 


and 


. 
— — —UäEjä—— 2 — 2 
. * 
. 
— nw vin — — - - 
- . * : —_— = _— 
* -3 \ = 


pO 
'B 

ny 

| , 

* 


$34 HISTORY OF THE 


and gives the greateſt advantage of aſpect to the 

| building. A wood on its left ſerves as a ſhelter to 
the banks of the river, and the right wing is open, 
and deſcends to the ſame point. 

FarrLes is mentioned as a manor, held by Wil- 
liam St. Martin of the counteſs Iſabella, in ca- 
pite, in the time of Edward the Firſt; and again, 
in the ſeventeenth year of Henry the Sixth, Sir 
John Popham poſſeſſed the ſame manors. 

Sour other particulars have not yet fallen under 
our notice. The mill, lately erected by Mr. 
Porter, at the extremity of the brook below North 
Fairlee, deſerves particular mention. It is known 
by the name of Botany Bay Mill, and received this 
fingular name from the circumſtance of its erec- 
tion at the time when the firſt convicts for that 
diſtant country were waiting at the Mother Bank, 
when thetranſports received ſupplies from Newport, 
which were conveyed down the river; and as Mr. 
Porter at this time hired all the labourers he could 
in the town, they frequently went down the river 
in boats. On theſe occaſions, the porters on the 
_ quay uſed tauntingly to aſk them, F they were 
going to Botany Bay; and the name was applied to 
It from this incident. Oa the other building on 
the oppoſite ſhore, deſigned for the ſame purpoſe 
but ſomewhat higher up, and coreſpondently call- 
ed Jackſon's Bay, we ſhall have occaſion to ſpeak 
in the pariſhes of the Weſt Medina. The views 
of theſe from near Padmore, where the road turns 
off eaſtward toward Wootton, are beyond all that 
the fancy or imagination can deſcribe. 


ISLE OF WIGHT, ” 535 


Prx hrs we ſhould be guilty of an injuſtice to the 


curious, if we omitted to notice the Folly, about 
half a mile below the mills, where, as the very pleaſ- 
ing author of Sketches of Deſcription, &c. ob- 
ſerves, © the OrsrERI cus of Newport river reſides 
as a publican, and at the ſeaſon lines the ſhore 
with the produce of Cancalle, a bay abounding 
with oyſters, near St. Maloes, and drags them 
when fattened for the iſland ſupply;” his farther 
deſcription of the ſcene is highly grateful. * The 
water was receding to its loweſt ebb, and afforded 
a good ſcope of employment to a group of old and 
young fiſhing gentry in various coloured garbs : 
Here were old females picking up cockles, with 
a more active train in the like ſteps of induſtry ; 
and here and there at different angles, as if placed 
by the wiſhes of poetic fancy, ſeveral ſturdy fiſher- 
men exerting their ſpears for eels, the riggling 
gentry well. rewarding their toil. —The influx of 
the tides,” continues he, © brought at this ſeaſon”? 
Viz. in June, “ an infinite quantity of mullet and 
baſe, and between the hours of fix and eight, we 
had ſeveral hauls with a ſeine, every time preſſed 
by the weight, and bringing numbers on the bank, 
leaping like animated ſilver.” 


=_— 
1 


Srer. X. Of the PARISH of ARRETON. 


Tuls was one of the fix ancient churches of this 
iſland, which were given to the abbey of Lyra, in 
Normandy, by William Fitz Oſbora. It is men- 


tioned 


5 
* 
1 
4 * 
Thi 
Fo 
| "I 
1 
* 
1 
* 
aq 14 
43 
* 


536 — HISTORY or THE 


tioned in Domeſday-book, under the name of 
Adrington, as held by the king in demeſne. King 
Edward the Confeſſor had alſo held it. The abbey 
of Lyra held the church of this manor, a yardland, 
and an acre of meadow. The church was charged 
in the thirteenth year of king Edward the Third 
with one man at arms and three bowmen, and the 
vicarage with one bowman; and we meet with it 
in 1305 in the dean of the iſland's return, that 
the abbot and convent of Quarr, who had obtained 
it at the endowment by Baldwin de Redvers, either 
by gift or ſome other means, had all the great and 
fmall tithes of the pariſh of Arreton, paying to 
our abbot and convent of Lyra an annual penſion 
of eleven ſhillings. In cardinal Beaufort's roll, 
Arreton was valued at fifty marks, with a penſion 
of forty ſhillings, and the vicarage at eight marks. 
But when that abbey was diſſolved, it came into 
the hands of Sir Levinus Bennet, by purchaſe from 
the crown; whole fon ſold it to Thomas, lord 
Culpeper, when governor of the iſland. From 
this family it paſſed into that of lord Fairfax, - of 
Leeds Caſtle, in Kent, by marriage with his daugh- 
ter and heireſs, who are ſtill the proprietors. A 
fee farm rent of forty-five pounds fix ſhillings and 

ten pence is paid for this manor to the crown. 
Arx the diſſolution of the monaſteries, the 
ſuperfluous, and in many places, the neceſſary plate 
of the churches was ſold by order of the crown. In 
Arreton church were diſpoſed of, a croſs and cha- 
lice, paxe, and cenſor of ſilver, weighing 132 
ounces, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | '$:7F7 


ounces, for thirty two pounds fix ſhillings and 
eight pence; alſo a hundred and a half of braſs, 
wanting four pounds weight, for thirty ſix ſhillings 
and eight pence; and making together thirty four 
pounds three ſhillings and four pence. | 

Maxy manors formerly exiſted in this extenſive 
pariſh, but ſome of them have been ſince diſmem- 
bered. We ſhall take notice of the moſt conſidera- 
ble ones. 

'To begin with our deſcription from the north, 
Briddlesford, as a manor, firſt attracts our attention. 
It was part of the ancient poſſeſſions of the Liſles, 
and Sir John Liſle built a chapel, which he en- 
dowed with the tithes of his demeſnes there. It 
is mentioned in Domeſday, as parcel of the poſſeſ- 
lions of William Fitz Azor. It was now held by 
Nigell, but Unfol had it in fee of Edward the 
Confeſſor, when, as at preſent, it was aſſeſſed at one 
hide. In the time of Iſabella de Fortibus, Sir 
John Lifle and the prior of Chriſtchurch are record- 
ed to have held two parts and a half of a fee in 
Briddlesford and Hamſtead, as of the lands of 
William Ruſſel, lord of Yaverland. In the dean's 
returns, Briddlesford chapel is mentioned to be en- 
dowed as above; but it does not appear in cardi- 
nal Beaufort's valuation. 

Tris chapel, though demoliſhed, is charged 
with an annual free rent to the crown, of one 
pound eight ſhillings and four pence, payable half 


yearly, As a manor, it is ſaid to have been poſ- 
ſeſſed, after Lifle, by the families of Burton and 


NC, 12. MA; Wray, 


* 
: 
— 12 
r 8 
- — g 


— — ge” ra —_ rk 3 * a * 
<a —⅛ 
Were * 


— Xo * « 
2 


2 


r A 


18 
* 
oe” 
.”T7 
val 
Ea 


1 
T5 
1 s 
K : 

[3 


8 * * 
—— — 
= 


— — — — 


X N 2 : 


— 


— — 


838 HISTORY OF THE 


Wray, and now to be held in abeyance by a Mr, 
Tarver, of Romſey. 
East STANDEN, now called little Standen, was 2 
lordſhip at the time of the Conqueror's ſurvey. — 
There are two entries of Standen in Domeſday ; the 
firſt, as part of the grant to Wm. Fitz Azor, which, 
in the time of the Confeſſor, had been held by two 
freemen in fee, and aſſeſſed at five yardlands, but 
now at one. The other was held by Bolla in the 
Confeſſor's time, but now by William Fitz Stur, and 
Humfridus of him; and was then and now aſſeſſed 
for a hide and a half. Probably one of theſe was 
the place, afterwards called Eaſt Standen, and the 
other what has been named Weſt Standen. In the 
time of Iſabella, counteſs of Albemarle, we find 
Thomas D'Evercy holding a knight's fee of her, 
by virtue of which he had Standen and Wode in 
demeſne. The lord of Standen and Wode was 
charged with one man at arms for defence of the 
ifland, as appears by the roll about five years after, 
and the chapel of Stownam or Standen, which had 
been erected by Sir Peter D'Evercy, with one 
bowman. 
In the dean of the iſland's return, in 1 3055 to 
biſhop Woodlock, the chapel of Standen appears to 
have been endowed with all the great and ſmall 
tithes of the ſaid Sir Peter D*Evercy, in Wode, in 
the pariſh of Brading, and one half of the tithes 
of Standen; the rector of Arreton taking the. other 
half. In 1404, cardinal Beaufort's valuation of 
Standen rates it at fix marks and forty pence, 
or 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 539 


* 


or half a mark; it was at that time, therefore, of 
ſome conſideration. The chapel, though decayed, 
may ſtill be traced from its remains in the orchard 
behind the houſe. This place was one of the ap- 
pointed watches in the time of Edward the Second, 
and probably the fame with what we find after- 
wards in the time of Charles the Firſt, ſaid to be on 
St. George's down; it was to conſiſt of two men. 
Jon GLAMoRGAN afterwards poſſeſſed it, by 
marrying the daughter and heireſs of the family of 
D'Evercy. It is ſaid to have paſſed ſucceſſively 


into the poſſeſſion of Urry, Bramſhot, Alcorn, and 


Smith, and at laſt to Chriſtchurch college, Oxford. 
In the 17th of Henry the Sixth it appears, from a 
roll of the tenants of the ifland, that George 
Bramſhot held one fee, including the manor of 
Standen, in demeſne, in right of his wife Elizabeth, 


the daughter and heir of William Urry, which had 


before been held of the counteſs by Tho. D*Evercy. 
If it was not made uſe of in ſome reſpects as 
a Chantry, it might be conveyed to that body by 


the laſt poſſeſſor; but we cannot, for want of par- 
ticular local information, determine any thing on 


the ſubject. We find that Mr. W. Roach pays a 
rent of 21. 8s. 6d. half yearly, for Eaſt Standen, 
under the name of a fee farm rent. 

Wr ſhall only add, that it is moſt pleaſantly ſitu- 


ated on the eaſt ſide of St. George's down, the 


ſummit of which is a delightful plain, near a mile 
In extent, and commands a fine view of the ſea, 

and of a great part of the iſſand. A bowling green 
N n2 was 


FW IIS WE Pooh ae -- ceo wee » WT 57 


7 
„ „ 


— 


- Sa 


* — * 
— 


1 — 


R 4 \ — 
=_ \ * $ - - _— 4, — * * 
eee ee 


p D 
. 


$40 HISTORY OF Tur - 


was made on it, and a houſe of accomodation ere&- 
ed during the government of the earl of Southamp- 
ton; where the gentlemen of the iſland aſſembled 
and dined together twicea week. SirJohn Oglander, 
in his memoirs, gives a liſt of thirty ſeven gentlemen 
and ten farmers, that almoſt conſtantly attended ; 
but it was afterwards diſcontinued, from a leſs re- 
gular reſort of company. From this down is a full 
view of Cowes harbour, in a delightful avenue, 
* with its veſſels at anchor; as wellas of Lutterel's folly 
and Calſhot caſtle. The land views of the iſland 
are not leſs pleaſing from this lofty ſituation. 
This manor was diſmembered and ſold to differ- 
ent purchaſers. | 
WesrT STANDEN is pleaſantly ſituated on the 
right hand of the road from Godſhill to Newport, 
not a mile from Shide bridge, under the weſt ſide 
of St. George's down. The proprietor, Mr. Ro- 
berts, made great improvements in it, ſo as to 
render it a very agreeable reſidence. In the time 
of Iſabella de Fortibus, John de Rivers had held, 
but then Richard Ruſſel did hold half a fee of 
William Ruſſel, lord of Yaverland, part of her poſ- 
ſeſſions in Rowborough, Weſt Standen, and Spann. 
HasreLEY appears to have been a conſiderable 
manor at the time of Domeſday, but paſſed, with 
Combley in this pariſh, and ſome other manors, 
into the poſſeſſion of Quarr abbey, at the time of 
its foundation, by Engler de Bohun. John Flem- 
ing, Eſq. pays a fee farm rent of two pounds ten 


ſhillings for the tenths of Combley; carl Harold 
held 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | $41 


held Haſeley of the Confeſſor, when it was aſſeſſed 
at three hides, but now at a yardland and a half. 
The monks converted it into a grange ; and it 
was afterwards, when that abbey was diſſolved, 
purchaſed by Mr. George Mills, of Southampton. 
His family ſold it, as they did Quarr, to lord 
chief juſtice Fleming, and it is now poſſeſſed, as 
we have related under Quarr, by John Fleming, 
Eſq. of Stoneham Park, near Southampton. 
MzRsToNv, as a manor, is mentioned in Domeſ- 
day, as part of the poſſeſſions of William Fitz 
Stur. It had been held in fee of Edward the Con- 
feſſor, and then and now aſſeſſed at half a hide. 


Tuls was perhaps the ſame which is now called 


Mepſton. It appears probable, that Preſtetone, 
there mentioned, now called Pereton, and then 
held by the ſame tenure, has been ſince annexed 
to it, and that the whole has been conſidered as 
parcel of the manor of Merſton ; for that was rated 
at two hides and a yardland and a half. Pereton is 
not far diſtant from it, but is not accounted to 
poſſeſs any manorial rights. In the countels of 
Albemarle's record, the lady Whitfield held lands in 
Merſton, as of the poſſeſſions of lady Matilda de 
Eſtur, and Robert de Giros, as part of the poſſeſſions 
of the ſame lady, amounting, with lands in Swey- 
land, to the fourth part of a fee; from whom it 
came into a younger branch of the Liſle family, who 
held it in the ſeventh year of Edward the Third. 
It ſeems to have followed the fate of Oſborn, in 
Whippingham pariſh, and to have had the ſame 

n Proprietors, 


[ 
ET | 
4 
1 
. 
} 

| 
| 
I 
'£ 
1 
: 


| 


FR 


n FI — 


N 
+ 
- 
1 
. 
* 


hy —_— 
n 
o = _ E ITS 2 


. — 
. 


542 | HISTORY OF THI 


proprietors, till it came into the hands « the late 
Mr. Blachford. 

Hal farm and manor is to be found on the 
road from Arreton to Apſe heath, and from thence 
to Royal heath and Sandown caſtle, near the 


eaſtern extremity of this pariſh. We find a manor 
called Aleballe, in Domeſday roll, among the 
poſſeſſions of William Fitz Stur held by Niſel 
Godric in fee of the Confeſſor, and was then 
and now aſſeſſed at half a hide. In the eighth 
year of Edward the Firſt, it was held of lady Ma- 
tilda de Eſtur by William de Goditon, parcel of 
the poſſeſſions of the lady Iſabella, and reckoned 
at half a fee. Richard de Hall was charged with 
two bowmen, and the lady Mary Butler with one 
| bowman for Hale, in the thirteenth year of Ed- 
ward the Third. We can only add, that it has 
been for ſome centuries in the poſſeſſion of the 
family of Oglander. 

Or the manor of Bottebridge, ſometimes called 
Butbridge, we have no account in Domeſday, but 
we ſind William Urry holding the fifth part of a 
fee of the abbot of Quarr, in Bottebridge, as 
held alſo of the lady Matilda, and part of the 
claims of the counteſs of Devon, in the eighth 
year of Edward the Firſt. As a manor, it was 
charged to maintain one bowman for defence of 
the iſland, in the reign of Edward the Third. Sir 
Robert Dillington afterwards purchaſed it, from 
whom it deſcended in the female line to Bock- 
ſand and Biſſet, as we have mentioned under the 
manor of Knighton.  RooKLEy, 


ISLE or WIGHT. 543 


Rook LEV, or Roucley, has not been mentioned 
as a manor. It is ſituated at the junction of the 
roads from Appleford and Godſhill, and gave name 
to the family of Roucle, its ancient owners. We 


meet with two entries of it in the time of Iſabella, 


counteſs of Albemarle and Devon, when John le 
Fleming and William le Marter held each a 
moiety of a half fee in Blackpan and Roucle, and 
Henry de Bottebridge and Robert de Roucle a quar- 
ter of a fee in Roucle, A licence is alſo met with 
in the regiſter of Wincheſter, for de Roucley to 
have oratories in his lordſhips of Roucley and 
Denmead. In the time of Edward the Third, one 
of the family married a daughter and coheireſs of 


Sir John Glamorgan of Brook, whither he removed. 


The eſtate afterwards came to the family of Cole- 
man, and the laſt of them, after the deceaſe of his 
ſiſter, deviſed it to James Worſley, Eſq. 

Sir Richard's hiſtory has placed this manor in 
Godſhill pariſh; but our parochial information 
places it in Arreton. It muſt be acknowledged, 
however, that Rookley farm is within the pariſh 
of Godſhill. 

WACKLAND 1s connected with Leſsland in this 
pariſh, in the record of the counteſs Iſabella ; when 
half a fee was held there by John de la Brugge. 
We have not yet noticed Shide, as a manor, 
though Shide bridge and mill are within the pa- 


riſh of Whippingham ; we apprehend, however, 


that the manor houſe is higher up on the ſtream, 
towards Weſt Standen, and within the limits of 
 Nn4 this 


7 


7 * = 
. — — 


rern ea" ue +7. 


— — 
hey uT ; . 
F 
= © ® 8 i= =_ 


; 
: 
* 
| 


544 HISTORY or THE 


this pariſh. There are three entries of this name 
in Domeſday, the firſt ſpeaks of a manor, which 
had been held in abeyance of the Confeſſor, aſ- 
ſeſſed at a hide and a half, and now for as much. 
The next was held by William Fitz Azor, which 
had been held in abeyance of the Confeſſor and aſ- 
| ſeſſed at five yardlands, but now at three. It was 
held of the Confeſſor at two hides and a little leſs 
than one yardland, now ata hide and a half. The 
third was held by Gozeline Fitz Azor. The ma- 
nor of Shide was held by William le Martin, as 
of the poſſeſſions of Iſabella de Fortibus, in capite, 
with other manors, The very ſame manors were 
held by Sir John Popham in the 15th year of Henry 
the Sixth. It was at Shide bridge that the inqui- 
ſition was taken of the cuftomary ſignal beacons 
in time of war in the ſixteenth year of the reign of 
Edward the Second ; and again at the ſame place 
in the eighteenth year of the ſame reign, as we 
have already noted.“ In the liſt of manors, it is 
ſaid to have paſſed from the crown through the 
hands of Ge Argenton, St, Martin, Popham, Wad- 
ham, and to be now poſſeſſed by the name of 
Smith; but on what authority we cannot in all 
theſe changes decide, 

Trnovcn laſt mentioned, yet not the icaſt in im- 
portance, as a modern ſituation, Fern HILL, the 
ſcat of the right honorable Thomas Orde Powlett, 
the preſent worthy, reſpected, and reſpectable 
governor of the iſland, has peculiar claims to our 

Sce Chap. 4. p. 40, 41. 
attention. 


ISLE OF WIGHT... 545 


attention. It has a moſt delightful aſpect, and 
its high gothic tower is viſible to Portſmouth 
and many places of the iſland, from the different 
parts of which it has a very fine effect. It iz 
contiguous to the road from Newport to Wootton 


bridge, on the north eaſt ſide of Wootton com- 


mon, and ſtands nearly on the ſummit of the emi= 
nence on the ſouth weſt fide of Fiſhborn creek. In 


moſt of the maps of the iſland, heretofore publiſh- 


ed, it has been called Barr houſe. It has a gate 
from the park on the oppoſite fide, near the foot 
of Wootton bridge, and another at the end of 
Beech lane. We cannot, perhaps, diſcharge our 
duty as hiſtorians better than by citing a MS. 
copy of an inhabitant of the iſland, with which 
we have been favoured for this work, of the pro- 
ceedings there in the month of June laſt ; which 
we ſhall preſent to our readers in the language of 
the writer. It is needleſs to ſay, that this was 
occaſioned by the viſit of their majeſties to Portſ- 
mouth, to view. the feet, after the memorable 
firſt of June. 
« No diſplays of animated ardour, at this period 
« of celebrating ſo matchleſs a naval victory, have 
« excceded thoſe at FER HILL, the ſeat of our 
te excellent governor, the right hon. Thomas OrDpe 
C PowLetT,. Fern Hill houſe with its aſpiring go- 
© thic tower, was adorned with more than a thou- 
fand lamps, of powerful luſtre. The arts united 
to convey the feelings of its generous maſter to 
te the captivated ſpectators. The lawn and gar- 
ce den 


, 4 n n x - of 
n 5 — — — - 
= 5 — — N . 
„ _ 
— ids - oy _—_ —— 
— OT at 7 * * 20 a 2 '3 1 — 5 — A” 
- } - . — - 3 — — 8 =_ 


7 
' 
: 
1 
i 


4 

by 
wh 
Y 
1 
. 


2 
* 
* 

21 


2 >. — = 


540 HISTORY OF THE 


(c 


ce 


cc 


: ce 


ce 
cr 
cr 
cr 
xc 
cc 
cc 


cc 


„ 


cc 
cc 


cc 
cc 
ec 
cc 


cc 


den were crouded with reſpectable parties of the 
iſland inhabitants, and within doors noseiTa- 
LiTy loaded the table with every kind of ſub. 
ſtantial and delicate refreſhment. After the 
king, queen, and royal family, a Iong continu- 
ance of their health and augmented felicity— 
the navy and army of Great Britain—the gallant 
carl Howe, his brave admirals, officers, and 
men, were drank with heart-felt applauſes. 
Many ſentiments of pureſt affection to our gra- 
cious ſovereign and unrivalled conſtitution 
were repeated, many fpirited ſongs encored, 
and the three feſtive evenings concluded with 
univerſal harmony and grateful acknowledge. 
ments. The exhibition of fire works was in- 
conceivably pleaſing and ſuperb. 

Ir would be unjuſt to omit the exertions of 
Mr. Vick, an eminent miller at Wootton bridge. 
Ingenuity and loyalty concurred in the diſpo- 
fition of brilliant ornaments in his houſe and 
gardens, which, reflected from the water, had 
the effect of almoſt magical enchantment.” 


Wr are particularly happy to find that a ſub- 


ſtantial ſccurity of railing, &c. painted white, has 
been erected on the ſouth fide of this bridge, as a 
guide by night, and that the other is to be done 


by the pariſh of Wootton. 


S:cr. XI. Ot the PARISH of GODSHILL. 


W enter on this pariſh with a degree of plea- 


ſure, which from the communications of the wor- 


thy 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 547 


thy rector of Niton, of whom we ſhall have occaſi- 


on preſently to make mention more fully, we are 
enabled to treat with more accuracy. Godſhill 
was one of the ſix which were given to the abbey 
of Lyra, and exiſted before the compilation of 
Domeſday-book. The pariſh is of great extent, 
being bounded on the ſouth by the ſea, on the 
weſt and north by Whitwell, Chale, and Arreton, 
and on the eaſt by Newchurch. The bounds of 
Arreton pariſh nearly approach the church of 
Godſhill. 

Or the manor of Godſhill we have therefore no 
ſpecial accounts in Domeſday, or in the roll of 
claims made by Iſabella de Fortibus, in the eighth 
year of king Edward the Firſt. In the thirteenth 
year of Edward the Third we find that the vicar of 
Godſhill was to ſupply a bowman for the defence 
of the iſland ; the return made by the dean of the 
iſland in 1305, alſo obſerves, that the abbot of Lyra 
had the great and ſmall tythes of the ancient de- 
meſne of Wike and Appuldurcombe, and of William 
de Heyno at Stenbury, now in the pariſh of Whit. 
well; that the abbot of Quarr had all the great 
tythes of the ancient demeſne of John Liſle, at 
Roude, and of the lands of Adam Piſtor and Walter 
Gaſterne, of which the vicar of St. Nicholas in 
the caſtle had all the ſmall tythes; that the abbot 
of Quarr alſo had all the great tythes of John Liſle's 
demeſne at Rewe, and a moiety of the ſmall tythes 
there; and that the chapel of St. Lawrence had the 


great tythes of the ancient demeſne of Hawley, at 
| Spann. 


548 HISTORY OF THE 


Spann. In cardinal Beaufort's valuation, about an 
hundred years after, we find that the church of 
Godſhill was valued at one hundred marks, with a 
penſion of five ſhillings. 

Wukx the alien priories were ſtripped of their 
acquiſitions i in this kingdom, this manor was given 
to the monaſtery of Shene, in Surry ; and when, 
laſtly, all monaſteries and religious houſes were 
diſſolved, it came by marriage with captain Worſ- 
ley' s widow, into the hands of Sir Francis Wal- 
ſingham, afterwards of Sir Thomas Millar, and 
then of the Worſley's of Appuldurcombe, who pur- 
chaſed it of the laſt proprietor. It was held on 
leaſe from the monaſtery by captain Richard 
Worſley, for a term of forty ſix years, at a rent of 
two hundred marks. Sir Francis Walſingham ob- 
tained it of the crown in fee. 

Tux ſituation of the church has been remarked, 
as ſtanding on the top of a ſteep hill, which com- 
mands the moſt beautiful views. In its elegant 
tower are five bells and a clock. It is an ancient 
and well built edifice, with croſs aiſles, and con- 
tains many old tombs of the families of de Aula or 
Hawley, Heyno, and Try, but the braſs figures 
and inſcriptions were probably ſtripped off in the 
civil wars. A handſome tomb of Sir John Leigh 
and of lady Mary, the daughter and heircſs of 
John Hacket, Eſq. who dicd in the reign of 

Tenry the Eighth, is among thoſe which remain ; 
their figures of alabaſter, with the arms of the fa- 
mily of Hacket on the border of the lady's robe, 

are 


TSLE OF WIGHT, 549 


are at full length, but there is no inſcription. 
There is alſo' a monument of Sir James Worſley 
and his lady, who was the daughter and heireſs of 
Sir John Leigh; this has no inſcription, but it has 
the arms of Worſley, Leigh, Hacket, and Standiſh ; 

which laſt was the family of Sir James Worſley's 


mother. Captain Richard Worſley, the ſon of Sir 


James, has alſo a monument, with an inſcriptions 
which ſupplies the want in the others. The lan- 
guage is too poetical to admit of a literal tranſla- 
tion, and therefore we ſhall not intrude it upon our 
readers. A ſuperb monument of marble has been 
lately erected to the memory of Sir Robert Worſ- 
ley and his brother Henry, in the north part of the 
croſs aiſle. Theſe were the laſt heirs of the elder 
branch of the family. Buſts are finely ſculptured, 
and placed upon the ſarcophagus of the monument. 
Tux living of Godſhill is a vicarage, in the gift 
of the provoſt and fellows of Queen's college, Ox- 
ford, and now annexed to the rectory of Niton. It 
was in the patronage of the crown from the time of 
the reformation, to the reign of king Charles the 
Firſt, when he gave the right or advowſon to that 
body, as we ſhall ſtate under Niton more fully. 
Tux circumſtance of the church being fituated on 
the ſummit of a circular hill of conſiderable height, 
no doubt gave a name to this pariſh. It is likewiſe 
probable, that on ſome account or other the hill 
was honoured by its preſent appellation anterior 
to the building of the church. This' conjecture is 
ſtrengthened by a ſuperſtitious tradition of great 
| anxiquity. 


n 


f 


* 


S . 


ww” + 
4 — — — 
17 — « — —_— — <=S * — 1 
rr — 
bo PI Pa 4 bay Rl — . 


450 HISTORY OF THE 


antiquity. A foundation, it is ſaid, was laid for a 
church in a far more central point, but whatever 
materials were collected by day, were, by an invi. 
ſible nightly hand removed to the place called 
Godſhill, and that the founder influenced by this 
miracle, purchaſed the preſent ſcite of the church, 
and the name was applied to the whole pariſh. — 
Similar pious frauds to infpire a diſtinguiſhed re- 
verential awe for a favourite ſpot were not incon- 
ſiſtent with the practices of the monks, under whoſe 
auſpices it is certain this church was built. 
Tus ſoil varies, but generally conſiſts of arable, 
with a very fmall portion of wafte land, and fomc 
down towards the fea, and to the weſt of Appul- 
durcombe park. The foil in the more central 
parts is light, but very productive of grain, and 
in ſome places peculiarly adapted for raiſing for- 
ward lambs, a kind of ſtock very profitable to the 
farmer; and owing to the warmth of the land, the 
harveſt is more forward than in the pariſhes to the 
eaſt or weſt. The fields for the moſt part are en- 
cloſed with banks, on which the underwood makes 
good fences ; and there are ſome conſiderable cop- 
pices, and the whole is tolerably well wooded. 

Tu roads made of a red binding gravel, are in 
moſt places pretty good. In Godſhill are com- 
prehended four vills or tithings, viz. Rookley, 
Rowde, Week, and Stenbury, and it conſiſts 
chiefly of detatched farm houſes and cottages, con- 
| taining in the whole about eleven hundred inhabi- 
tants. The principal village adjoining to the church 
13 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 551 


is formed entirely of thatched cottages, which hav- 


ing gardens annexed to them, with the church on 
a natural piramid in the centre, exhibit a very neat 
ruſtic picture, In different parts of the pariſh 
_ dwell conſiderable landholders, both in fee ſimple 
and on lives; and very many opulent farmers who 
hold large farms on leaſe. The cottages erected for 
the convenience of farmers, as well as thoſe in the 


village, are inhabited either by labourers or me- 


chanics employed in making farming implements; 
and there is no kind of manufacture to be met with. 
A grammar ſchool was founded and indowed and 


a houſe built for the reſidence of the maſter by Sir 


Richard Worſley, Bart. in the year 1614; and in 
the year 1616, Richard Gard bequeathed the an- 
nual ſum of five pounds for an uſher to the 
above ſchool. Independent of this inſtitution, 
which is at preſent in a flouriſhing and reſpect- 
able ſtate under the management of the Rev. John 
Lancaſter, there is likewiſe a free ſchool for the 
benefit of the pariſh at large. In the village there 
is a ſmall wooden building erected under the 
auſpices of the late John Weſley, for the purpoſe 
of a chapel for the methodiſts, to be ſupported by 
ſubſcription, but the ſect at preſent ſeems on the 
decline; perhaps with a ſingle exception there is 


no diſſenter in the pariſh, as the methodiſts ſuffer 
not themſelves to be diſtinguſhed by that appel- 


lation. 


A remarkable inſtance of the terrible effects of 


lightning on the ninetcenth day of January, 1778, 
was 


552 HISTORY OF THE 


Was communicated in a letter of the 21ſt. addreſſed 
to Sir Richard Worſley, Bart. from Mr. Walſh, 
then vicar of Godfhill ; which we ſhall here tran- 
ſcribe for the information of oy of our readers, 
„ Dear SIR, | 
© We had here on bey laſt, about 

nine in the morning, very ſevere lightning, with 
two of the loudeſt claps of thunder I ever heard. 
There was a ſenſible interval between the firſt 
flaſh of lightning and its thunder. The ſecond 
flaſh of lightning and clap of thunder ſeemed to be 

at the ſame inſtant. My houſe rocked as if it was 
tumbling down, and at firſt I thought it the effects 
of an earthquake. I concluded that the cloud 
would burſt, and be attended with fatal con- 
ſequences. It firſt made its appearance againſt 
the old tower, and from thence, its zig Zag, 
confuſed, and various directions are ſo perplexed 
that they cannot be followed in any one continued 
line of deſcription. It ſeems to have commenced 
its rage near the middle of the wall, about four feet 
below the dial plate of the clock, where it tore off 
large pieces of maſlive ſtone, and looſened many 
others, but did not penetrate quite through there; 
ſome of it muſt have entered by the ſpindle, in the 
centre of the dial plate, as it broke the clock caſe, 
liquefied the upper part of the pendulum, diſtorted 
the works of the clock, and broke the piece of 
Iron that regulates the ſtriking. | 

e IT has done no miſchief in the ſtory where 


the bells are, except in the wall on the ſouth 
fide; 


ISLE OF WIGHT: W 


fide; over the belfry, it has rolled up ſome of the 
lead, leaving no marks on the boards or timber 
that ſupported it. The battlements are looſened, 
the ſpindle that ſupports the weather cock is bent 
double, fo is the pinnacle on which it ſtands. The 
pinnacle on the ſouth eaſt angle is in the ſame 
ſituation. The cramp irons and lead that faſtened 
them in, are wrenched out of their places. 

« Near that part of the tower where it ſtruck, 
it broke almoſt all the glaſs in the great window 
behind the gallery; entered the church in an 
angle between the ſtone frame of the window and 
the wall; ſhivered and tore off part of the frame, 
to which the glaſs was faſtened ne looſened it 
from the building 1 10 8015 

© THiRE' 1s a large hole between the two cook 
in the angle at the bottom of the weſt end, through 
which it muſt either have deſcended from the bat- 
tlements of the tower, or come out from the ſtory 
where the clock is fixed. In its eaſtward direction, 
it has grazed over the arches, deſcended to the 
butment, doing no miſchief there, but tearing off 
ſome of the white waſh, it continued its courſe 
eaſtward to the monument between the two chan- 
cels, ſtruck off a part of the moulding, and then 
laid hold of the iron work, when it became forky, 


conducted by the different pieces of the iron about 


the movements. One part of it entered cloſe by 
the corner of one of the hatchments ; infinuated 
itſelf with inconceivable ſubtilty through the wall, 
and came out again in the upper joint of the win- 


N00. - TIF dow 


; 
_ 2 — 
— 4 — — « — 2 * 1 
p pF h « oF — A —— 2 w 
: _ On — oo A ESE s r 1. = — p b = \ a 
1 =_ * 2 by X * > * N 
1 AT a. —u—y„:¼ſ8.. 2 „een i 8 = \ Ll * 5- 1 
„„ ᷣͥ ˖.́ A. . .. 8 . ** « r 421 


854 HISTORY OF THE 


dow frame over the communion table. The other 
part entered the wall in the angle cloſe to the 
bottom of Mr. Stuart Worſley's monument; pierced 
through the wall and the buttreſs on the outſide, 
threw a large piece of ſtone to a conſiderable diſ- 
tance, deſcended down the buttreſs, ploughed up 
afurrow a yard or more in length at the north-eaſt 
corner of the buttreſs, and made its exit. There 
are ſome ſtones looſened on the outſide of the open- 
ing of your family vault, which may, or may not, 
be the effects of this ſhock—there is alſo another 
furrowat the ſouth-weſt corner of the church, near 
. mon place where it begun its violence. 

„ Tuis is but a very faint deſcription of the 
. lightning; if it had happened the 
day before, when we were aſſembled in the church, 
I believe many of the congregation would have 
been deſtrayed by it. | 
I thought it right to inform you, Sir, of the 
truth and particulars of this event; therefore choſc 
rather to expoſe my ignorance of technical terms, 
than betray the leaſt unwillingneſs to inform you 
of any thing in my power, that you would wiſh to 
know; a tribute of gratitude juſtly due to you from, 
5 1 your much obliged, 

And obedient humble ſervant, 
| DANIEL WALSH.” 
- GopsniLL, Fan. 21/, 1778. 
70 Sir Richard Worſley, Baronet. 

We have only to add, that about the year 1789, 
two of the gable ends fell in, which broke the 
formal 


TSLE OF WIGHT. $55 


formal appearance of its extremity ; this was pro- 
bably occaſioned by the circumſtances of the 
lightning, the account of which has been juſt given. 


Tuts pariſh was formerly expoſed to ſome diſ- 


turbances, as appears from two letters of the biſhops 
of Wincheſter, in 1307, to Edward the Second, 
praying the king's aid, and in 1340 to Edward 
the Third. We have related the conduct of the 
monks, and the reſult of that conduct, in the hiſ- 
tory of Quarr abbey“, and therefore need not here 
repeat them. 

Taz famous Dr. Cole, 1 of St. Paul's, of 
trimming memory, who lived in the times of Henry 
the Eighth, Edward the Sixth, queen Mary, and 
queen Elizabeth, was a native of Godſhill. He 
had been a great traveller, and was afterwards 
warden of New College, Oxford; an active op- 


. Poſer of the reformation, both from the pulpit and 


preſs, but ſoftened his tone, as Henry's averſion 
to the ſee of Rome increaſed, and acknowledged 
his ſupremacy. He afterwards went ſo far in his 
ſucceſſor's reign, as to join the reformers ; but 
reverted to his former tenets in that of queen 
Mary, and was not only choſen to diſpute with 
Cranmer and Ridley, but preached Cranmer's exe- 
cution ſermon. He was commiſſioned to purſue 
the tragedy in Ireland, but made a ſhort ſtay in 


his way at Cheſter, where he divulged to the mayor 


of that city the occaſion of his journey, in which, 


See chap. 14, p. 426, 427, Ec. 
O0 02 it 


* W*z Y — — he $6 
” 
— — * % - 
= — 4 
N Ss 1 
ol 4 Cn CSS... =, > 


— S * 


1 


— nner . 
——> =. 8 — 
+3 ww + wm To 


Senn Chem 
a. - - = . 
KA ——— — 


* 
1 


5 56 = HISTORY oF THE 


it is related, he was overheard by his hoſteſs, who 
had a brother a clergyman in Dublin, and found 
means to ſubſtitute a pack of cards for the com- 

- miſſion, in the little box that contained it. This 

he packed up, without diſcovering the trick which 

had been ſo dexterouſly put upon him. He ar- 

rived in Dublin in December, 1558, and was in- 
troduced to the lord lieutenant, when, with much 
formality, he diſcloſed his buſineſs and preſented 
his box. - The diſcovery occaſioned ſome ſarcaſtic 
advice from the viceroy, and the neceſſity of re- 
turning for a new commiſſion was indiſpenſable; 
but before it could be effected, the queen died, 
and his golden dreams of power and perſecution 


were buried with her. This dexterous hoſteſs was 


rewarded with a penſton of forty pounds a yeas for 
her fervices by queen Elizabeth. 

Is fpeaking of the manors, Appuldurcombe rea- 
ſonably claims the preference. Beſides what has 
been mentioned in its hiſtory as a priory, whilſt it 
.remained in the hands of the Aldgate nuns, the 
family of Fry held it by leaſe from that convent; 
but the laſt of this family left a widow, who was 
one of the daughters and heirs of John Hacket, 
Eſq. of Woolverton, afterwards married to Sir John 
Leigh. We have already given a tranſlation: of 
the diſpenſation granted by Henry the Seventh, 
to Sir John Leigh, in 1505, * from whom it deſ— 
cended to the family of Worſley. 


# See chap. 8, p. 18, &c. 


Tur 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 669. 


Tur lords of Appuldurcombe are charged with 
two men at arms and two bowmen for defence of, 
the iſland, in the roll of the 13th of Edward the 
Third; and in the year 1638, Appuldurcombe 1s 
repreſented as liable to keep a watch of two men, 
as it had alſo been at the time of the inquiſition 
in the 18th year of Edward the Second. 5 

As the principal ſeat of the Worſley family, the 
houſe and park are always the objects of attention 
to ſtrangers. The ſcite of the old priory houſe: 
was but a ſmall diſtance from the preſent manſion 
In the time of queen Elizabeth it had obtained a 
compleat repair; but Sir Robert Worſley entirely 
removed it in the beginning of the preſent century, 
and it has been entirely rebuilt by the preſent Sir 
Richard Worſley, at a vaſt expence. The man- 
fion houſe is large and beautiful, and built of 
free ſtone, having four regular fronts to it of the 
Corinthian order; but the principal of them is 
adorned with twa wings, and hasa lawn before it. 
Our limits prevent us from deſcribing the apart- 
ments, paintings, buſts, ſcarce and valuable anti- 
quities, &c. collected in a courſe of travels on the 
continent, - by the preſent owner. Application 
for admiſſion tickets was heretofore made at the 
Bugle inn, in Newport; but we underſtand that 
orders have been iſſued by the owner to permit 
ſtrangers no farther than the ground floor, from an 
abuſe of the privileges heretofore granted by ſome 
depredations that were committed. Wm. Clark, 
Eſq. to whoſe particular care the houſe is com- 

Oo yz mitted 


558 HISTORY or THE 


mitted in the abſence of Sir Richard Worſley, 
with the utmoſt politeneſs and attention, will ac- 
commodate ladies and gentlemen, on ſending in 
their names, with tickets for this purpoſe; and a 
| written catalogue is there produced to ſtrangers, 
deſcribing the particulars of theſe valuable curio- 
ſities. 
Tux park is well ſtocked with deer, in which is 
an obeliſk of Corniſh granite, near ſeventy feet in 
height, erected to the memory of Sir Robert 
Worſley. Its ſoil is very rich, and affords excel- 
lent paſturage. An artificial caſtle, ſituated on a 
rocky cliff, about half a mile from the park, has a 
view from the houſe, uſually known oy the name 
of Cook's Caſtle. 

We ſhould, perhaps, have mentioned the tes 

in the firſt place, by which you enter into the 
park from Godſhill. It has an elegant gateway of 
the Ionic order; and the lodge is a neat plain 
building, on the right as you enter it, at the foot 
of a ſmall coppice. 
Or Bagwich we meet with an account in Domeſ- 
day, as held of the Confeſſor, and at that time 
at half a yardland. It is on the road from 
Rookley to Bridge Mill, on the weſt ſide of the 
rivulet, and nearly weſt from Godſhill. It is 
charged with a free chapel rent of two pounds and 
eight pence a year. | 

Or Apleford, or Apulderford, we have ſeveral 
entries in Domeſday. It occurs twice in the re- 


cord of the counteſs Iſabella, in the eighth year of 
Edward 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 559 


Edward the Firſt, when John de Liſle held of the 
counteſs, in capite, the manor of Apulderford, and 
the lady Whitfield, as part of the poſſeſſions of 
lady Matilda de Eſtur, held lands in Weſt Aple- 
ford. As a manor, we find it to have been after- 
wards poſſeſſed by the names of Pike and Carter- 
It had a chapel; but exempt from valuation in the 
beginning of the fifteenth century. Thomas Haſ- 
kol, Eſq. of Newport, has lately purchaſed a cot- 
tage here, in a very elevated ſituation, on the eaſt 
ſide of St. Catharine's Down that commands a 
moſt extenſive and delightful proſpect of the iſland 
and of the ſea, which he is improving with much 
taſte and judgment, in a manner which will render 
it a moſt pleaſing and delightful country reſidence. 

Rovpe, as a manor, to the eaſt of Apleford, is 
ſaid to have been held in fee of the Confeſſor by 
Alnod, but by Gozelin Fitz Azor in the Domeſday 


roll; being held of the Confeſſor at three hides, 


but now at five yardlands and a half. 

Ws: ſhall now direct our attention to the other 
part of the pariſh, to the ſouth of Appuldurcombe, 
as far as Spann. | 

Wr have noted under Weſt Standen, that John 
Rivers had heretofore held, and that Richard Ruſſel 
then held half a fee in that and Spann. Other 


accounts of it are occaſionally interſperſed in dif- 


ferent parts of this hiſtory. 

STILL farther to the ſouth is Rewe, or perhaps 
Rue, the French word for ſtreet, in alluſion, as 
ſuppoſed to the opinion of thoſe who are advocates 

: O 04 for 


. __ = 
2 88 R _ 
** — — 


— 

1 
- — 
a - — ow 


* n - — 


r 


" y - r r p 4 1 
n 5 * _ — b — 1 * * 2 2 by 
— . 2 F X 4 C 
* _ WIS k q ” N — — . 
23 2 „ „ . —— = _ *" , Es - 5 . 
8 - * * 5 — 22 . A 
— | be - 1 — — bay ER 
« * * _ — * 0 
ay 24 2. h X x * 8 = _ \ 
A w# a0» ES r "NOV Yu f 1 


wi * : TY 1 1 
. — 
8 = — * n 


2 2. 


560 HISTORY or TRE 


for this ifland's having been a peninſula, which 
we diſcuſſed in an early part of this work. As part 
of the poſſeſhons of Sir John Liſle it was held of 
the lady Iſabella, in capite, in the eighth year of 
Edward the Firſt, and probably deſcended with 
ſome at leaſt of the other poſſeſſions of the ſame 
family. For this and other poſſeſſions in Roude 
and Middleton, Sir Rich, Worſley pays a fee farm 
rent of two pounds two ſhillings and fix pence. 
It ſtands in the direct road for Steephill. 
Or the fine ſituation of the village of Steephill, 
and particularly of the beautiful cottage of the 
Hon. Wilbraham Tollemache, almoſt every thing 
which language can expreſs or pen deſcribe has 
been ſaid. But ſuch a ſubject is exhauſtleſs. The 
Right Hon. Hans Stanley, when governor of the 
iſland, cauſed it to be erected at a vaſt expence; 
it devolved with other eſtates to his ſiſters, who 
ſold it as above. We underſtand, from various cir- 
cumſtances, that a very conſiderable ſum was ex- 
| pended io accommodate it with water. | 
THz avenue from the gate to the houſe is formed 
of lofty elms and aſhes, almoſt to the door of the 
hall, where the ſurrounding flowers aud ſhrubs 
afford a new ſcene, wherein the utmoſt taſte has 
been diſplayed. An urn is placed on the left hand, 
before we reach the houſe, and there 1s a curious, 
but ſimple chair, on the right, formed of the 
rough branches of trees. 
Tur houſe is formed in the true cottage ſtyle. 
Its walls are covered with a white compoſition, 
and 


ISLE OF. WIGHT, 561 


and its roof with thatch; which cauſe it to have - 
rural, but pleaſing appearance. The inſide it is not 
our province to deſcribe, and we have only to add, 
that the principal view from it is towards the weſt, 
on which ſide a bow window projects that, like the 
roofs of all the other parts, 1s alſo covered with 
thatch. The lawn, which gradually declines, pre- 
ieats the whole range of the village of St. Law- 
' rence on one fide, and the ocean bounds the view 
on the other. The garden is on the right hand at 
the bottom of the lawn, protected on the north by 
| towering rocks, and fanned on the ſouth by the 
refreſhing breeze of the ſea. The offices are partly 
in the adjacent village, and partly contiguous to 
the houſe; and the green-houſe and ſtabling are on 
the left, but conſiderably lower than the cottage. 
Arx the village, it is uſual for parties to come to 
dine at the New Inn, where they may be accom- 
modated very comfortably ; upon occaſion three 
or four travellers might alſo take up their reſidence 
here for the night, but a greater number would 
find it leſs convenient. Every attention has been 
paid, which a leſſer degree of art could effect, to 
render it delightful, and to afford a ſhelter to the 
chearful gueſts which viſit it, from the powerfiiÞ 
rays of a ſcorching ſun. _ X 
A veRy curious fiſh is ſometimes taken here, 
called the ſun fiſh, from its circular form, the head 
only being a little pointed. Crabs and lobſters 
are alſo taken here in great numbers, and dog's 
fleſh is a very common bait for them. Many 
. ravens 


8 HISTORY OF THE - 


ravens build in the cliffs, and the falcon hawk is 
peculiar to them, being the only proper ſort for 
the diverſion of hawking. The opinion that eagles 
have been found in the iſland, we are authorized 
to tay, is well founded. | 


IT 4 


— 


Srer. XII.—Ofthe PARISH of St. LAWRENCE. 


Ar what time this pariſh became entitled to pa- 
rochial privileges, we are not enabled to determine; 
for we find it as a chapel in cardinal Beaufort's 
roll, about 1404, valued at ſix marks. It was 
anciently called St. Lawrence under Wath, and 
belonged to the family of De Aula, until the 
reign of king Edward the Third, the heireſs of 
which family was then married to William Ruſſel; 
in their family it continued till the reign of Richard 
the Second, when the daughters and coheireſſes of 
Sir Maurice Ruſſel were married to John Hacket 
and Stephen Hatfield. It came from Hacket to 
Sir John Leigh, and from him, in the reign of 
Henry the Eighth, with other. poſſeſſions, to Sir 
James Worſley, as already noted elſewhere. In 
the 13th year of Edward the Third we meet with 
the church of Wath, as furniſhing one bowman 
for the defence of the iſland. It is called Suth 
Wath in the roll of the counteſs Iſabella, in the 
eighth of Edward the Firſt, when John Woolver- 
ton held the eighth part of a fee there, as parcel of 
the lands of the lady Matilda de Eſtur, and 
William Ruſſel, lord of Yaverland, held this 

. 85 manor, 


ISLE OF WIGHT, $63 


manor, called Suth Wath Sr. Lawrence, and that 
of Yaverland of the counteſs in demeſne. It is 
probable, therefore, that about this time it firſt 
began to aſſume the name of St. Lawrence. We 
meet with the ſame expreſſions in a record of the 
17th of Henry the Sixth, and there n 
confined to the ſame poſſeſſions. 

THz church of St. Lawrence is allowed to be 
the ſmalleſt in the iſland, and probably in Eng- 
land. The village conſiſts of a few ſtraggling 
cottages, in ſuch ſituations as the face of the 
ground permits, and is nearly about the middle of 
the pariſh. As the inhabitants were eſtimated 
ſome years ago at ſomething under. eighty, the 
congregation muſt be ſmall, eſpecially when the 
northern cliffs prevented a ready communication 
with the pariſh of Whitwell. A ſteep road is now 
cut through the cliffs on the north towards Whit- 
well, that will admit carriages to paſs with great 
fafety; which at firſt muſt have been a very bold 
undertaking, and its ſucceſs almoſt beyond expec- 
tation. This road joins that from Niton under 
the Clif, in the middle of the village. The 
whole of this tra& from Niton to Steephill is ex- 
tremely pictureſque. 

Taz rector of the chapel of St. Lawrence, as 
ſtated in the dean of the iſland's return in 1305, 
had the great tithes of the ancient demeſne of De 
Hawley at Spann. 

Tur commiſſioners of the reign of Edward 


the Sixth returned the account for this pariſh 
| of 


564 HISTORY OF THE 


of plate, &c. ſold in the different churches of the 
iſland, as amounting to Nane ſhillings and 
ten pence. 

Wr ſhould not forget to mention the beautiful 
cottage which has been lately built by Sir Richard 
Worſley, and the attempt to produce a vineyard 
in this ſingular ſituation. Having procured a 
vigneron, or manager, from the continent, his 
exertions, at leaſt, are truly laudable, whatever 
may be the iſſue of the undertaking. As a ſight, 
unknown in England, it certainly merits the at- 
tention of the curious. The great quantities of 
grapes which are produced in ſome parts of Suſſex, 
and converted into wine, of which the writer has 
many times been a partaker, are certainly facts ta 
be produced in favour of the meaſure, if it 1s not 
too near the ſea to be affected unfavourably by its 
breezes. | 


— 


* 


7 * * 


ster. XIII.—Of the PARISH of WHITWELL. 


Tut hiſtory of this 1 has ſome peculiarities, 
from its having followed the fate of the manor, 
which is a little extraordinary. The manor was 
anciently included in that of Gatcombe, which 
alſo comprehended the manor of Weſtover, for- 
merly a part of Calbourn; though at the diftance 
of eight miles or more from it. - In'the roll of 
Domeſday, it is ſaid to have been poſſeſſed by 


three brothers in the time of the Confeſſor, as we 
| ſhall 


 ISLE or WIGHT. 565 


ſhall more particulatly notice under that pariſh. 
Each of theſe had his hall, or capital meſſuage. 
This accounts for the ſilence reſpecting Whitwell 
in the Domeſday-book. The roll of tenants of the 
lady Iſabella, in the eighth year of Edward the 
Firſt, preſents us with the name fot the firſt time. 
The lady Matilda de Eſtur is therein ſaid to hold 
the manor of Whitwell in demeſne, with Gatcomb 
and Calbourn; which ſhe gave to her ſon, William 
de Eſtur, and, by marriage with the heireſs of 
that family, Walter Liſle became poſſeſſed. of 
Gatcomb and Whitwell, 

In the 17th of Henry the Sixth theſe were poſ- 
ſeſſed by John Bramſhot, who held five fees upon 
that tenure. It afterwards paſſed through the 
hands of Pole and Newnham, and was laſtly pur- 
chaſed by the family of Worſley, to whoſe defcen- 
dants it ſtill belongs. 

Taz church is properly a chapel to Godſhill, but 
eſteemed a diſtinct pariſh, on account of its having 
diſtinct parochial rates. The prefent church was 
formerly two' chapels contiguous to each other; 
that which was dedicated to St. Radegund, being 
firſt built and endowed by de Eſtur, lord of Gat- 
comb, is now the chancel of the preſent church, 
and was to be ſupported and repaired by the rector 
of Gatcomb, who now receives the rent of the 
lands with which the chantry was endowed, and is 
required to officiate therein at certain times, for 
which duty he uſually compounds. It was here- 
tofore preſented to, under the title of the chantry 

of 


566 HISTORY OP THE 


of Gatcomb. The other chapel conſiſts, of two 
aiſles, and was dedicated to the bleſſed Virgin Mary, 
and was alfo ſupported and repaired by the inha- 
bitants of Whitwell, pariſhioners of Godſhill, at 
which laſt place thoſe inhabitants were buried, as 
the inhabitants of Whitwell, being pariſhioners of 
Gatcomb, were at Gatcomb. The inhabitants of 
this pariſh obtained a decree againſt the vicar of 
Godſhill and rector of Gatcomb, in the year 1515, 
in a cauſe before John Downman, vicar-generat 
and, chancellor of Richard Fox, biſhop of Win- 
cheſter. So far as we can diſcover it in its muti- 
lated condition, it ſtated the allegations of the in- 
habitants to be, that, from time immemorial, the 
vicar of Godſhil for the time being, with the aid 
and aſſiſtance of the rector of Gateomb for the 
time being, who yearly contributed the ſum of 
twenty-ſix ſhillings and eight pence, at his own 
coſts and charges, for the ſervice hereafter written, 
uſed to find and provide a fit and decent prieſt, 
who was conſtantly to reſide in the ſaid village, 
and to celebrate maſs and all other divine offices 
on the lord's days and other feſtivals ; and as often 
as was neceſſary, the facraments and all and every 
fervice relative to the ſacraments, the burial of the 
dead only excepted tothe inhabitants of Whitwell, 
which Mr. Bayley, vicar of Godſhill, and William 
Hatton, rector of Gatcomb, being duly required 
by the ſaid inhabitants, were to do without any 
lawful cauſe forbidding. | 


A Lask of the year 1574, of a houſe called 
Church- 


ISLE OF WIGHT, $67 


Church-houſe, held by the inhabitants of Whit- 
well of the lord of the manor, demiſed the ſame 
to John Brode, with this particular clauſe: “ pro- 
vided always that if the quarter fhall need at any 
time to make a quarter- ale or church- ale, for the 
maintenance of the chapel, that it ſhall be lawful 
for them to have the uſe of the ſaid houſe, with 
all the rooms, both above and beneath, during 
their ale.” 


Tur inhabitants of this pariſh in 1632 were chaos | 


hundred and nine; and by a late account, they 
amount to three hundred and: forty-four. From 
hence appears an increaſe of thirty-five; and, upon 
the whole, it is probable that the number of fouls 
in the whole iſland has rather, itreaſee than de- 

creaſed. SOLE: | 
Tur b tub by king Edward 
the Sixth to inquire into the quantity and value of 
the plate, &c. ſold in the different churches of 
the iſland, made the return for plate and other 
articles ſold here to the amount of five pounds two 
ſhillings and eight pence. | 
Tur poor's rate of this pariſh in 1650, at the 
rate of two ſhillings for every ten pounds annual 
value, produced eight pounds ſeven ſhillings and 
eight pence; which makes the whole annual value 
of the pariſh at that time to be eight hundred and 
thirty eight pounds fix ſhillings and eight pence. 
In 1776, it was one ſhilling in the pound, and 
produced ſeventy eight pounds four ſhillings and 
three pence halfpenny, making the whole annual 
value 


— 


* 


£68 HISTORY OF THE | 


value of the partſh in that year to be one thouſand 
five hundred and ſixty four pounds five ſhilling: 
and ten pence: It is probable that it might be 
under rated in both inſtances. 

STENBURY, Which is now poſſeſſed by ee Rev. 
Francis Worſley, appears next to claim our atten- 
tion as a manor. There are two places of this 
name, one of which is in Godſhill pariſh, but we 
apprehend this to be the manor-houfe.'- It is 
joined with Whippingham in Domeſday=book, 
and both were at that time held by the king. In 
the time of the Confeſſor, Chaping held the two 
manors of tim in fee, which were then afeſfed at 
three Hides, but now at two. ) 7 

Ix the time of the counteſs Iſabella, we find that 
John de Heyno held a fee of the counteſs in capite 

in Stenbury, and had the manor of Stenbury in de. 
meſne. W. de Heyno held the ſame in the 5th year 
of Edward the Third. It came to this family from 
de Aula, or Hawley, probably by marriage, and 
after more than two centuries it paſſed into the 
family of Beauchamp. It was afterwards poſſeſſed 
by the name of Pound, and again by Henry Rat- 
cliff, earl of Suſſex, who had married Honora the 
daughter and heireſs of Anthony Pound, Eſq. and 
died in 15393; from whom, or his fon Robert 
Ratcliff, earl of Suffex, it was purchaſed by Tho- 
mas Worſley, of Appuldurcombe, who muſt alto 
have died before the year 1611, when his ſon 
Richard was created the firſt baronet of the iſland. 


\'Ta1s' houſe was anciently furrounded by a moat, 
that 


ISLE or WIGHT. = ;; 


that was filled up in the year 1727; when there 
were found in the bank ten eatthen pots or urns,” 


full of coals and bits of bones, which, from their 
compoſition, ſhape, and ſize, lead to the conjec- 
ture, that this ſpot might have been a family ca- 


tacomb, before the cuſtam of interment in church 


yards was introduced. 

In the year 1566, we find that certain lands in 
Sears; then poſſeſſed by the family of Worſley, 
were of the annual value of three pounds ſeven 
ſhillings and eight pence; and we ſhould have 
noticed, that this manor ſupplied one man at arms 
for defence of the iſland; ſo early as the 13th of 
Edward the Third. The hiſtories of Week or 
Wyke, near the eaſtern extremity of the pariſh, 
on the weſt ſide of the down ſo called, and of 
Sandford, are included in that of Appuldurcombe. 
The accounts in Domeſday mention them together, 
and treat them as part of the king's demeſnes ; 
that the Confeſſor held them at three hides, but 
his ſheriff at two hides and a yardland, =» + 

Or the manor of Witcombe, on the weſt ſide of 
the pariſh, we have this account in Domeſday, 
that Godric held it of the Confeſſor in abeyance, 
and that it was then conſidered as one hide, but 


now without rate. In the eighth year of Edward 


the Firſt, we find it held of the counteſs of Devon 
as one fee by the abbey of Montſburg. This ſeems 
to have followed the fate of the manors held by 
that abbey. 

IT is remarked of this pariſh that, for the moſt 
part, it is productive of fine corn. As it lays out 


DONE, 13. | P p of 


e 


0 - 
— — 2 — — - > Go 2 7 e _ - +> . - " +. ar N * -< & - . 
. an — 2 — on "+ 7 r S SHETTY oo - IS 7＋ N 7 8 d, — — FE r « - 

. i, 1 Uo *. E 
* LE" — 5 * IS ts - 8 : — 2 , a a < N a z 
4 * 1 28 4 e 9 — — * PI — * 1 — - mg git m n — — 21 16 K ww 

q — 2 2 - 4 — K 0 2 . 
— — = _ 5 ” * _ - 4 1 7 22 — «a 2 — — LO — you Wo— 

- ws : T = Y L LET * q — b IR. Mes To RS - 2 5 yy ho LT 


<2 En 


* 
£ 


22 
a — — — 


570 HISTORY OF THE 


of the rout of molt travellers, it has been leſs at- 
tended to by our touriſts than almoſt any other 
_ pariſh. For as theſe uſually paſs acroſs that part 
of it, which has the name of Under Cliff, from 
Niton on the weſt, to. Steephill on the eaſt, or the 
_ contrary, fewer obſervations have been made upon 
its ſituation and produce, than on any other track 
of ground in the iſland. We cannot therefore re- 
frain recommending the way through Whitwell to 
St. Lawrence, by way of the new road through the 
Cliff, for thoſe who are deſirous of ſurveying this 
iſland in ſuch a manner, as to poſſeſs themſelves 
of all its beauties of ſituation, proſpect, and views, 
in the abundant varieties which they afford. A 
bridle path is firſt met with about a mile from 
Niton, and half a mile farther to the caſt a narrow 
cart road. 
Ir is worthy of notice, that in this i ina 
farm called Aſh Farm, at a ſhort diſtance only from 
the ſummit of the ſouthern cliff, bounding St. 
Lawrence, a ſpring arifes, which will produce an 
hundred hogſheads of pure fine water in ah hour. 
15 he ſtream, after running in a circuitous channel 
through. the valley to the north and eaſt, and unit- 
ing its ſupply with many others, falls into the ſea 
at RP haven. 


Ster. XIV.—Of the PARISH of NITON. 
Wes enter upon this pariſh with peculiar plea- 
ſure, from the manuſcript information with which 
we : have been favoured by its worthy incumbent, 


who 


t5LE or WIGHT. 


who we truſt will exerciſe his wonted liberality of 
ſentiment, in excuſing us for incorporating it with 


the other local information in our poſſeſſion rela- 


tive to the pariſh. From north-eaſt to ſouth-weſt, 
the longeſt way poſſible, it does not meaſure two 
miles, ard fcarce a mile and a half broad in any 
part, and on the north little more than a mile. 
Ar the time of Domeſday, the king held Neeton 
(Niton) and Abba, which two freemen had held in 


fee of Edward the Confeſſor, when the two manors 


were aſſeſſed at three hides, but now at one hide 
and a yardland. Under the name of Neweton, it 
appears that Robert de Pimeley held half a fee in 
demeſne of the counteſs of Devon, in capite, and 
William Fitz Liſte, and Baldwin de Neweton, each 
a quarter of a fee of the ſaid counteſs, in capite. 
This was in the eighth year of king Edward the 
Firſt. We alſo find William Fitz Liſle, and Bald- 
win de Neweton holding half a fee of the honout 
of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke in Neweton, in the ſe- 


venth of king Edward the Third. In the 13th of 


Edward the Third, the lord of Niton and Chale 
furniſhed one bowman for defence of the iſland, 
and the church of Niton one bowman. In the 
year 1638, we find that one of the watches of 
the iſland, conſiſting of two men, was ſtationed at 
Cripe at Nyghton, as it had before been as early 
as the 18th of Edward the Second, then wrote 

Nywetone. 
Tur church, which is dedicated to St. Job the 
Baptiſt, is doubtleſs of very great antiquity, and 
P p 2 WAS 


7 
ö 
0 


— — * » - 2 
— * — — * 4 


ITS en we wt 
ons» es . 
. _ » > ; — p au $a; i as 
* + > 2. oak? HL. —— * — > - — 


570 HISTORY OF THE | 


of the rout of moſt travellets, it has been leſs at- 
tended to by our touriſts than almoſt any other 
pariſh. For as theſe uſually paſs acroſs that part 
of it, which has the name of Under Cliff, from 
Niton on the weſt, to Steephill on the eaſt, or the 
contrary, fewer obſervations have been made upon 
its ſituation and produce, than on any other track 
of ground in the iſland. We cannot therefore re- 
frain recommending the way through Whitwell to 
St. Lawrence, by way of the new road through the 
Cliff, for thoſe who are defirous of ſurveying this 
iſland in ſuch a manner, as to poſſeſs themſelves 
of all its beauties of ſituation, proſpect, and views, 
in the abundant varieties which they afford. A 
bridle path is firſt met with about a mile from 
Niton, and half a mile farther to the caſt a narrow 
cart road. | 
Ir is worthy of notice, that in this pariſh, in a 
farm called Aſh Farm, at a ſhort diſtance only from 
the ſummit of the ſouthern cliff, bounding St. 
Lawrence, a ſpring ariſes, which will produce an 
hundred hogſheads of pure fine water in an hour. 
The ſtream, after running in a circuitous channel 
through the valley to the north and eaſt, and unit- 
ing its ſupply with many others, falls into the ſea 
at Brading haven. 


—. 


Ster. XIV. — Of the PARISH of NITON. 
Wi enter upon this pariſh with peculiar plea- 


ſure, from the manuſcript information with which 


we have been favoured by its worthy incumbent, 
who 


t5LE OP WIGHT. 


who we truſt will exerciſe his wonted liberality of 
ſentiment, in excuſing us for incotporating it with 
the other local information in our poſſeſſion rela- 
tive to the pariſh. From north-eaſt to ſouth-weſt, 
the longeſt way poflible, it does not meafure two 


miles, and ſcarce a mile and a half broad in any 


part, and on the north little more than a mile. 
Ar the time of Domeſday, the king held Neeton 
(Niton) and Abla, which two freemen had held in 


fee of Edward the Confeſſor, when the two manors , 


were aſſeſſed at three hides, but now at one hide 
and a yardland. Under the name of Neweton, it 
appears that Robert de Pimeley held half a fee in 
demeſne of the counteſs of Devon, in capite, and 
William Fitz Liſte, and Baldwin de Neweton, each 
a quarter of a fee of the ſaid counteſs, in capite. 
This was in the eighth year of king Edward the 


Firſt. We alſo find William Fitz Lifle, and Bald- 


win de Neweton holding half a fee of the honout 
of the caſtle of Cariſbrooke in Neweton, in the ſe- 


venth of king Edward the Third. In the 13th of 


Edward the Third, the lord of Niton and Chale 
furniſhed one bowman for defence of the iſland, 
and the church of Niton one bowman. In the 
year 1638, we find that one of the watches of 
the iſland, conſiſting of two men, was ſtationed at 
Cripe at Nyghton, as it had before been as early 


as the 18th of Edward the Second, then wrote 


Nywetone. 
Tae church, which is dedicated to St. Tall the 
Baptiſt, is doubtleſs of very great antiquity, and 
P p 2 was 


2 & — ＋ N os — 


— 


I. — — 1 _=_ adhd 


a 8 - 2 2 
— — > £ - — 
** r — — Fw man = — — 
* — 222 ⏑ ⏑ - 
N _ —— — So. S * 
: - * & A - — * 
_ PI % [4 


4 4 
- 
Sz. I 2 
4 —— — — 


— 22 5 


— — 


— -; 
n 
— EET I _ 


— 
ow 
— 


= 


- -» -- 22 * rr 2 2 — 
— _—  —— — "Ix 1 * — 
' , 
— — Rh a 44 wa — 
8 2 1 1 — * . 
rr 
— 2 _ PD - is & : 


572 HISTORY OF TH? 


was one of the livings of the iſſand which were 
given to the abbey of Lyra, in Normandy. The 
croſs, which has been raiſed with large hewn ſtones, 
and manifeſtly deſigned for the purpoſe of baptiſm 
before the uſc of fonts in churches for that purpoſe, 
fully demonftrates its very ancient original. The 
church is built with freeſtone, and feems to have 
been originally covered with blue ſlate, conſiſting 
of two aifles and a ſtone tower containing three 
bells. We find no mention made of it in the dean 
of the iffand's return to Biſhop Woodlock in 13053 
but as that record is 1njured by time, it may poſſi- 
bly be defaced or loſt. In cardinal Beaufort's 
roll of valuation in 1404, it is rated at twelve 
marks, and a penſion of five ſhillings. In the time 
of Edward the Sixth, of plate and other things, 
which had been ſold in the different churches, we 
find that plate was fold to the amount of ſixty 
ſhillings. 
- Ir is a rectory, and in the prefentation of the 
provoſt and fellows of queen's college, Oxford, and 
was granted to them by king Charles the Firſt, in 
the year 1626; but not in exchange for the college 
plate, as it has been uſually confidered and repre- 
ſented, becauſe the following extracts will "uy 
demonſtrate the contrary. 

By the Help of Thomas Lord Corentry 
Keeper of the Great Seal, Lord Hay, Earl of 
_ Carliſle, and George Goring, Vice Chamberlain 
to the Queen, the Provoit got of the King, by 

the Interceſſion of the Queen, the perpetual Ad- 
ä vou ſon 


ISLE OF WIGHT. a 


vowſon and Patronage of fix Churches in the 
County of Southampton, viz. the three Recto- 
_ ries of Hadleigh, Niton, and Weyhill, and the 
Vicarages of Milford, Godſnill, and Cariſprooke, 
with the Chapels of Newport and Northwood 
annexed. Nov. 12th. 1626. MS. Aſh. Muſ. 
F. 2 f 95: lk 
Tur this bequeſt was not made in e 
of any ſtipulation, or equivalent made by the col- 
lege, is extremely probable; but that the plate 
was not lent, for the ſervice of the king's exigen- 
cies, till ſixteen years after, is fully manifeſt from 
the following extract, taken by Mr. Maes from the 
college regiſter. If, therefore, it could poſſibly 
be attributed to any intereſted motive, it muſt be 
aſſigned to that of gratitude on the part of the col- 
lege, and of confidence on the part of the king; 
for to whom could he apply with ſo much pro- 
priety, as to thoſe who had received ſuch liberal 
favours from him. E 
* Letter from his Majeſty to the Provoſt and 
Fellows of Queen's College, defiring them to 
lend him all plate of what kind ſoever belong- 
ing to the College, and promiſing to ſee the 
ſame repaid after the rate of five ſhillings per 
ounce for white, and five ſhillings and ſix pence 
for gilt. Dated Jan. 5th, 1642. Tankards 36, 
&c. amounting to 591. 18. 9 D.“ 
Tux church contains no monumental inſoriptiont 
worth notice; from whence it is probable that no 


family of diſtinction has ever reſided in the village. 
111 „ 


874 HISTORY OF THE 


Or the incumbents of this pariſh, previous tg 
the patronage being veſted in queen's college, we 
are not acquainted; we have been favoured with a 
lift of thoſe which have ſince been preſented to it, 
but our limits will not_allow us to give them. 

Or charities which have been beſtowed on this 
' Pariſh, we find a legacy of one hundred pounds, the 
Intereſt of it to be employed in inſtructing the chil- 
dren of the poor; but when it was bequeathed does 
not appear. Mr. R. Weeks alſoleft one hundred and 
fifty pounds for the ſame purpoſe in the year 1789. 

Tux regiſter of this pariſh appears to have been 
kept with much regularity from the year 1560 to 
the end of the year 1700. Since that period it has 
been at intervals much neglected, and particularly 
In the time of the late rector; which we are the 
more ſurpriſed at, in an age when the utility and 
Importance of parochial regiſters, as acts of record, 
is ſo generally underſtood. - On this occaſion, we 
cannot help recommending it as an excellent im- 
provement, already adopted in many pariſhes, of 
anſerting at length the names of both parents in 
_entering baptiſms, with the parents at leaſt of the 
mother of a child, and of what place. 

Tae following numbers of marriages, baptiſms, 
and burials, for ſeven years, ending with 1567, and 
with 1793, will ſhew the comparative population 
at theſe two periods, and that little, if any Varia- 
tion, has taken place in this pariſh:—marriages 13, 
baptiſms 59, burials 27, ending with 1567; mar- 
riages 11, baptiſms 58, burials 30, ending with 
1783. 5 Tur 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 975 


Tur whole number of inhabitants, including 


perſons of every deſcription may be about 2 
hundred. 8 


Or the village of Niton, beſides whir has bete 


already obſerved, we may remark that it has been 
variouſly wrote, ſo that its etymology is not eaſily 


aſcertained. Moſt old writings have Nighton, 
though the biſhop of Wincheſter's regiſter has it 
Niweton, Neweton, or Niton; but what can be 


meant from the relative terms, either of nigb or 


nem, when applied to this village, ſeems of equally 


difficult explanation, either from ſituation or period 
of time, as it muſt, to ſay the leaſt, have been in 
yery early exiſtence. 8 Mm 

As a manor, it appears to have been held in de- 
meſne by the lords of the ifland from remote times 
to a pretty late date, and fo to have paſſed from the 
crown to the lords, thence to Piers Gaveſton, Wm. 
earl of Saliſbury, George duke of Clarence, and then 
again to have reverted to the crown, It was after- 
wards held by the family of Meaux, of whom it ap- 


pears to have been purchaſed by Thomas Coteile, 


Eſq. from whom it deſcended by inheritance, as we 

have already mentioned under Aſney, in the pariſh 

of Newchurch. It has ſince been ſold to Meſſrs. 
James, John, and Joſeph Kirkpatrick. 


Or the manor of Beauchamp we can find but few. 


traces in ancient records. It had its name from 
Beauchamp, lord of Alceſter and Powick, who, in 
the reign of king Edward the Third, enjoyed this 
and Freſhwater, and alſo another manor called 


. Keineys 


= 
= —— 4 — — — —— ” 
F 24 3 2 * * 2 - 
n , 
— * * 2 N 0 — + 2 F e — 


. . A po — 


* 
— — — N — — — = 
_ — —ä—E—ç 2 — —— —— —ę„—' oo Loo CE ů "I — 
* e 3 8 - — — 
— 


— 2 - 


r 


DD © 


576 HISTORY OF THE 


Keineys Court, from a family of that name, which 
_ reſided; at Tarrant: Keineys, in Dorſetſhire. It 
was long poſſeſſed by the family of Meaux, of 
Kingſton, and came, by marriage with the grand 


daughter and heireſs of Sir William Meaux, bart. 


to Sir Edward Worſley, of Gatcomb, knt. After 
his death it was divided, and afterwards ſold off to 
different perſons; but the greateſt part of this has 
alſo become the property of ſhe: family of Wr. 
trick. 

Tus ſoil of this 1 is variable, and conſiſts 
both of arable, down, and meadow land; but the 
much greater part is of the firſt deſcription, and is 
eminently rich and productive of all forts of grain, 
but particularly of wheat. The cliits which look 
towards the ſea are formed of ſtrata of white free- 
ſtone of a tolerably good quality. Abundance of 
marl is ſupplied from the hill of St. Catherine's, 
the higheſt land in the iſland; from the bottom of 
which a ſmall. ſtream of tranſparent water iſſues 
that runs through the village, and receives ſo many 
other ſmaller rills as to become large enough for 
the ſupply of two mills within the diſtance of a 
mile. From hence it continues to increaſe in its 
progreſs through fine rich vales, till it falls inta 
the ſea at Brading harbour. N 

* Som of the land is cultivated by tbaſe doc 
freehold it is, but tbe far greater part is either 
lifehold, or let at rack rent. Agriculture is the 
ſole ſupport of the inhabitants, excepting a ſmall 


fiſhery for ſhell fiſh, which gives bread to a few. 
families. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 577 


families. It has obtained the name of Crab Niton. 
from the number of crabs found on the coaſt, and 
perhaps alſo to diſtinguiſh it from Knighton, in 


the pariſh of Newchurch, of a ſimilar found, Fm 


of ſo different orthography. ENT 

_ Taz pariſh is partly incloſed. with hedge 1 rows, 
and the reſt common field; and the roads, which 

are made by ſtones gathered from the arable lands, 

are firm and ſound, but very rough, as they are 

not ſufficiently covered with gravel. All the houſes 

- of the village are built of free ſtone, and, except 


the,parſonage, covered with thatch; making a very- 


neat appearance. Moſt of them are accommodated 
with orchards, the produce of which is made into 
a, rough ſpecies of cyder, which the inhabitants, 


from cuſtom; are pleaſed with. The parſonage 


has been almoſt entirely built by the preſent in- 
cumbent, and -is a handſome, ſubſtantial, ſtone 
building, with ſuitable offices. The pariſh con- 
tains no meeting houſe whatever of any deſcription 
or denomination ; and all the pariſhioners are of 
the church of England. | 
I is a received opinion that through this vil- 
lage tin was conveyed from Southampton, and 
ſhipped for the Continent. An artificial mound 
of earth of conſiderable height, now called the 
Old Caſtle, is ſtill ſhewn in ſupport of it, on the 
moſt acceſſible part of the ſhore. Tradition ſays, 


that this is the ſpot where the tin_was depoſited 


and ſhipped. Another remnant of antiquity is a 
ſimilar artificial mound on the north boundary of 


the 


— ©". AA 


£38: - HISTORY OF THE 


| the pariſh, called Bury, adjoining to which a gate 


that opens upon St. Catharine's is called Bury 


Gate. This mound appears to have been of un- 
common magnitude, but has been much dimi- 
niſned by the farmers for the foil of which it is 
compoſed. It is certain that it has ſtood on a much 
larger baſe than any of the barrows that are mer 
with on the downs of the ſouthern counties. 

Bor we ſubmit, with all due deference, in ad- 
dition to what has been already ſaid in the ſecond 
chapter of this hiſtory, whether the name of Old 
Caſtle may not have relation to ſome means of de- 
fence againſt invaſion, and whether the northern 
barrier might not have regard to the ſame pur- 
' poſe; ſince, by ſecuring the two avenues, the 
pariſh itſelf with the whole adjacent coaſt would 
de perfectly ſafe from all depredations of hoſtile 
forces. Yet we are by no means decifive on this 
matter, Af 

Tris pariſh comprehends a confiderable extent 
of that ſingular and unique feature of the iſland, 
known by the appellation of Under Cliff, which 1s 
a tract of land bounded by the ſea on the ſouth, 
and by the Cliff on the north, being generally 
about half a mile broad. By ſome convulſion, 
probably as old as the deluge, the ſolid rock has 
burſt aſunder for five miles, in the direction of 
eaſt and weft, and the ſeparated maſs ſeems to 
have ruſhed forward in ſcattered fragments to- 
wards the ſea. The majeſtic perpendicular which 
has kept its ſtation, and forms the northern barrier 


of 


812 or WIGHT. 579 


of this truly romantic ſpot, preſents the appear- 
ance of the walls of an old caſtle of many hundred 
feet in height, curiouſly fretted into rock-work, 
and pictureſquely interſperſed with lichens, ivy, 
and other creeping plants. The intervening land 
is fancifully toſſed about and variegated with huge 
roc ks, that, being ſeparated by their fall from their 
natiye quarry, and covered with many kinds of 
bruſh wood, form a ſtriking contraſt with the cul- 
tivated banks by which they are cnvironed. This 
renders them not unlike the clumps in pleaſure 
grounds. 

AxornrR ſingular beauty of this ſpot ariſes from 
the many rills of tranſparent water that find their 
way through the declivities into the ſea; and we 
muſt alſo obſerve, that the whole ſcene is huma- 
nized with villas, farm houſes, and cottages. It 
was here, at a ſmall cove called Puckaſter, where 
at preſent the boats of a few fiſhermen only find 
an aſylum, that king Charles the Second Janded, 
probably, after ſome caſual water excurſion. The 
incident is thus recorded in the pariſh regiſter. 

« July the 1ſt. Anno Domini, 1675, Charles 
the Second, King of Great Britain, France, and 

Ireland, &c. came ſafely aſhore at Puckaſter, 

after he had endured a great and dangerous ſtorm 
at ſea. Ut regnet diu et ſeliciter, vovit et ex- 
optat Thomas Collinſon, Rector de Nighton.“ 

ABOUT a mile weſt of the road from the village 
of Niton to the range of Under Cliff, is a ſmall 


houſe called Knowles, on the low ſouthernmoſt. 


point 


580 HISTORY or THE 


point of the iſland, under the hill of St. Catha- 
Tine's ; but there is no further progreſs from it, 
fince the tremendous precipices and impending 
rocks render all communication with the pariſh 

of Chale totally impracticable. This is the w eſtern 
extremity of Under Cliff. - 

Lorer EpGcuMBE pays a free thepel's rent of thir- 
teen ſhillings and four pence to the crown for bot- 
foms in Niton; five ſhillings for Harvey's land; 
_ and' fourteen ſhillings for Cheek's. A fee farm 
rent for Niton farm appears to have been paid to 
the crown in the time of king Henry the Seventh, 
of ſeventeen pounds ten ſhillings and eight pence. 

Tre pleafant cottage of Mirables, on the very 
brink of the ſea, lately purchaſed by Geo. Arnold, 
Eſq. a gentleman ef Northamptonſhire, is well 
worth notice; to whole exertions, in concert with 
the very worthy rector of Niton, the public are 
greatly indebted for the fine roads from Newport 
to the back of the iſland. 

Tur light houſe of St. Catharine's is within the 
limits of Chale pariſh, under which pariſh we ſhall 

take notice of it. 

Having now completed our ſurvey of the Eaſt 
Medine, we may be allowed, for the ſake of me- 
thod and order, to commence our accounts of the 
Weſt Medine with the pariſh of Northwood, ſo as 
thereby to include Weſt Cowes, which is the prin- 
Cipal port and entrance into the iſland. 


PART II. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 581 


PART II. of the WEST MEDINE. 
Secr. I.—Of the PARISH of NORTHWOOD. 


Tre church of Northwood, which is but ſmall, 
is no more than a chapel of eaſe to Cariſbrooke, 
and is ſituate on the eaſt fide of the road from 
Cowes to Newport. The parſonage houſe is on 
the weſt ſide. The croſs lane which leads to them 
from the turnpike road is more than two miles 
from Cowes. Since the time of Henry the Eighth 
the inhabitants have been exempted from all con- 
tributions to the repairs of the mother church, and 
enjoyed all parochial privileges. The tithes of 
Northwood, both great and ſmall, were aſſigned 
to its vicar, when the priory of Cariſbrooke pro- 
cured the rectory, as an endowment ; being at this 
time, probably, of ſo little value, that both were 
{ſcarcely ſufficient for the maintenance of a prieſt 
to officiate there. From the name it ſeems rational 
to conclude, that it was pretty much overrun with 
wood; but ſince it has been cleared away and cul- 
tivated, theſe tithes have been very productive. 
The rectory is conſidered as an appendage to the 
vicarage of Cariſbrooke, and included in the pre- 
ſentation. 

Tur following extracts from the regiſter of 
Northwood illuſtrate many 7 articles in 


our hiſtory. 
1377. The French landed in the ifle of Wight; burnt divers 
towns; and though they were repelled from the caſtle 
by the valiant Sir Hugh Tyrrell, captain thereof, yet 


they conſtrained the men of the iſland to give them one 
chouſand 


$82 | HISTORY OF THE 


_ thouſand marks to ſpare the reſidue of their houſes and 

goods. In the ſame year they burnt Portſmouth, Dart- 

mouth, Plymouth, and Haſtings. 

1402. The French landed in the iſle of Wight 1700 men, burnt 
two villages and ſome few cottages, but hearing the 
people of the iſland were aſſembled, they made haſte to 

| their ſhips and returned home. | 
t404. The French again landed 1000 men in the iſle of Wight, 

when they got together a great booty of cattle, but the 
iſlanders coming upon them, took away their booty, 
and made many of them leave their carcaſes for a booty 
to the iſlanders; yet the French would not leave it ſo, 
but a while after, as having got new ſpirits, they caſt 
anchor before it, and required the whole iſland to be 
delivered up ; but a reſolute anſwer of the iſlanders 
frightened them away, 

1513- A religious houſe was built near the church at Northwood; 
and which, fince the memory of man, was ſtanding and 
called by the name of Church Houſe. | 

1 1545. The French landed 2000 men in the iſle of Wight, but 
were there repelled, though reported to have in their 
ſhips ſixty thouſand men. 

Newport burying place was conſecrated on che 2 zd of October, 
1583, and Northwood in 1486; buried at Cariſbrooke before, and 
paid about forty ſhillings a year to the repairs of the mother church. 

Northwood ſeparated and freed from paying any chureh rate to 
Cariſbrooke, the mother church, 1545. | 

The title of governor of the iſle of Wight was fixed by a ect 
order of council, June 15th, 1618. 


To ſpeak of Weſt Cowes, which has been alluded 
to already“, it may be neceſſary to ſtate, that it 
is not of very ancient date, and that it wanted 
a name till the erection of the caſtles here, and at 
the oppoſite point, in the time of Henry the Eighth. 
The ſituation is on the declivity of the hill on the 
weſt ſide of the river Medina, near its influx into 


See p. , 223. 
the 


181 E OF WIGHT, 583 


the ſea, which renders the approach to it from 
Southampton or Portſmouth extremely pleaſing. 
It has an excellent harbour, and is ſo favourably 
placed, that ſhips can turn out of it either to the 
eaſt or weſt. Its inhabitants were eſtimated ſome 
years ago at 1660; but we think that it cannot at 
preſent contain much ſhort of 2000. Large fleets 
of merchant ſhips frequently ride off here for ſe- 
veral weeks, in time of war, to wait for convoy 
or a fair wind, and the town enjoys a good trade 
for the ſale of proviſions, and other things neceſ- 
fary for ſea-ſervice. Though the lower parts of 
the town are crowded, yet its more elevated parts 
are ſo delightfully ſituated, either for pureneſs and 
ſalubrity of air, or the enjoyment of beautiful and 
extenſive proſpects, that many gentlemen of the 
navy have imbibed a predilection for it. 

Tu bathing machines, which ſerve for an at- 
traction to the faſhionable, as well as a remedy to 
the valetudinary, are on a fine beach a little to the 
| weſtward of the caſtle. For the comfort and re- 
lief of our brave ſeamen, Mr. Sime, an eminent 
ſurgeon and apothecary, is appointed agent for his 
majeſty's ſick and hurt at this port. | 

Or the ſituation of many of the villas, or little 
country boxes, on the hull, as they are ſometimes 
called, we may apply in general, what was ſaid 
Tome years ago of one of them in particular ; that 
they command a noble view of the channel 
from Portſmouth to Lymington, and the mouth 


of the Southampton river. The high lands in 


New Diſplay of the Beauties of England, vol. 1. p- 323, 324. 
Suſſex, 


584 HISTORY OF THE 


Suſſex, the hills in, Hampſhire, and the woody 
coaſt of the New Foreſt, all bound the view, and 
form for one ſtroke of the eye the nobleſt river 
_ perhaps the world can exhibit : the breadth is from 
three to ſeven miles, and the length from twenty 
five to thirry. You either command. diſtinctly a 
noble lake, land- locked ina moſt agreeable manner, 


or, as you change your poſition, a winding river. 


that cannot be exceeded in beauty.” 

We have not yet noticed the chapel of Weſt 
Cowes, which was, erected in the year 1657. It 
ſtands on the ſide of the hill, the lower part being 
probably all built and occupied before that time. 
Though it was conſecrated in 1662, it had no en- 
dowment till 1671, when Mr. Richard Stephens 
gave five pounds a year to it for ever, The biſhop, 
about eight years after, farther endowed it with 
twenty pounds a year, on condition that the in- 


babitants ſhould pay the miniſter, who was to be 


of their own chuſing, forty pounds a year; other- 
wiſe, if this was neglected, the ſaid endowment of 
twenty pounds was to be forfeited for ever. 

As a manor, we meet with Northwood, as part 
of the poſſeſſions of the crown, and afterwards as 
held by the lords of the iſland, from whom it again 
reverted to the crown by the purchaſe of Edward 
the Firſt, In the eighth year of that reign we find 
William St. Martin holding the manor of North- 
wood of the counteſs in demeſne, with other ma- 
nors, which, in the 17th of Henry the Sixth, were 


held by Sir John Popham ; and John Northwood 


held half a fee in Northw ood of the counteſs IAa- 
bella, 


ba — oa Co — „ 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 585 


bella, as part of the poſſeſſions of lady Elena Gorges. 
It is ſaid to have paſſed through the families of 
the earl of Angleſea, Knowles, and Stephens, till 
it came to the Blachfords ; but on what authority 
we cannot learn, and it is expreſsly comrary to 
exiſting records, already mentioned. A watch 
and two men were under the command of Captain 
Harvey, of Avington, in 1638, at Northwood. 
As a manor, within the limits of this pariſh, we 
meet with the name of Debourne or Debborne, a 
little to the weſt of Cowes. In the ſeventh year 
of Edward the Third, it occurs with Gurnore in 
an inquiſition, held by Henry de Stella of the ho- 
nour of the caſtle of Carifbrooke, and both con- 
taining the twelfth part of a Knight's fee. This 
manor ſeems to have followed the fate of many 
others which were held by the crown or the lords 
of the iſland, by whom it appears to have been 
poſſeſſed. When it reverted to the crown, after 
the duke of Clarence's fate, it paſſed to one Hop- 


ſon, and from him to the family of Coteile, which 


conſequently paſſed into the Edgcumbe family, and 
was lately purchaſed by Mr. Knowles, of Newport. 

Or Gurnard, or Gurnet, as a manor, which lies 
a little farther weſt, on the bay ſo called, we know 
little more than from its connection with Debborn, 
juſt mentioned. It was at Gurnard's Bay that king 
Charles the Second landed, when he viſited Sir 
Rob. Holmes, the governor, at Yarmouth, taking 
Park farm in the foreſt in his way.* The farm of 

. ® See ch. 10, p. 275, 276. h 
. 13. Q Whippence, 


Fu ; 


586 | HISTORY OF THE 


Whippence, not far from the coaſt, to the weſt of 
Rue Street, and that of Thorney ſtill more weſt- 

ward, but within the limits of this pariſh, are only 
remarkable from their being ſhaded by trees, of 
which, for the moſt part, the houſes on this part 
of the coaſt are deſtitute. Great Thorneſs or 
Thorney paid a fee farm rent of eight pounds to 
the crown in 1507, which in 1780 was eight pounds 
one ſhilling and eight pence. In the reign of 
Edward the Second, a watch of four men by night 
and two by day was kept here. 

A veRy fine and romantic view is preſented to 
the eye on the hills above Gurnard Bay. The 
water is ſeen to break boldly into the land in va- 
rious bays and creeks. In front, the New Foreſt, 
with the diſtant hills behind, forms the boundary 
on the other ſide of the water. The Dorſetſhire 
hills riſe in fine varieties. To the left the ifland 
projects in four promontories, which are diſtinctly 
ſeen beyond each other. The whole ſcene is as 
complete as can be wiſhed. | 

Wr muſt now take notice of Egypt, the moſt 
northerly point of this iſland, between Cowes and 
Gurnard Bay. Mr. Collins is the poſſeſſor of this 
pleaſant fituation, at the foot of the declivity, to 
which you may walk or ride along the beach when 
the tide is out, or, having firſt aſcended the ſum- 
mit of Cowes from the proximity of the Caſtle, 
after a ſhort diſtance of fix or ſeven hundred yards, 
_ deſcend to it by a road on the right. He reſides 
here for the ſummer, and“ keeps an elegant 

yacht,”” 


ISLE OF WIGHT: 587 


yacht, as the pleaſing author of Sketches of De- 
ſcription obſerves, © chi fly for the purpoſe of 
accommodating his amiable daughters, with their 
favourite water excurſions. It is a fine ſummer's 
reſidence, as it commands an extenſive proſpect of 
objects which will ever animate the heroic, or de- 
light the milder mind.” 

Dopnor FARM, after paſſing Werrow near the 
weſtern banks of the Medina, obſcured by a thick 
grove, under Northwood village, is ſurrounded 
with rich clumps of trees, and well cultivated 
fields, nearly oppoſite to Botany Bay Mill, of which 
we made mention * in the pariſh of Whippingham. 
The other mill on the weſtern ſide, called Port 

Jackſon, deſigned on a plan of a ſtill ſuperior ſcale, 
was not finiſhed before an unfortunate and unfore- 
ſeen interruption of commercial credit put a ſtop 
to the building; and the projector and its ſup- 
porters together were overwhelmed in the general 
confuſion. | 

Taz wood of Hurſtake next ſucceeds, on our 
approach to Newport, being diſtant from Quay- 
ſtreet little more than half a mile. A complete 
yard for ſhip building, for many years employed 
in that ſervice, and for which it is peculiarly 
adapted, has unfortunately been diſuſed of late 
years; which, probably, like literary merit in in- 
digence and obſcurity, is neglected and unknown, 
only for want of ſome friendly foſtering hand to 
ſupport and maintain it. 

See p. 534. 
Q q 2 Tre 


588 HISTORY OF THE | 


Tue ſeat of Mr. Kirkpatrick, at St. Crofs, near 
the town of Newport, has already been noticed as 
a priory. As a manor, it was conſtantly held by 
the ancient proprietors, and is now poſſeſſed by 
leaſe from the.college of Wincheſter. The wind- 
ing walk of its grove on the banks of the river, 
with the charming meadows on each fide, cloathed 
in almoſt perpetual verdure, are highly and equally 
grateful to the ſolitary paſſenger, or the lively and 
ſociable party. 


Seer. II. Of the PARISH of CARISBROOKE. 


Tut very great irregularity of this pariſh ſeems _ 
to point out, that Gatcomb pariſh has been taken 
out of it. Compared with our obſervations upon 
Whitwell, there may indeed, at firſt view, appear 
ſome caufe to doubt this conjecture ; but we ſhall 
conſider this ſubject more particularly under that 
pariſh. 

Or the antiquity of Cariſbrooke, which the com- 
mon people, we would beg to inform our readers, 
corruptly pronounce Caeſbrook, as the metropolis 
of the iſland, prior to its purchaſe by king Edward, 
there can be no doubt. Its vicinity to the caſtle, 
which was not pnly a complete aſylum againſt all 
hoſtile or civil invaſions, but the court of a potent 
baron, gave it a pre-eminence over every other 
part of the iſland. | 

Maxx fanciful interpretations have been given 


of the origin of the modern name. We think that 
| us - 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 389 


its ſituation near a brook may account for the ter- 
mination ; but whether the firſt part ariſes from 
Caer, the Saxon word for a town, as Sir Richard 
Worſley has noted, we will not poſitively affirm. 
As a modern name, indeed we have ſome doubts, 
becauſe it was known by the name of Boucombe 
or Beaucombe, meaning a pleaſant valley, not only 
ſo late as the time of Domeſday, but 200 years 
after; and its Saxon original may, therefore, be 
juſtly queſtioned. The moſt ancient record in 
which it occurs by this name 1s that of the dean's 
return to biſhop Woodlock in 1305, in the latter 
part of Edward the Firſt's reign; but in the record 
of the claims of Iſabella de Fortibus, in the be- 
ginning of that reign, prior to her ſale of it to that 
monarch, it occurs under the name of Boucombe. 
It alſo occurs twice under the name of Cariſbrooke, 
near which it is ſaid in the record of the counteſs, 
that Robert Haſkard held the twentieth part of a 
fee; and that Nicholas de Motteſton and Adam 
Paulinus held alſo the third part of a fee between 
Cariſbrooke and Newport. | 
WHETHER, in conſequence of this purchaſe, it 
changed its original name, for any cauſe to us un- 
known, we muſt be contented to paſs over in 
filence. The ſport of conjecture might pleaſe it- 
ſelf with calling it Cary's Brook, from ſome per- 
ſon of that name, who might reſide near it, if the 
ſmalleſt trace could be made of the probability of 
ſuch a circumſtance; and the comparatively mo- 
dern'period in which this change took place is not 
Qq3 unfriendly 


890 HISTORY OF THE 


unfriendly to ſuch a conjecture. In this, however, 
we ſhall determine nothing, but Proceed with its 
hiſtory. 

HavixG largely treated already of the caſtle, we 
need only ſay that the village is placed on the ri- 
ſing ground on the weſt, as the caſtle ſtands on an 
eminence on the caſt ſide of the brook. It is 
about a mile from Newport. The church has for- 
merly been a very large pile of building, but it 
appears to have loſt one of its ſide aiſles, and Sir 
Francis Walſingham, who married the widow of 
captain Worſley, to whom the priory had been 
leaſed, and who was therefore obliged to repair the 
chancel, prevailed on the pariſhioners to ſuffer 
him to take it down, for which he gave them an 
hundred marks. It has a fine gothic tower, with 
eight large pinnacles, or ſpiral ornaments, which 
give it an air of grandeur; and contains a peal of 
eight muſical bells, for which its ſituation is pecu- 
liarly favourable. A large window, far ſuperior 
to any other of the kind within the ifland, gives 
It a preference which it juſtly merits. 

Taz church contains ſome monuments; one of 
which is to the memory of lady Wadham, wife 
of Sir Nicholas Wadham, captain of the iſland, 
in the reign of Henry the Seventh. Another, 
which may be noticed as a curioſity, is on a wooden 
tablet, contains an allegorical repreſentation 
and inſcription, which, though fanciful, is appli- 
cable to the profeſſion of the perſon it commemo- 
rates. A ſhip, with a man fitting on the deck, 

| and 


ISLE OF WIGHT. $91 


and a crown of glory ſuſpended over his head, forms 
the capital; on the fails the words ripes is written, 
on the compaſs veRBUM DE1, on the anchor sprs, 
 &c. under which is an inſcription, all of which is 
ſtill freſh, and the letters ſo well painted and ſhaded 
that they appear as if carved in relievo. We are 
ſorry our limits will not permit our inſerting it. 

Tux impropriate or rectorial tithes belonging to 
Cariſbrooke, far exceed thoſe of any other church 
in the iſland. Thoſe of the pariſh form but a part; 
for all the tithes of the other pariſhes, which had 
been at any time obtained by the priory, alſo be- 
long to it. As they were formerly collected by 
the procurator or proctor of the abbey of Lyra, 
who was reſident in the iſland for that purpoſe, 
they from thence acquired the name of procuracies, 
procurations, or proxies. Hence, probably, the 
name of procurations, ſo well known at our eccle- 
ſiaſtical viſitations ; though ſome conſider theſe as 
a compoſition paid by each incumbent, in lieu of 
the entertainments formerly given on parochial 
viſitations. 

In the thirteenth of Edwargthe Third, the prior 
of Cariſbrooke furniſhed ſix men at arms to defend 
the iſland, and the vicar two bowmen; and in 
cardinal Beaufort's valuation, Cariſbrooke with its 
chapels, which in the dean's return of 1305, are 
ſaid to be Newport and Northwood, was rated at 
forty marks, and the vicarage at ſixteen. 

In the time of Edward the Sixth, the commiſ- 
fioners made the return of plate, &c. found and 
ſold at Cariſbrooke, to amount to 531. 


| 
7 
! 
4 
1 


592 HISTORY OF THE 


Tur demeſne lands of the old priory are now the 
property of Mr. Dummer, which he obtained by 


purchaſe from Mr. Bromfield. His predeceſſor 


was Sir Francis Walſingham, to whom it came, 


after the Worſley family had enjoyed it, by mar- 


riage with captain Worſley's widow. This manor, 


after it had been transferred from the abbey of 


Lyra to the monaſtery of Sheene, paſſed at the final 
diſſolution into the hands of the Worſley family, 
having been held by Sir John Leigh, on leaſe, by 
diſpenſation from king Henry the Seventh, as al- 


ready ſtated on a former occaſion.“ In the year 


1565, we find that the rents of certain tenements 


In Cariſbrooke, belonging to the priory, amounted 


to ſix pounds fix ſhillings and ſeven pence. We 
have only to add that a watch and two men were 
under the command of captain Harvey, on Aving- 
ton down, ſo late as the year 1638. | 
Ir would be doing injuſtice to the bounty of 
Providence, to paſs over Cariſbrooke, without 
noticing its fine water. An unfailing ſpring,” 


ſays the author of Skrrehrs of DescrrPTION, 


& i ſſues from a banjgat entering Cariſbrooke vil- 
lage, which fully rivals, for its coolneſs and pel- 
lucid purity, the urns of Saint Lawrence or Saint 


Boniface at the back of the iſland.” He goes on 


to demonſtrate this aſſertion by a ſtriking caſe, in 
theſe words: © An inſtance of its beneficial effi- 


cacy merits our attention: A child of the writer's 


had a complaint in his right eye, which was pro- 
* Sec ch. 8, vol. 1, p. 184, &c. 
nounced 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 593 


nounced by the mc learned of the faculty to be a 
fitula lachrymalis : Every lotion had been hurtful, 
and medicine of no avail. A chirurgical operation 
was determined on, but this would be precarious 
in its effect, and torturing in its proceſs. Mater- 
nal tenderneſs ſuſpended the attempt. The boy 
being brought to Newport, it was recommended 
to try this clear water, and in leſs than a fortnight 
the complaint was entirely removed, and the eye 
reſtored to its natural ſtrength and brilliance.” 
As a manor, we find Avington or Alvington, 
(Alevineſtune) in the Domeſday record, held by the 
king. In the time of the Confeſſor it had been 
aſſeſſed at two hides and a half, but then at two 
hides, the caſtle ſtanding upon one yardland. In 
the eighth year of king Edward the Firſt, we find 
it was held of the counteſs Iſabella in capite, by 
William St. Martin, with Northwood, Fairlee, 
and Shide, to the amount of three-fourths of a fee, 
as it was alſo in the 17th of king Henry the Sixth; 
and it is particularly obſerved, in the record of the 
7th of Edward the Third, that Reginald St. Mar- 
tin held half a knight's fee in Alvington of the 
honour of the caſtle. The ſiſter of Sir Lawrence 
St. Martin, for want of iſſue, ſucceeded to his 
eſtates, by whoſe marriage with Sir John Popham, 
of the county of Southampton, they came to that 
family. He had no male iſſue, but bequeathed 
his lands in the iſland to his daughter Elizabeth, 
one of his coheireſſes, who was married to John 
Wadham, Eſq. from whom they deſcended to his 
rl grandſon, 


594 HISTORY OF THE 


_ grandſon, Sir Nicholas Wadham, captain of the 

 ifland. His widow fold Avington to Mr. Harvey, 
whoſe family poſſeſſed it for more than two cen- 
turies; after which it came by marriage into the fa- 
mily of Leigh, the deſcendants of whom fold it to 
Sir John Miller, bart. whoſe family now enjoy it. 
The manſion houſe and principal farm, however, 
were not comprehended in the former demiſe, but 
ſold ſeparately to Mr. Pike, at whoſe death they 
deſcended to Sir John Carter. 

We ſhall now ſpeak of Boucombe, or Bowcombe, 

as 2 manor unqueſtionably the moſt conſiderable 
of the whole iſland, according to the account in 
Domeſday. It had been held by Edward the Con- 
feſſor, and was, with other crown lands of the iſland, 
given to William Fitz Oſborn. But as the whole 
was forfeited by the treaſon of earl Roger, his ſon, 
it was in the king's hands at the time of the com- 
pilation of this record, and held in demeſne.— 
Though it had before been aſſeſſed at four hides, 
it was now rated at nothing. 
Tur monks of Lyra had the church of this manor, 
which has ſince acquired the name of Cariſbrooke, 
with one vardland. To this church belong twenty 
meſſuages of the borderers. 

As ſo much of this manor belonged to thechurch, 
ſubſequent accounts of it muſt, therefore, be ſeldom 
met with; all the account we have of 'it in the 
record of the counteſs Iſabella, is, that the abbot of 
Titchfield, as part of the poſſeſſions which Jordan 
de Kingſton held of her, had the third part of a fee 

in 


ISLE or WIGHT, | 595 


in Cadland, belonging to Bowcombe. In the year 
1507, we find that Bowcombe Farm paid a fee-farm 
rent to the crown of eighty pounds, and that in 
1780, Robert Pope Blachford, Eſq. was charged 
with a rent of eighty pounds five ſhillings and 
three pence halfpenny. How it came into the 
poſſeſſion of this family we ſhall endeavour to trace, 

As Bowcombe had always been united with the 
lordſhip of the iſland, and preſerved in their ov n 
hands for the ſupport of their kitchen, ſo it fe- 
mained with the crown after the purchaſe by king 
Edward the Firſt, We have already ſpoken of 
Pann manor, as retained in hand for the ſame pur- 
poſe. But king James the Firſt granted it to 
Chriſtopher Villiers, earl of Angleſea, the brother 
of his great favourite the duke of Buckingham, in 
1625, under a fee-farm rent, as above mentioned. 
In 1652 Villiers ſold it to Sir Henry Knowles, or 
Knollis, of Grove Place, in Hampſhire, whoſe ſon 
ſold this and other manors to Dr. Stevens, much 
under their value, from threats held out of the 


Doctor's being one of Cromwell's commiſſioners of 


ſafety, and that he could procure their forfeiture. 
For that time, therefore, ſubmiſſion was the only 
remedy; but after the reſtoration the doctor was 
obliged, on the cauſe of complaint being heard, 
to advance two thouſand pounds more for this 


manor. His ready compliance with the king's will 


occaſioned his being knighted. It remained in his 
family till 1728, when his grandſon ſold it to John 
Blachford, Eſq. in whoſe family it ſtill continues. 


Ws 


DOS : wt 
F e 7 I pg + 4 


Se = l — 12 +, — 
* : — 
* 
* * 
F 2 Sa = <7 


— 4 — 4 


596 HISTORY OF THE 


Wx meet with a record of Chiverton, which we 
believe belongs to this pariſh, in Domeſday, as 
part of the poſſeſſions of William Fitz Stur, held 
by Humphrey. In the time of the Confeſſor it was 
in abeyance, and was then and now aſſeſſed for one 
hide. In the eighth year of king Edward the Firſt 
we find John de Kingſton holding half a fee in 
Chiverton. 

- RovenrIccx, between Swuinſton down and Gal- 
laberry down, was then held by Gilbert, which is 
ſaid to be held by a perſon of the ſame name in the 
reign of Edward the Third. | 

Bes1pes theſe, we find lands had i in Clatterford 
in this pariſh, in the time of Edward the Firſt, 
under the weſt fide of the caſtle, Henry de Oglan- 
der held the thirteenth part of a fee, as of the 
poſſeſſions of lady Matilda de Eſtur, and Robert 
de Shorwell half that quantity; and John Gold- 
ſmith held the thirteenth part of a fee alſo in Clat- 
terford, as of the poſſeſſions of Hugh de Cheken- 


hull. Daniel Collins, Eſq. pays a fee-farm rent 


to the crown of two ſhillings for Clatterford. 

Ox Ramſedown, within the pariſh of Cariſ- 
brooke, a watch and two men were under the com- 
mand of Mr. Mewx, in 1638. 

We have already mentioned under Wootton, that 
Chillerton Farm, to the ſouth-weſt of Chillerton- 
ſtreet, within the limits of the pariſh of Cariſ- 
brooke, belongs to that pariſh. But this is a manor, 
which we are told, has been in the family of Fitz 


Azor, or Liſle, together with Wootton, its pariſh, 
; | from 


18LE OF WIGHT. $97 


from the conqueſt. Of ſome entries in Domeſday, 
and other matters, an account will be found under 


Gatcombe. 
Berors we take our leave of this parith, we have 


to add to our account of Newport, already given 


in the hiſtory of the boroughs, that by the tax 
rolls, the number of houſes in Newport amount to 
ſix hundred and thirty..five, which, at an eſtimate 
of five perſons and a half, on an average, to each 
family, muſt ſwell our account of the inhabitants 
to 3500 nearly. 


Joux FLeminG, Eſq. pays a fer- farm rent to the 


crown of twelve pounds five ſhillings and nine 
pence for the chantry of Newport. The corpora- 
tion alſo pay annually to the crown twenty-four 
pounds two ſhillings and two pence. 

Wiru pleaſure we attend to the diſcharge of our 
duty as faithful hiſtorians, in correcting our ſtate- 
ment of the hiſtory of this borough, in a former 
chapter. The anecdote, page 314, taken from the 
hiſtory of the boroughs, ſo far as it reſpects a gen- 
tleman, whoſe name is mentioned, as having been 
a principal concerned in the tranſaction there 
ſtated, we are informed, FROM THE BEST AUTHO= 
RITY, 1s not founded in fact. 

Da. Taouas Jamrs was a native of Newport, 
and of New College, about the latter end of the 16th 
century, extremely well ſkilled in ancient manu- 
ſcript, and firſt librarian in the Bodleian library. 
He gave great aſſiſtance to the learned Camden, in 


furniſhing matcrials for the Britannia; and was an 
able 


** 
: * 
4 . 
"wy + 
P 1 
CY 
q 
I 
3 © * 
' 
: 1% 
1 
© Sn 
99 
. 
4 , 
. 
1 
A1 
9 
4 } 
1 
1 
Fa 
* 
'. 
Wy! 


} 


— 


„ 2 
— 


= 
. —_ 


— — — > 
— — L 


— . a 


— A Þ. 1 4 re 


1 
- 2 


3 


-_ * — VI. — 1 — — 
; 9 TIES. 
Ss” 


- ” — > -- 


7.42%. "Fm. wor at + 


ARES — . 


— PIE 17g ner ore 
a _— —— — _—_— — 
4 2 r 1 


ou — — == FA 6 
P 
= ———— 4 — 


—? age 8 = 7 Try” 
= — — -. Py * 


658 HISTORY OF THE | 


able advocate for the reformation. He died in 
1629, at the age of fifty- eight. 
Or the wonderful projector of the Botany Bay 
and Port Jackſon mills, it may be proper to give 
ſome account here. His name was William Por- 
ter. Originally a hawker of penny pies about the 
ſtreets, and poſſeſſing a genius for enterpriſe, he 
firſt purchaſed the houſe he lived in, which he in 
a great meaſure rebuilt, and then formed the defign 
of Botany Bay mill on the eaft fide of Newport 
river, of [which we have already taken notice“. 
The ſeven elegant houſes, now known by the name 
of Porter's row, at the bottom of High-ſtreet, were 
his next undertaking. After theſe, Port Jackſon 
mill, on the weſt tide of the river; and, laſtly, 
| Yarmouth mill on that river, were projected, and 
moſtly executed by him. He had alſo taken a 
plan for building a creſcent at Cowes. The mills 
are on ſo wonderfully large a ſcale, as to be capa- 
ble of grinding each forty loads of wheat weekly. 
It is ſurpriſing that he effected all theſe through 
the credit of his honeſty and ſobriety, never poſ- 
ſeſſing fifty pounds of his own property. Unfor- 
tunately for him, the new bank at Newport, which 
chiefly ſupported him, was obliged to ſtop; and 
his reſources failing, he was involved in the con- 
ſequences, though twelve months more it is thought 
would have enſured him a handſome independence. 
But, with theſe talents, the event ſhewed that he 
had not abounded in prudence and cexconomy. His 


See p. 534. 
deficiency 


ISLE OF WIGHT. $99 


deficiency in the firſt was manifeſt, in building the 
three mills on life tenures, without making provi- 


fion for a renewal; and in the latter, that he kept 


a phaeton and pair, with a poſt chaiſe and ſingle 
horſe chaiſe, which involved him in unneceſſary 
expences, before he had realized the permanent 


means. He ſold the two mills on Newport river 


for goool. but the purchaſe-money not being 
paid according to agreement, they returned to 
him again. Not a ſcrap of paper of any accounts, 
as large as a crown-plece, could be found on 
the examination by the commiſſioners into the ſtate 
of his effects. The methodiſts, in his failure, loſt 
a principal pillar, whom he liberally favoured. 
He died in 1794, in the prime of life, being almoſt 
reduced to a ſtate of poverty, 3 his misfor- 
tunes but a ſhort time. 


Ser. III. — Of the PARISH of St. NICHOLAS. 


Tuts pariſh conſiſts of ſeveral detached parts; 
excepting on the ſouth-eaſt of the caſtle, where a 
ſmall portion belongs to the church or chapel of 
St. Nicholas in the caſtle, the reſt is diſperſed. 

TH: original chapel was built before the Domeſ- 
day roll was taken, by William Fitz Oſborn, or his 
ſon earl Roger; it was given to Quarr Abbey, 
with its lands, by Baldwin de Redvers, with the 
conſent of his barons. Sir Richard Worſley ſays, 
that it was endowed with thirtcen parcels of land 
in that part of the town of Newport, called Caſtle 
= Hold; 


LA : 

— — 2 - Pr * 
— —— - _ 
T 1 5 «vs Wes — 

by — — — A * — 12 » * 
L 


— — — 


—- 
—— 
— 
— 
— 


V —_ —T— 


— a * — v2 bo * 
— — 


„* ao * 


' 
* 
| 


p 
L 
al 


3 


+. 4 
. 1 
11 
LP 
, % 
4 
N a 
{ 


* 
* 
15 
4 
1 
; 
IS 


23 


600 5 HISTORY OF THE | 


Hold; and with lands at Shalcombe, Rowborough, 


Coſham, and Luccombe. In our notes upon the 
charter of the counteſs Iſabella to her new borough, 
we have endeavoured to eſtabliſh a different inter- 
1 the word; and it is to be obſerved, 
that, in the hiſtory alluded to, the additional half, 
expreſſed in that charter, is dropped, which affords 
a ſtrong argument againſt that vague and inde- 
terminate meaning. The memoirs of Sir John 


Oglander ſtate, that this part of the pariſh had 


formerly a chapel, in a field which is ftill known 
by the name of Chapel Field; but no ſuch place 


now exiſts, if it ever did, and the inhabitants of 


that part of Newport have no regular pariſh church 
to go to, as the duty of the caſtle has been long 
diſuſed. We have elſewhere ſtated, that the pre- 
ſent worthy governor has it in contemplatton to 
revive the long- neglected ſervice of the caſtle, and 


to render it ſomething more than a ſinecure; we 


have alſo mentioned that government rebuilt the 
chapel in 1738. The vicar of Cariſbrooke has a 


| penſion of three pounds from the crown, which was 
probably the original ſtipulation with the abbey of 


Lyra, as an acknowledgment to the mother church. 
The chapel or the caſtle was rated in cardinal 
Beaufort's valuation, in 1404, at one hundred ſhil- 
lings. By the dean's return it appears that the 
vicar of the caſtle had all the ſmall tithes of the 
ancient demeſne of John de Lifle at Roude, as well 
as of the lands of Adam Piſtor and Walter Gaſterne. 

A $MALL detached part of this pariſh is on the 


ſouth 


Ll 
LY — | VOY 8 FB 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 601 


Muth fide of the creek, on which Port Jackſon 
mill has been erected. ETD 

AnoTazr detached part of this pariſh, conſiſts of 
Great Park Farm, between New Park and Swain- 
ſton, on the north fide of Apes Down, and of the 
road from Newport to Calbourn. It is within the 
limits of the pariſh of Cariſbrooke, already 
deſcribed. | 

THe is alſo another detached part, called Row- 
borough, on the fouth of Boucombe Down, between 
Idlecombe and Cheverton, on the toad to North 
Court in the pariſh of Shorwell. It is called Rode- 
berge in Domeſday, and had been held by the abbot 
of Wincheſter of king Edward in fee, being then 
and now aſſeſſed at one yardland. John de Rivers, 
and afterwards Richard Ruſſel held lands here in 
the time of Edward the Third of the counteſs of 
Devon, with others in Weſt Standen and Spann, 
amounting to half a fee. A fee- farm rent of ſix 
ſhillings and eight pence is now paid to the crown 
by the preſent proprietor. 

We meet with another detached part beyond 
Calbourn, under the north-eaſt extremity of Aſton 
Down, at Sharcombe. It is contained within the 
limits of Shalfleet pariſh. An entry in Domeſday> 
under the name of Zeldecombe, as belonging to St. 
Nicholas, ſtates that it had been held for one hide 
in the time of the Confeſſor, but was not now rated. 
It paſſed to the lords of the iſland, who gave it to 
the abbey of Quarr, after which it belonged to 
Chriſt church priory, till it was ſeized by Henry 

Ne. 13. | Rr the 


602 HISTORY OF THE 


the Eighth, from whom, among other lands, it 
was granted to one Hopſon, in exchange for the 
manor of St. Mary-le-bone, and then came to the 
Stanley family, and, by deviſe from Sir Hans Stan- 
ley, it is now the property of lord Mendes, late 
Sir Welbore Ellis, and Chriſtopher D'Oyley, Eſq. 
The crown receives a fee-farm rent of twenty ſhil. 
lings from the proprietor of this manor. | 

Or the number of inhabitants belonging to this 
pariſh a modern account makes them but a very 
little beyond fifty, except thoſe belonging to Caſtle- 
Hold, which are eſtimated at about two hundred 
and fifty. | 


— *— 
ä 


Ster. IV. Of the PARISH of GATCOMBE. 

Or the pariſh of Gatcombe we have to obſerve, 
that the church, which is to the weſt of Gatcombe 
manor houſe, is almoſt ſecluded from the view by 
the lofty pines which ſurround it. Its fine ſquare 
tower, however, ſtill ſhews its elevated pinnacles 
above the ſummit of its modern rivals on the riſing 
ground above the bridge. The vicar of Godſhill 
officiates in the chapel of Whitwell; but the rector 
of Gatcombe compounds, at the rate of four nobles, 
a year, to the vicar of Godſhill, in lieu of the duty 
he would otherwiſe be obliged to perform. The 
figure of a man in full proportion, appears on the 
north ſide of the chancel here, carved in wood, 
which we conſider as a repreſentation of one of the 
ancient family of the Liſles. The inhabitants call 
| | it 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 603 


it the old wooden ſaint. It is a a rectory, attached. 
to the manor, and the pariſh ſcarcely contains two 
| hundred and fifty inhabitants. In the time of 
Edward the Third, the church furniſhed three 
bowmen for defence. The dean's return of the 
churches in 1305, ſtates, that the rector of this 
church takes all the great and ſmall tithes of the | 
demeſne of Baldwin de Liſle at Whitwell in Gods- 
hill, and all the oblations offered on the altar of 
St. Radegund there. In cardinal Beaufort's valua- 
tion, in 1404, it is put down at twenty-five marks. 

We now come to ſpeak of the manor of Gat- 
combe, which at the time of Domeſday appears to 
have been held by William Eitz Stur. It had been 
held by three brothers in abeyance, or equality, of 
king Edward, and was then rated at two hides, 
but now rated at one. Each of them had his 
manſion. | 

In the roll of landholders under the counteſs Iſa- 
bella, Gatcombe is mentioned as part of the poſſeſ- 
ſions of lady Matilda de Eſtur, which ſhe held in de- 
meſne with Whitwell and Calbourn. John le Fry is 
alſo there ſaid to hold of the ſaid lady the eighth part 
of a fee in Gatcombe. Theſe manors, with Mer- 
ſton, ſupplied three men at arms to defend the 
iſland in the time of Edward the Third. In the 
ſeventeenth of Henry the Sixth we find that John 
Bremſhot held theſe manors, conſiſting of five 
knight's fees, by marriage with the heireſs of this 
branch of the Liſle family, to whom they had de- 
ſcended by marriage with the heireſs of the Eſtur 


3 r family. 
1219 2 


604  HISTORY- OF THE 


family. The two daughters of the Bremſhot family 
were married into the families of Dudley and Pa- 
kenham, who held the eſtates in abeyance or co- 
partnerſhip, till Dudley's moiety was purchaſed 
by Richard Worſley, captain of the iſland. Paken- 
ham's moiety was again ſub-divided, by the mar- 
riage of the two daughters and coheireſſes with the 
families of Earnly and Pole, who ſold their reſpec- 
tive ſhares to John Worſley, Eſq. of Appuldur- 
co nbe. Thomas, his ſon, deviſed Gatcombe to his 
younger ſon John, and it ſtill remains in this branch 
of the family. Sir Edward Worſley rebuilt the _ 
manſion houſe in 1750, beſides making many other 
very great improvements; and Edward Meaux 
Worſley, Eſq. had it in contemplation to make a 
large canal in front of the houſe, on which was to 
be a pleaſure yacht, but this was never fully 
executed. Captain Harvey commanded a watch 
and two men on the down here, ſo late as 1638. 
It is a plain brick building, with a fine lawn before 
it, which extends to the road; an agreeable proſ- 
pect in front, and on the left hand, adds to the 
beauty of its ſituation, extending along the valley 
of Newchurch to a conſiderable diſtance. 

Is Domeſday roll we find the name of Sheat, 
which had been held in the time of the Confeſſor, 
and was ftill held by Alaric, and reckoned at one 
hide. In counteſs Iſabella's record Gilbert Reope 
held half a fee of her at Cotsford and Sheat, as did 
William de Cockevill at Hemſtead and Sheat. The 
abbot of Quarr had alſo half a fee in Sheat. Ir is 


ſituated on the ſummit of an eminence, and its vi- 
cinity 


- ISLE or WIGHT. 605 


cinity is ſurrounded by ſmall woods, which are 
extremely pleaſant and agreeable to the eye. 
HII FARM muſt not be overlooked, as we find 
it in the Domeſday roll, to be held by Ulnod, who 
had poſſeſſed it in the time of the Confeſſor. It 
was then, as well as now, aſſeſſed at a yardland; 
but we have no farther accounts of it in antiquity. 
Or Chillerton, as a manor, we have hinted under 
Cariſbrooke, in the farm belonging to Wootton 


pariſh; but, perhaps, Chillerton, to the weſt of 


Gatcombe houſe, may be entitled to the honour, 
though, from its ancient poſſeſſors, we ſhould be 
induced to give it to Wootton. Two portions are 


entered in Domeſday, as parcels of the poſſeſſions 


of William Fitz Azor; one of which was held of 
him by William the foreſter, which Aluric had 
held of the Confeſſor in abeyance, and was then and 
now reckoned for one hide. Geoffrey held another 
portion of him, reckoned at one yardland, which 
Blacheman had held in abeyance. 

Goztiin Fitz Azor had alſo poſſeſſions at that 
time, which Blacheman had held of the Confeſſor 
in abeyance, but was now held by Geoffrey, and 
reckoned at a yardland. Aluric alſo held of him 
what was reckoned at half a hide, which he had 
before held of king Edward. 

Ix the record of the counteſs Ifabella, Chillerton 
is reckoned as parcel of the poſſeſſions of Sir John 
Liſle, held of her, in capite; John de Kingſton held 
half a fee, as of the poſſeſſions of the lord of Yaver- 
land, in Shorde and Chillerton, and Richard de 
 Aﬀeton the twelfth part of a fee. 

Rr 3 Ster- 


by 
- 1 
: 1 — 
8 = 
* 
. = 
+ 6 
: { 1 = 
e-}! 
- * nd 
| 3 - 
l %. 
. . 
1 
2588 
. 1 * 
, 4 
” ; * 
YA 
* * , 
4 4 
1 
x 70 * 
; 
. 
. 4 = 
wy bh, ; N 
>, 
Wi. 4 4 
n a 
ny 
'L 
* t - 
4 = # 
$4 
1 3 
1 
"= , 'Y 
1 
By i 
1 bf 
„ 2 Ty 
6 * % 
. 15 
9 8 
Fc. a 
. 9 
of f * 
74 5 { 
10 J 
: 
Py 5 
on 4 
4 N 
i743 
1 
* 4 5 
1 7 | 
x 4 . * N 35 
| AP 
1 | 
[] 
7 
"1 1 
N 
- by 
a 10 | j) 


4 
17 
1 


1 
1 
4 
n 
: 
7 
ö 
N 
ki 
= 
: 
Þ 
1 
| 
= 
| 
4 
| 
'Y 
| 
{ 
| 
} 
| 


7 


606 HISTORY OF THE 


S xcr. V.—Of the PARISH of CHALE.. 
Or the foundation of this pariſh, we have the 


following account from the chartulary of Cariſ- 


brooke. It was erected by Hugh Vernun in the 


beginning of the twelfth century, and was claimed 
by the prieſt of Cariſbrooke as belonging to his 


pariſh; but was reſiſted by the founder, on the 
ground that his tenants did not belong to the church 
cf Cariſbrooke, but were at liberty to go to what 
church they pleaſed, when living, and to exerciſe 


the ſame option in the burial of their dead. A 
compromiſe, however, at length took place, and 
the church of Cariſbrooke had a moiety aſſigned to it 


of all the glebe land and tithes of burials and obla- 


tions, but with the expreſs reſervation of thoſe of 


his own houſe, for maintaining the ſervice and 
repairs of the church of Chale. At this time the 


new church had a cemetry allowed, by conſent of 


the prieſt of Cariſbrooke, and confirmed together 
with this agreement by William Gifford, biſhop 
of Wincheſter and lord chancellor of England, from 
1107 to 1129. From this period, the parſon of 
Chale was obliged to perform the whole ſervice of 
his church. | 8 38 Bend 

Tur church of Chale comes neareſt to that of 
Cariſbrooke in external appearance of any other 


— church in the iſland, but is not quite ſo large, nor 


Shas it ſo much of the venerable gothic appearance. 
This church furniſhed two bowmen in the time of 
Edward the Third for defence of the iſland; and 
ue have already mentioned that the lord of Niton 
and 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 607 


and Chale found one bowman. In the dean of the 
iſland's return to biſhop Woodlock, in 1305, we 
find the abbey and convent of Lyra are reported as 
taking the moiety of all the great and ſmall tithes 
of Chale, and the moiety of its oblations and dues, 
as by the above agreement appears, the rector of 
the church of Chale for the time being, taking the 
other half. In cardinal Beaufort's valuation, about 
one hundred years after, it was rated at thirty 

marks. The return made to the commiſſioners of 
king Edward the Sixth of plate ſold from this 
church, only amounts to fifty ſhillings. 

Tur preſent population of the pariſh is ſuppoſed 

to be about three hundred and fifty. 

In ſpeaking of Chale, as a manor, we muſt begin 
with Domeſday, where we find two entries. It 
was held, ſays the record, of the king in demeſne, 
by William Fitz Stur, and is the ſame which had 
been held of the Confeſſor by Chetel in abeyance, 
being then reckoned at one hide, but now at a yard- 
land. The other was held alſo in abeyance of the 
Confeſſor, and reckoned at half a hide, which 
Ulicus now holds at the ſame eſtimation. 

In the record of the counteſs Iſabella, Roger de 


Langford is ſaid to have held three-fourths of a fee 


of her, in capile, whereby he poſſeſſed the manor 


of Chale; and Gilbert de Hoſkerſwell held of him 


the third part of a fee in Chale. John de Langford 
is ſaid to have held a knight's fee in Chale in the 
ſeventh year of Edward the Third. He was ap- 
pointed conſtable of Cariſbrooke Caſtle, and was 

KE4S one 


<I ECL N 
* TM XY 
* 


Y _ 
* 
— F 


ad 


n we —— 5 2A WR FI 


=, 
” 


— > — 
24 . eee oy 


3 - 
3 . - 
— — —— 


2 
— 
——2— A * 


608 HISTORY OF THE 


one of the three wardens of the iſland which were 
elected by the inhabitants. 

ANOTHER account ſays, that Richard de Lang- 
ford, ſon of Sir Richard, obtained certain lands in 
Chale, with common paſture on the down, from 
Richard Barnevyle, in the twenty-firſt year of 
Edward the Firſt, and that John Langford, chief 
lord of Chale, obtained the reſt of Barnevyle's 
lands in the ſecond year of Edward the Second. 
Perhaps this makes up the additional quarter of a 
fee, which they held in the gn of Edward the 
Third. 

Tux heireſs of the i was married to Thomas 
Pound, Eſq. of Southwick, in the county of 
Southampton, who ſucceeded to Chale in the firſt 
year of Henry the Eighth; of whom it was pur- 
chaſed by captain Richard Worſley, and now re- 
mains in the Appuldurcombe family. A watch 
was kept on the down in the time of Edward the 
Second, of four men by night and two by day, as 
there was of two men under the command of Mr. 
Meaux, ſo late as 1638. Certain tenements in 
Chale paid rents of fourteen ſhillings and eight 
pence, which had belonged to the priory of . 
brooke, in 1565. d 

Or the manor of Godyton or Gotton in this pa- 
Tiſh, now called Gatton, we have but few autho— 
rities to direct our pen. We meet with it, how- 
ever, in Domeſday, under the name of Gadetune, 
where it belonged to William Fitz Stur. In the 
Lonfeſſor's time, Bruning and his brother had held 

. it 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 609 


ic jointly, and it was then, as now, confidered at one 


hide. In the counteſs of Devon's roll, we meet 


with it as held, with other lands in Whitfield, 
Brading, and many more places, of the lady Ma- 
tilda de Eſtur, amounting to a fee. What we far- 
ther know of it is, that Walter de Godyton built 
a Chapel on Chale down, in 1323, which was de- 
dicated to St. Catherine, and aſſigned certain rents 
for a chantry prieſt to. ſing maſs, and to provide 


lights for the guidance and direction of mariners 


approaching that dangerous coaſt by night, as it is 
expreſſed in the regiſter of Wincheſter. But it 


ſhared the fate of all chantries, on the diſſolution 


of religious houſes, and the proviſion of lights was 
involved in its deſtruction. There had been an 
hermitage on the ſame ſpot before the eſtabliſn- 
ment of this chapel of St. Catharine. An entry to 
the following purpoſe appears in the regiſter of the 
dioceſe, which proves its exiſtence eleven years 
before; how long it had been there before that 


time we cannot determine. Walter de Lang- 


ſtrell admitted to the hermitage upon Chale down, 
in the iſle of Wight, on the ides of October, A. D. 
1312.” A watch was kept at St. Caterons of two 
men, under the command of Capt. Rice, as late as 
the year 1638. 

For the purpoſe of a ſea mark, no place could 
indeed be apparently more ſuitable. Its command 
ing elevation being ſeven hundied and fifty feet 
above the level of high water mark, and ſcarce 
more than half a mile from the neareſt ſhore, and 

not 


— — — * * 7 
- 
— — * 
4 — _ 
we - 


— — — — 
r 


— — — 


— £6 
Rx. ES 


= 
— 
— — T 


» = 
TT ] 


- E 2 
=> 


— —— 


3 
** 


— —_ 
— 1 — - — - 
— - 


\# 
. 
51 
4 
1 10 


610 HISTORY OF PHE 


not a mile from the ſouthera extremity of the 
iſtand, ſeems to point it out as a moſt defirable 
ſtation. The tower of the chapel is ſtill ſtanding, 
and known by the name of St. Catherine's tower, 
being thirty-five feet fix inches high, of an octan- 
gular form without, but quadrangular within, and 
finiſhed with a pyramidical roof. Each of the ſides, 
both without and within, meaſures four feet.” It 
was ſome years ago in a ſtate of decay, and in dan- 
ger of falling, but has ſince been ſubſtantially re- 
paired, and its angles ſupported with buttreſſes. 
On clearing the ground, it was found that this 
Chapel had no tranſept, and conſiſted only of a body, 
at the weft end of which the tower was erected ; 
when the prieſt's little cell was diſcovered by the 
floor and ftone hearth at the ſouth-weſt corner. 
Tur brethren' of the trinity houſe have lately 
erected a light houſe on this down; but, upon ex- 
perience, it proved altogether uſeleſs, the cloud- 
_ capt hill being invariably obſcured in miſty va- 
pours, when the mariner has moſt occafion for its 
friendly aid. The newly erected houſe of ob- 
ſervation, intended to convey ſignals from 
Freſhwater hither, from hence to Aſhey down, 
and from thence to Portſmouth, muſt doubtleſs 
labour under the ſame defect. The ſhell of the 
light houſe is a handſome circular ſtone building, 
and makes a diſtinguiſhed land mark, when the 
atmoſphere is clear, viſible from every eminence 
in the iſland, and from many parts of Hampſhire. 
Excepting towards the veſt, where the ſight is 


intercepted by the downs of Brixton, every part of 
tie 


ISLE OF WIGHT. | 611 


che iſland may be ſeen from this down; and the 
iſles of Purbeck and Portland are very plainly dif. 


covered. It has been affirmed that to the eaſt, | 


the point which forms the bay of enen 
| may be perceived from hence. 

Hou far the current opinion of the inhabitants 
ig to be credited, that Shanklin Down to the eaſt- 
ward could not formerly be ſeen from St. Catha- 
rine's, we are not competent to determine. They 


fay that Week Down, in Godſhill pariſh, formerly 


intercepted the view, though it is now ſuppoſed 
to be a hundred feet lower than Shanklin is at 
preſent; and they conclude from this circumſtance 
that the intermediate down muſt have ſunk con- 
ſiderably. Indeed they go ſo far as to aſſert that, 
within the memory of old perſons who are or were 
very lately living, Shanklin Down was barely vi- 
ſible from the hill of St. Catharine's; to which 
they add, as a farther confirmation, that theſe old 
perſons had been informed in their youth by their 


ancient predeceſſors, that Shanklin Down could not 


at all be ſeen from Chale Down, except from the 
top of the beacon. Though we are unwilling to 
ſuppreſs this account entirely, we are not deſirous 
of attaching ſuch a degree of credit to it, as to 
induce our readers to ſuppoſe it to be our opinion; 
as we could eaſily give reaſons which would, ac- 
cording to the common acceptation of words in 
the laſt century, or beginning of the preſent, admit 
this general ſtatement, without the ſuppoſition 
herein contended for. | 


WI 


> A — 
— 2 


1 


— 3 
—— 
— _— — 


2 
—_ 


— 


— —— — — 


— 


* 4 — 
_— — — 


1 
ö 
; 
{ 
j 
1 
5 
1 
j 


612 HISTORY OF THEY 


We now come to Wallpan, to the weſt of Chale 


. parſonage, and on the ſouth fide of the brook which 
there runs parallel with the coaſt ; it is mentioned 
as a manor in Domeſday, that, with Atherfield, 
and Dunnoſe, were held by three thanes or lords 
of king Edward at three hides, but now at one. In 
the time of the countefs Iſabella, William de 
Aumarle held of her in capite one fee in Wallpan, 
with Honeyhull, and Cockpull; and the abbeſs 
of Laycock had held a yardland in Wallpan, but 
it: was then held by the chaplains of Burton or 
Barton. 

Tus Chine of this name is fimitar to others 
which are herein noticed, but of a leſs terrific na- 
ture, and therefore needs no particular deſcription. 
The ſame may be obſerved of Ladder Chine, to 
the north-weſt of Blackgang Chine. 
 Pernays we ought not to leave this pariſh with. 
out mentioning the dangerous coaſt of Chale Bay, 
which abounds with rocks. juſt lurking under the 
water's ſurface. With a ſouth or ſouth weſt wind, 


and a ſtrong tide, theſe occaſion very heavy ſwells, 


and a good offing to the ſouthward is neceſſary for 
a ſhip or veſſel to weather the point of Old Caſtle 
to the ſouth of St. Catherine's. This bay, though 
it has a fine broad beach at low water, annually 
occaſions the loſs of veſſels driven into it, and fre- 
quently the loſs of many lives; and, unhappily, 
the inhabitants are uſually more intent on plunder 
than on affording aſſiſtance to the diſtreſſed and 


ſhipwrecked mariner or paſſenger. We cannot 
help 


* 


ISLE OF WIGHT) 613 


help thinking with a recent touriſt, that ſome pre- 


mium ſhould be offered and honour beſtowed upon 


thoſe who are inſtrumental in ſaving the lives of 
perſons in ſuch ſituations, in proportion to the 
danger and hazard incurred; and, in caſes where 
the circumſtances warrant, a ſociety might be 
formed to give bounties to individuals for guarding 
from plunder ſuch merchandize as might be ſaved, 
excluſive of the ſalvage commonly allowed. 
Brackxcanc Cnins, to the ſouth of Chale vil- 
lage, is the uſual way down to the ſtrand. But 
the vaſt maſſes of broken ground and disjointed 
rocks, among which you muſt paſs through an im- 


menſe gully, the ruins of the country above it 


render it extremely awful. The fides of this chaſm 
are little ſhort of five hundred feet high, but 
ſhelving; and a ſpring, which has its riſe on the 
ſummit, winds flowly down to the ſea. It appears 
to contain particles of iron, of a ſulphureous ſmell, 


and, if drank, operates as a gentle aperient. Many 


copperas ſtones lay about it in a native ſtate, and 
there are ſome pieces of rock allum, but not in 
ſuch plenty as at Allum Bay. It is ſaid to have 
received its name from a gang of pirates, who 
formerly made it their place of reſidence. Be 
that as it may, it is certain that this has a more 
ſavage and barbarous appearance than Shanklin 
Chine, and not a buſh is to be ſeen on any part of 
the mouldered or mouldering precipices, to {often 
its terrific aſpect, But it is moſt au ful from the 
ſhore below. 


Or 


” - — 
— — — — —ñ—üw! f — — P —— 3 — - — - ll” 
wt N 


r 


— 


* Zack. 


. — — 


4 


x; 


* 
» 


— — — 
— — : 


Dm 


Wb —ͤ— 


MC ORE 


- 


a 
4 
j 
4 
U 
[ 
j 


* 
* 

N 

"4 
4 

W 

* * 

Fl 


614 HISTORY OF THE 


Or the gold duſt, which it has been ſaid, was 
"diſcovered among the ſand fome years ago, it is 
probable that fome Spaniſh ſhip might have been 
wrecked in the bay ; which is the more likely, as 
ſome dollars were occaſionally found there, and | 
might have been thrown up by the waves: 


* —— 


* 


Seer VI. Of the PARISH of KINGSTON. 
Or the church of Kingſton, which is called a 
chapel in cardinal Beaufort's valuation, and ex- 
| empted from taxation, we can only conclude that 
it was built by one of the family of Kingſton, be- 
fore any regiſters of the dioceſe commenced, which 
are now in exiſtence. The founder and date are 
therefore matters concerning which nothing can 
be determined ; but it appears from the regiſters, 
after their commencement, that the lords of King- 
ſton always enjoyed the preſentation. The church 
of Kingfton furniſhed one bowman for defence of 
the iſland in the reign of Edward the Third. This 
pariſh is not ſuppoſed to contain more than thirty 


inhabitants. It is a rectory in the preſentation of 


the lords of Gatcombe and Kingſton. 

Wet have ſeveral entries in Domeſday of King- 
ſton, under the names of Cheniſtone and Chingeſtune. 
The king held here and at Dean ¶ Done) what eight 
freemen had held in fee of king Edward, and had 
been aſſeſſed at two hides, but now was not rated. 
Oda with two fre -cemen had half of a hide; and a 
* of a yardland; Alwold, Herould, Gödwin, 

g and 


9 
— 


C — HH 
— 2 - 


- — 
— 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 615 


and Alric had each a yardland, and Brictric half a 
hide, and a fifth part of a mill belonged to each of 
them. The king held the lands of theſe five thanes 
for his kitchen. Half a yardland was alſo held by 
Tovi in Cheniftone (Kingſton), as of the king's gift, 
which Bondi held of king Edward in fee, being 
then and now aſſeſſed for that quantity. We alſo 
find lands held in Chingeſtune (Kingſton) by the 
king, which Uluric had held in abeyance of the 
Confeſſor, and then rated at one bade. but now at 
a yardland. | | 

In the counteſs's roll, the eichen. year of Edward 
the Firſt, Jordan de Kingſton held of her in King- 
ſton half a fee, with the manor in demeſne; and 
one of the ſame name and family, in the ſeventh. 
of Edward the Third, held a knight's fee, and the 
eighth part of a fee of the honour of the caſtle of 
Cariſbrooke in Kingſton and Molleſby. The lord 
of Kingſton alſo furniſhed one man at arms for de- 
fence of the iſland, in the thirteenth year of that 
reign, and Sir John de Kingſton one man at arms 
and two bowmen. 

From the family of Kingſton, this pariſh paſſed, 
by marriage with the heireſs of the family to that 
of Drewe, and after that in the ſame manner to the 
family of Meaux; in whom it remained for more 
than three hundred years, till lady Worſley, the 
relict of Sir Edward Worſley, Kant. the laſt ſurviving, 
branch of the family, deviſed it to Edward Meaux. 
Worſley, Efq. of Gatcombe, in whoſe family it 
remains. 


„ 
— — W —— — — — —— — 


= 

f 
FE 
L 

Ch 
ſh 
5 
7 
s 
{ 
1 

4 , { 
' 4 


C 10 18319 


616 Ants rokv or THE 


Ster. VII. - Of the PARISH of SHOR WELL. 

Or the hiſtory of the church of Shorwell, our 
materials are, we are ſorry to remark, viſibly de- 
fective. As a chapel, indeed, which was probably 
erected after the foundation of Cariſbrooke, we 
have the leſs reaſon to regret this want of authen- 
tic information; it was confirmed as ſuch to that 
priory, by the charter of William de Vernun, and 
belonged to the pariſh till the reign of Edward the 
Third. But the inconvenience of burying their 
dead at Cariſbrooke, at ſuch a diſtance, eſpecially 
in winter, occaſioned its ſeparation from the mo- 
ther church. = 

Tur vicar of Shorwell, in the thirteenth of Ed- 
ward the Third, was charged with two bowmen 
in defence of the iſland, and the rectory with two 
others. The form of the architecture of this church 
is mentioned under Brixton, to which it is ſimilar. 

Ix the dean of the ifland's returns in 1305, Shor- 
well is ſaid to pay a penſion of twenty ſhillings to 
the prior of Cariſbrooke, probably a ſtipulation for 
the above privilege, and as an acknowledgement 
of its rights; but the abbot of Lyra had all the 
great tithes of the demeſnes of the abbeſs of Lay- 
cock, who received the great tithes of the demeſnes 
of R. de Wolverton and J. de Olde, with the tithes 
of the mill, of which from a decay or defect in 
the record, we are not informed. But the abbot 
and convent of Quarr received the great tithes of 
Sir John Liſle's demeſne in the pariſh; and the 
vicar of the caſtle two parts of the ſmall tithes of 


the ſaid demeſne. Abou r 


iSLE OF WIGHT. 617 


Azsour a hundred years after, the rectory was 
rated in cardinal Beaufort's valuation at forty 
marks, and the penſion of twenty ſhillings is alſo 
mentioned; but the vicarage of Shorwell was not 
taxed, being probably at that time of inconſider- 
able value. 

Tur report made by the commiſſioners of king 
Edward, of plate, &c. ſold in the different churches, 
amounted to 271. 148. 10d. 

Tu number of inhabitants contained in this 
pariſh are between five and ſix hundred. 

In ſpeaking of the manors of this pariſh, we - 
find north and ſouth Shorwell, and Woolverton. 
It occurs twice in Domeſday, but is not diſtin- 
yuiſhed ſo as to diſcover the one from the other; 
but from ſubſequent information, north Shorwell 
appears to have been held by the king at the time 
of this ſurvey, which had been poſſeſſed by three 
thanes jointly, who had each their diftin& man- 
fion, in the time of the Confeſſor, and reckoned 
at a hide and a half, but now at three yardlands. 
This, with the reſt of the king's lands, went into 
the hands of Baldwin de Redvers, being included 
in the general grant of the lordſhip of the ifland, 
and it remained in the family till the reign of 
Henry the Third, when Amicia, counteſs of Devon, 
gave it to the nuns of Laycock, in the county of 
Wilts. This grant was confirmed by her daugh- 
ter, Iſabella de Fortibus, counteſs of Albemarle, 
in whoſe record of the eighth of Edward the Firſt 
it is obſerved that the abbeſs of Laycock then held 

1. 858 of 


es + HISTORY OF THF 


of her i capite one fee, by which ſhe poſſeſſed in 
demeſne the manor of Shorwell. She was charged 
to ſupply three men at arms and two bowmen tor 
- defence of the iſland, on account of this manor, 
in the thirteenth year of Edward the Third. After 
the diſſolution of monaſteries it came to the crown, 
and in the ſecond year of queen Elizabeth, it ap- 
pears to have been in the poſſeſſion of Thomas 
Temes, Eſq. Sir John Leigh purchaſed it about 
the latter part of that reign, in whoſe family it 
was lately, when it belonged to five coheireſſes. 
It has ſince been the reſidence of the right hono- 
rable the lord Ducie, and was lately purchaſed and 
is now inhabited by Richard Bull, Eſq. who has 
made the apartments within as comfortable as the 
external aſpect is reſpectable, and is equally 
eſteemed for that primitive hoſpitality, which has 
been the characteriſtic feature of the inhabitants 
of this ifland. It pays a fee farm rent to the crown 
of one pound twelve ſhillings and ſeven pence. 
Or the manſion houſe we learn that it was begun 
by Sir John Leigh, at an advanced age, in the 
_ reign of James the Firſt, and completed by his ſon, 
and has been much repaired and improved ſince by 
the poſſeſſors, ſo as to be one of the beſt houſes in 
the iſland, It is built with a ſmooth and durable 
ſtone, ſcarcely to be found at preſent in the quar- 
ries of the iſland, and the eaſt front retains its ori- 
ginal purity ; the whole of which has a venerable 
and not unpleaſing appearance. The gardens are 
laid out with judgment and taſte, and it commands 
ſome very extenſive views. Or 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 619 


Or Weſt Court, or South Shorwell, we have 
this account in Domeſday, that it was part of the 
poſſeſſions of Gozeline Fitz Azor, and had been 
held in the time of the Confeſſor by Ulnod in abey- 
ance, at two hides and a yardland, but now at half 
a hide. 

Ar the time of the counteſs llabella - s record, 
we find that Sir John Lifle had this manor, with 
many others, which he held of her in capite, or by 
Knight's ſervice. It deſcended from them in the 
ſame manner as we have ſtated under Shanklin, 
and is now poſſeſſed by colonel Hill, in right of 
his lady. This pays a fee farm rent to the crown 
of one pound fix ſhillings and eight pence: 

THz manor of Woolverton claims our next at- 
tention, on the oppoſite fide of the brook which 
runs from Shorwell to Brixton. It is but a very 
ſhort diſtance from Weſt Court. In the Domeſday 
roll it is wrote Uſwarcombe, and was then part of 
the poſſeſſ ons of William Fitz Stur, and held by 
Luran, who had alſo held it of the Confeſſor in 
abeyance, being then and now reckoned at one 
hide. In the liſt of armed men, in the reign of 
Edward the Third, Ralf de Woolverton ſent two 
bowmen, and Nicholas de Woolverton one bow- 
man, for defence of the ifland. Sir Ralph de 
Woolverton gave the tithes of his demeſnes to the 
priory of Cariſbrooke ; but when it changed maſters 
we are not informed, though it is found to have 
been in the family of Dingley or Dineley in the 
reign of Henry the Fifth, as was little Woolverton 

"GS 2 under 


620 HISTORY OF THE 


under Wathe in the pariſh of St. Lawrence. In 
the ſurvey of the ſecond year of Elizabeth, it is 
repreſented as being held of the manor of Gat- 
-combe, and containing three hundred acres of 
land; but it was purchaſed by Maurice Hunt and 
Anthony Morgan, Eſqrs. at the revolution, and the 
principal farm and manor houſe have been lately 
transferred to Mr. Jolliffe from Mr. Delgarno, but 
now the property of Chaloner Archdeacon, Eſq. 
The other part is faid to have paſſed into the hands 
of Serle, Goodenough, and Clarke, by which laſt 
family it is now poſſeſſed. 


Secrt. VIII.—Of the PARISH of BRIXTON. 
Or the pariſh of Brixton we have to obſerve, 
that it is a daughter of Calbourn, and was taken 
out of it ; as that pariſh was a part of the ancient 
poſſeſſions of the church of Wincheſter, ſome of 
the biſhops of that ſee probably built the church 
of Brixton, which has a very primitive appearance, 
and made it parochial. Calbourn ſtill endeavoured 
to preſerve its juriſdiction, which was reſiſted by 
the rectors of Brixton, and a commiſſion was 
iſſued to the rector of Gatcombe to exerciſe that 
authority, until the right ſhould be determined, as 
the parties had proceeded to open violence, and 
were at iſſue upon it. But as the biſhop was patron 
of both churches, it is more than probable, that 
the diſputes were terminated by his accommoda- 
tion. In the dean of the iſland's return to biſhop 
Woodlock, it is reported that Brightſton, as it is 
there 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 621 


there called, uſed to belong to the church of Cal- 
bourn as the mother church, and it is repreſented 
as furniſhing one man at arms and two bowmen, 
diſtinct from Calbourn, in the thirteenth of Edward 
the Third, for the iſland's defence. In cardinal 
Beaufort's valuation it is alſo diſtin, and there 
rated, under the name of Brightſton alſo, at thirty 
marks. Of the return of king Edward the Sixth's 
commiſſioners, for taking an account of plate, &c. 
we find it produced 51. gs. 6d. 

We have to add of Brixton, as a pariſh, that it 
is ſuppoſed to contain only about one hundred and 
thirty inhabitants. Of the church it muſt be ob- 
ſerved, that few country churches are furniſhed 
with neater pews, and other neceſſary accommo- 
dations for public ſervice ; but there are no vaults 
for the interment of any families of diſtinction, nor 
any monuments, whoſe inſcriptions are of impor- 
tance ſufficient to claim a place in this hiſtory,— 
A foot ſtone to the memory of Mr. Robert Ding- 
ley, interred in 1657, and another to the memory 
of the Rev. Robert Tyrrell, ſaid to be of the family 
of Tyrrell, at Hackborn, near Reading, in Berk- 
ſhire, are thoſe which moſt deſerve attention. The 
tower of the church contains five muſical bells, 
which were hung there in the year 1740, and had 
been recaſt from the metal of three larger ones, two 
of which were broke. On its low tower is a ſhort 


ſtone ſpire, ſimilar to thoſe of Shorwell and 


Motteſtone. 


WE have been favoured with ſome extracts from 


„ the 


C : —_ — — — af N : — 
= * +} 2 1 — 
Oi ; % ee I 
TEE" OF, 14S ts SAT, 2 


— - 


— 2 * —— 


A ee So 295m, 95 cf 


- 


' 
; 
| 
J 
| 


622 utsroRY or THE 


the pariſh regiſters by the preſent amiable rector, 
whoſe. liberality and humanity do honour to his 
profeſſion, and is highly. worthy the imitation of 
others. Theſe enable us to ſtate, that population 
is probably encreaſing, as the baptiſms, on an 
average of ten years, from 1644 to 1653, were only 
ten, and the burials betwixt fix and ſeven; from 
1688 to 1697, there were near eight baptiſms, and 
as many burials on an average; from 1741 to 1750, 

| thirteen baptiſms and ſix burials annually ; from 
1771 to 1780, ſixteen baptiſms and near ſeven bu- 
rials annually ; and from 1784 to 1793, ſeventeen 
baptiſms and ſeven burials annually. _ 

THREE manors in this pariſh demand our atten- 
tion, before we communicate the principal part of 
the information we have received concerning 1t 
from an intelligent correſpondent. Brixton, of 
courſe, claims the preference, which at a very 
early period, was in the hands of the biſhops of 
Wincheſter,as appendant to: Su ainſton or Calbourn; 
ſo that we neither meet with it in the Domeſday 
record, nor in the roll of poſſeſſions claimed by the 
counteſs Iſabella, about two hundred years after, 
and allowed by the juſtices itinerant. The firſt 
carl of Saliſbury, of the name of Montacute, to 
whom the manor was granted, had large franchifes, 
and particularly wrecks of the ſea, which muſt have 
included that part now known by the name of 
| Brixton; ſo that the manor, ſo late as in the reign 
of Eduard the Third, appears not to have been 


divided, though the church had been erected long 
before 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 623 


before that period. In the twenty-third year 
of Henry the Seventh, the manor of Brixton, 
then wrote ee paid a fee-farm rent to 
the crown of thirty-ſix pounds fixteen ſhillings 
and four pence halfpenny; and ſo late as 1638, a 
watch and two men were under the command of 
Capt. Urry, on the ſhore of this village. From the 
earls of Saliſbury, this manor deſcended to the 
famous earl of Warwick, who was killed at the 
battle of Barnet. King Edward gave it to the duke 
of Clarence, by whoſe attainder it came again to 
the crown. The earl of Warwick's fon then had 
it, but it was once more forfeited; after which 
Henry the Eighth granted it to the ſiſter of the 
laſt earl of Warwick, counteſs of Saliſbury, who 
married Sir Richard Pole, knight of the garter; 
but ſhe was alſo afterwards accuſed of treaſonable 
practices, condemned, and beheaded; and Swain- 
fton again reverted to the crown. Queen Mary 
beſtowed it on the daughter and coheir of Henry, 
lord Montagu, ſon of the counteſs of Saliſbury, 
who was twice married, firſt to Sir Thomas Haſt. 
ings, his brother the earl of Huntingdon having 
married the other ſiſter, and ſecondly to Sir Thos. 
Barrington, knt. whoſe ſon Francis was created a 
baronet, and in whoſe family the manor ſtill remains. 

 LeMeRSTON, as a manor, gave name to its poſ- 
ſeſſors, like many others in the iſland and elſe- 
where, ſoon after the conqueſt. It occurs in 
Domeſday roll, where Elnod is ſaid to hold one 
hide of the king, which he had before held in 


. abeyance 


624 HISTORY OF THE 


abeyance in the time of the Confeſſor, being then 
alſo rated at one hide. Another entry ſays that 
the king held lands in Levingtune (Lemerſton), 
which Ulviet, the huntſman had held in abeyance 
from king Edward, and were then rated at one 
hide, but now at half a hide. The family. built an 
oratory here, with an endowment for three prieſts. 
The Tichbornes af:erwards enjoyed it for four 
hundred years, to whom it came by marriage with 
the heireſs of Lemerſton. In the time of Edward 
the Third, it ſupplied one bowman for defence of 
the iſland. Sir John Tichborn alſo furniſhed two 
| bowmen, probably for the manor. It was at laſt 
purchaſed of that family by the father of the late 
Hans Stanley, to whom it deſcended, and it is now 
the joint property of Baron Mendes, the title to which 
the Right Hon. Welbore Ellis has been lately creat- 
ed, and Chriſtopher D'Oyley, Eſq. who married 
his ſiſters, to whom it had been deviſed by the will 
of the ſaid inheritor. In the dean of the iſland's 
return to biſhop Woodlock, it is ſtated that to the 
chantry of the chapel of St. Martin at Lemerſton, 
an endowrnent of three ploughlands was aſſigned, 
for the reſidence and ſervice of three chaplains to 
the ſaid chapel belonging; but in cardinal Beau- 
fort's tax roll, it is not rated, being exempted as 
a religious houſe. The walls of the chapel are ſup- 
poſed to exiſt at preſent, for the moſt part, in a 
barn there; and a ſtone coffin with human bones 
have been dug up there in levelling the rick yard. 

Tur manor of Uggaton, which we have placed 


in 


＋τ 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 625 


in this pariſh on the authority of Sir Richard Wor- 
ſley, bart. was given to the knights templers, by 
Maſcarell, lord of Brook. It was given to God's 
houſe, at Portſmouth, after the ſuppreſſion of that 
order, till it came into the hands of the crown, at 
the general diſſolution of religious houſes, where 
it remained till the reign of James the Firſt, when 
it was purchaſed by Stephen March, Eſq. from 
whom it deſcended, on the failure of male iſſue to 
the families of Powel and Bagſter. The two moie- 
ties each pay a fee-farm rent of five pounds two 
ſhillings and nine pence to the crown. 

 ArHeRFIELD is the next object of our attention, 
which has been already alluded to, in ſpeaking of 
Wallpan in the pariſh of Chale, ſo far as relates to 
the entry in Domeſday. Of the point and rocks, 
ſo called, to the weſt of Fiſhing Cove, it muſt be 
obſerved, that great variety and plenty of weighty 
pyritical ſubſtances in the form of beautiful ſhells 
are found at the bottom of the beach. Brixton 
Bay commences from this point, along which the 


rolling waves appear to have committed ſeveral 
depredations on the land. Near this point a watch 


and two men was kept, ſo late as 1638, under the 
command of Sir John Leigh. Odo de Compton 


held the third part of a fee here in the eighth year 


of Edward the Firſt. There are various chines 
along this extent, as Cowleaze, beginning from 
the eaſt, Shripledge, Jackman's, and Chilten, at 
the weſtern extremity; of which Jackman's, which 


leads to Brixton village is the principal, and where 


the 


KN 
* - * 
* EOS. > 42 * 2 ” 0 
r — 


"# 
% 
" 
i 
of 
2 
j 
q 
J 
5 


626 HISTORY OF THE 


the brook from Motteſton and Brixton mills, al- 
ready mentioned, finds a paſſage to the ſea. Barnes 
Hole, between the two firſt mentioned chines, and 
Grange Point to the weſt of Jackman's, are alſo 
remarkable places; but eſpecially the firſt, which 
is a vaſt chaſm in the earth, that deſerves the name 
of a chine, in front of the ſea, and extends a con- 
aderable way towards Brixton. On entering it the 
mind is infpired with horror; and it has every ap- 
pearance of leading to ſome ſubterraneous paſſage, 
which may furniſh a retreat for a neſt of robbers, 
ts fides are four hundred feet high, meaſured from 
the water, which have a dark and black earth on 
the outfide, tending naturally to increaſe the terror 
which impreſſes the imagination on the firſt view 
of it. a 

Durchuax's Horx, near Grange Chine, ſo called 
from a large Dutch ſhip which ran into it, as well 
as ſome other rocks and deep holes near the ſhore, 
have frequently proved fatal to trading and other 
veſſels in foggy and ſtormy weather. 

As confiderable profits have been often made by 
attending wrecks here, we cannot omit the anec- 
dote of a carpenter of this place ſome years ago, 
when a ſhip with a rich cargo was ſtranded on this 
coaſt. Having hid his baſket of tools in a furze 
buſh, the booty which he found on attending to 
the veſſel ſo fully engroſſed his attention that for 
tix weeks, as our correſpondent aſſures us he has 
been credibly informed, his mind never once was 
impreſſed with a thought of them; and the pro- 

perty 


ISLE OF WIGHT, 627 


perty which he acquired upon this occaſion enabled 
him to make a purchaſe of about eight pounas a 
year, that is now known by the name of Knights. 
We are nevertheleſs aſſured, that the natives hu- 
manely exert their utmoſt efforts in affording. 
aſſiſtance to the diſtreſſed paſſengers and ſeamen 
on theſe unfortunate occaſions, though it muſt be 
admitted that their motive for ſo doing is profit to 
themſelves. | 
Tux village of Brixton, or as it is uſually called 
Bris'n or Briſon, from the impropriety of the dia- 
lect of the common people, is about ſeven miles 
ſouth-weſt from Newport, and nearly the ſame 
diſtance from Yarmouth and Freſhwater. It 
is one of the largeſt villages in this part of the 
iſland, as well as the pleaſanteſt, and has a clean 
and good road through it; being partly ſheltered 
from the inclemency of the winter by its high downs 
on the north. On the ſouth it commands an ex- 
tenſive proſpect of the Britiſh channel, from which 
it is little more than a mile diſtant. In this fine 
ſituation a ſeminary of inſtruction has been ſup- 
ported with credit and reputation for more than 
thirty years, which is at preſent under the direction 
of a gentleman of the name of Heath. There are 
two ſmall inns in this village, where ſtrangers may 
be very decently and comfortably accommodated 
with every requiſite for two or three days, if ne- 
ceſſary, except wines, which, if they cannot diſ- 
penſe with, they muſt bring with them; in parti- 
cular one of them has a very convenientroom. Fiſh 
are 


” . 
— . 22 * - 
v3, — — of Iu n d „ 
. LIC ———— «© - Þ +> ot 
5 — SPL ”- PP, 0 — 
— — 
WV 2 > 7 — - © Sv» '& — » = 
. — 8 
- o 7 
o . 
a — 
— oy oo — — 


FP A ed. 1725, G2, 


628 HISTORY OF THE 


are generally to be had here in plenty, eſpecially 
whiting, lobſters, prawns, ſhrimps, and, at the pro- 
per ſeaſon, great quantities of mackerel are ſome- 
times taken. There are ſome other ſpecies; and the 
polypus is found on the rocks of this bay, concern- 
ing which it has been frequently aſſerted that, if 
cut in pieces, every part will grow into a com- 
plete polypus by an acceſſion of the neceſſary mem- 
bers for that purpoſe. To thoſe who can ſpare 
time, the ſalubrity of the air muſt be a very ſtrong 
temptation, in addition to ſo many conveniences, 
to ſpend a few days in ſo pleaſant a ſituation, and 
to afford an opportunity of exploring the coaſt of 
this bay. 

THtRE was formerly a fix gun battery on the 
fummit of the cliff facing the ſea, under the care 
and management of a perſon called Buckett, and 
ſometimes Capt. Buckett ; and the old inhabitants 
affirm that it was cuſtomary for the houſholders to 
watch on the cliff in their turn, which no one was 
ſuffered to refuſe, and that the ſtaff was carried 
from houſe to houſe in rotation for that purpoſe. 
Proper officers were appointed to ſuperintend this 
diſcipline, and enforce a due attention to it ; this 
was ſuppoſed to have been about the years 1705 
or 1706. 

Tuls pariſh affords a ſtriking inſtance of the 
effects of monopoly in farms, which ſeems to merit 
a ſerious conſideration. It is ſaid that, within the 
memory of perſons now living, every houſe in this 


pariſh, except one, had at leaſt a few acres of land, 
by 


TSLE OF WIGHT. 629 


by which theoccupiers lived comfortably, and many 

of them brought up numerous families. On theſe 
ſmall farms, one hundred and twenty milch kine 
were kept more than there are at preſent, which, 
upon an average that each cow produces five pounds 
of butter in a week, excluſive of the quantity of 
milk for the ſupport of the poor, a matter of no 
ſmall importance, amounts to fix hundred pounds 
of butter weekly in one pariſh only, of about four 
miles ſquare, during the ſummer months, more 
than what now comes to market. Extend this 
calculation, either fully, or in part, to the reſt of the 
iſland, and from the iſland to the county, and from 
the county to the kingdom at large, and can it be 
wondered that the neceſſaries of life are become 
ſcarce and dear, that new ſources of proviſion are 
found out from neceſſity, and that in proportion 
as theſe are dearer than the natural productions of 
the country, the poor's taxes are continually in- 
creaſing, and the burdens on the occupiers of 
houſes and lands daily accumulating! Happily 
this evil has been checked in the iſland, as we have 
fully ſtated in a preceding chapter; but we are not 
the leſs juſtified in theſe reflections, which, not- 
withſtanding this ſalutary meaſure, would ſtill add 
to the reaſons already aſſigned or ſuggeſted againſt 
monopolies, as a public grievance. 

Tux peregrinations of a day labourer of the name 
of John White, who formerly lived in the village, 
but now reſides at Moortown, at a ſmall diſtance, 
in the ſpace of 37 years, are worthy of notice; dur- 


ing 


630 | HISTORY OF THE 


ing all which time he has been employed on on 
farm at Lemerſton, whither he has conſtantly travel- 
led every morning and returned in the evening. 
For the firſt ten years he regularly went from Brix- 
ton, which is a mile, and back again; and for the 
laſt twenty-ſeven years from Moortown, which is 
a mile and a half, and back again. Though he 
ſtill continues to do it, an eſtimate for this com- 
plete number of years may ſuffice to ſhew how 
much ground a perſon may paſs over in a ſeries of 
time, without conſidering to what amount it may 
accumulate; nor is any thing added on account of 
the ſteps he muſt have trod frequently in the courſe 
of his employment. In this long period we muſt 
alſo note, that as a country fidler, he has always 
been abſent from his labour for three days at Whit- 
ſuntide, but on no other occaſion has he been pre- 
vented either by weather, ſickneſs, or accident. 


The calculation is as follows: 


His travels from Brixton in 10 years, abating 30 working days, 
amount to 6 80 miles. And from Moortown in 27 years, abat- 


ing 81 working days, to 24,939 miles. — And both together, 
amount to 31,119 miles; which is almoſt one-fourth more than 


the whole circumference of our globe of earth and ſea, 
Wr ſhould not omit to remark, that, except on 


the roads, it is utterly impoſſible to proceed on the 
Brixton mountains, from their extreme height and 
ficepneſs. 


Ster. IX.—Of the PARISH of CALBOURN. 
Tar hiſtory of the church of Calbourn, or, as 
the country people corruptly expreſs it, Cauborn, 


is connected with the manor; and, at the time of 
| the 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 63 


the Domeſday roll, it was held in demeſne by 
Walklin, biſhop of Wincheſter. Perhaps we may 
conjecture that it received its name from the brook, 
which might be anciently termed the Caul Bourn, 
ſince contracted into Calbourn. It is there ſaid to 
have been always in the monaſtery; probably 
meaning, that the lands were held in common, and 
undivided from the convents, as the biſhops, whoſe 
cathedrals were conventual, did not keep their 
Intereſts ſeparate from the convents, by which they 
were elected, till the reign of Edward the Firſt, 
at which time the revenues were divided. There 
were thirty-two hides, but in the time of the Con- 
feſſor, as at preſent, it was only aſſeſſed at ſeven- 
teen hides. The biſhop ſeems to have had ſix hides 
of this land, Herpal two hides, and Alfi three 
hides and a half. Seven freeholders held theſe 
hides of the biſhop, nor could they be diſpoſſeſſed 
of them. Malget held the manor of this church 
at half a hide. It is there ſaid to be a hundred 
within the hundred of Boucombe. 

From the contents and value of the land here 
ſtated, there can be no doubt that this manor in- 
cluded both Swainſton and Brixton; neither of 
theſe names are met with in that record, which 1s 
a farther argument for this ſuppoſition, befides 
what has been already obſerved under Brixton. 
The manor and advowſon of the church remained 
in the hands of the biſhops till the twelfth year of 
Edward the Firſt; when that king deprived John 
de Pontiſſera of this manor, becauſe the Pope had 

forcibly 


632 HISTORY OF THE 


forcibly intruded him into that ſee, contrary to the 
king's inclination and pleaſure, and the king har- 
raſſed him frequently by divers acts of diſpleaſure 
openly manifeſted and declared. At length, the 
biſhop, to purchaſe the king's peace, agreed not 
only to ſurrender the manor of Swainſton into his 
hands, and for himſelf and his ſucceſſors for ever to 
quit claim to the ſaid manor, but to pay a fine of 
two thouſand pounds for the quiet and peaceable 
enjoyment of the other temporalities belonging to 
the biſhoprick. But it nevertheleſs appears from 
the record of that time, and the cauſe aſſigned as 
a valuable conſideration, that the biſhop reſerved 
to himſelf and his ſucceſſors the advowſon of the 
church of Calbourn, and of the chapels of Bright- 
ſtone or Brixton and Bynſtede, whether the ſame 
ſhould be known by the name of churches or cha- 
pels, as having always belonged to that ſee. 
Tnar this manor ſoon after changed its name 
to that of Swainſton, is evident from the confirma- 
tion by king Edward the Second, in his thirteenth 
year, of the grant of Ademarus, biſhop of Win- 
cheſter, to the burgeſſes of Newtown; for this 
charter was ſealed at Swainſton. It occurs indeed 
yet earlier under that name in a grant of the ſaid 
king Edward, in his firſt year, of this manor with 
other poſſeſſions to his ſiſter Mary, a nun at Am- 
breſbury, in Wilts; which were given in addition 
to Whitfield manor in Brading pariſh, and Freſh- 
water, which had been aſſigned to her for life for 
her ſupport there, by king Edward the Firſt, as 
there 


tsLE or WIC HT. 1 


there mentioned, in exchange for the manor of 
Coſham in Wilts, and the borough of Wilton and 
Bereford, which her father had alſo given to her, 
but by this deed were ſurrendered to the ſaid king. 

AFTER it reverted into the ſaid king's hands, 
it was beſtowed on his ſon Edward, at that time 
earl of Cheſter; who, after his acceſſion to the 
crown, granted it to William lord Montacute, 
earl of Saliſbury. It has fince deſcended to the 
| preſent poſſeſſor, Sir John Barrington, in the man- 
ner we have already ſtated under Brixton. It is 
proper to obſerve that this manor paid a fee- farm 
rent, in the reign of Henry the Seventh, of eighty- 
five pounds two ſhillings and eleven pence. 

Wr have only to obſerve farther of the church 
of Calbourn, that it furniſhed one man at arms for 
defence of the iſland in the time of Edward the 
Third, that it was valued at forty marks in the 
time of cardinal Beaufort's taxation, and that the 
commiſſioners of king Edward reported the ſale of 
a croſs of filver in 1549, weighing forty-nine 
ounces for fourteen pounds and twenty pence, 
without any information of any perſon's being ap- 
pointed to anſwer for the value. The pariſh is 
ſuppoſed to contain about fix hundred and fifty 
inhabitants. 

Wu1LsT we are upon the ſubject of the church, 
we muſt not overlook the chapel of Newtown, 
which formerly appertained to, and ſtill belongs, 
though the chapel is decayed, to this pariſh. The 
glebe with which this chapel was originally en- 


Ne. 14. 5 dowed, 


634 N HISTORY OF THE 


| dowed, is poſſeſſed by the rector; but we find an 
Intereſting entry in the regiſter of the dioceſe, in 
the firſt year of Edward the Sixth, which ſerves to 
point out its connexion with and dependance upon 
Calbourn. It appears that the rector of Calbourn 
was at variance with John Mewes, Eſq. of New- 
town, touching his right to ſome tithes there in a 
place called Bernard Merſh, and that the biſhop 
was appealed to for deciding the difference; who 
awarded that Mr. Mewes ſhould pay his whole 
tithes for the ſame, but that the parſon of Calbourn, 
who had formerly paid only twenty ſhillings a year 
towards finding a prieſt for the inhabitants of 
Newtown, ſhould from that time, with the favour- 
able aid of the ſaid inhabitants, at his own coſts, 
maintain a prieſt, * up riſing and down lying,” to 
reſide in the houſe adjoining to the church-yard 
at Newtown. On this conſideration, the mayor 
and burgeſſes and inhabitants of Newtown quitted 
their claim to Longbridge Croft, otherwiſe called 
Magdalen's Croft, and ſuffered the ſaid parſon of 
Calbourn and his ſucceſſors to enjoy the ſame. Ir 
was alſo agreed by the faid mayor and burgeſſes 
and inhabitants on the one part, and by the ſaid 
parſon on the other, that if any difference ſhould 
hereafter ariſe concerning this award, to refer them- 
ſelves to the determination of the biſhop. of the 
dioceſe for the time being, 

IT alſo appears from the report of the furvey 
which was taken in the ſecond year of queen Eli- 


zabeth, that the parſon of Calbourn held a grant 
| of 


A, 


1812 or WIGHT, 635 


bf forty acres, called Magdalen's Land, belonging 
to the chapel of Newtown, and that he provided 
for the chapel a reader on account of this land. 
Tur manor which was called Cauborne in the 
Domeſday roll, is evidently meant of that which is 
now called Weſtover, and was held by W. Fitz Stur, 
but had been held of the Confeſſor in abeyance 
by Bolla at three hides and almoſt half a yardland,. 
beſides providing for its own defence, but now 
reckoned at one yardland and a half. We appre- 
hend this to be the ſame which was afterwards held 
by lady Matilda de Eſtur, lady of Gatcombe, of the 
counteſs Iſabella, with thoſe of Gatcombe and Whit- 
well, amounting in the whole to five knight's fees. 
Or this manor of Weſtover, we muſt obſerve that 
it paſſed, with Gatcombe and other lands, to the 
younger branch of the family of Liſle, where we 
have ſtated its ſucceſſion in the family of Bremſhor, 
from whom it came to Sir Geoffrey Pole, whoſe _ 
- widow ſold it to Earnley and Earlſman, the latter 
of whom ſold it to Sir Robert Dillington. A de- 
ſcendant of his diſpoſed of it to the father of Capt. 
D. Urry, and his ſon ſold it to lord Holmes; and it 
has ſince devolved tothe preſent Leonard Troughear 
Holmes, Eſq. who has a very pleaſant ſeat there, 
facing the church of Calbourn. As it ſtands on a 
ſmall eminence, it has very fine proſpects over all 
the north-weſt part of the iſland; and the hoſpita- 
lity of its reſpected and reſpectable owner is too 
well known to need any panegyric from the pen of 
an hiſtorian. a 
| Te 2 Ster. X. 


636 | HISTORY OY THE 


Sxcr. X. or the PARISH of MOTTESTON: 
Or the foundation and endowment of this pariſh, 
which is very ſmall, we can only obſerve that the 
church was probably erected by one of the family 
of the Glamorgans, before the oldeſt remaining 
regiſter of the dioceſe of Wincheſter commences. 
As an ancient building, it impreſſes an idea of 
grandeur; but this is almoſt loſt by what are termed 
modern improvements. Its external form is much 
like thoſe of Shorwell and Brixton, under the latter 
of which pariſhes it is noticed briefly. There is 
no account of it in the dean of the iſland's return, 
in 1305, but we find that it was charged for defence 
of the iſland with two men at arms in the 13th of 
Edward the Third, and was rated in cardinal 
Beaufort's valuation at twenty marks. After the 
reformation, the report given of its plate, &c. by 
the commiſſioners of king Edward the Sixth, ſtates 
the value at twenty- ſix ſhillings and eight pence. 
Tux preſent number of pariſhioners is ſuppoſed 
to be conſiderably fhort of two hundred. The vil- 
lage is a very pleaſant ſpot, and commands the 
moſt delightful views of the ſea, and, at a ſmall 
diſtance, appears to be almoſt ſurrounded with 
woods. | | 

W have two entries of Motteſton in the Domeſ- 
day roll, one of which is there called Meſſetone, 
part of the poſſeſſions of William Fitz Stur, which 
king Edward had held in demeſne, as his farm, 
and was not aſſeſſed. The other entry is wrote 
Modreftan, and was part of the poſſeſſions of Wil- 

lam 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 637 


liam Fitz Azor, which four thanes had held jointly 
in the time of the Confeſſor, being then reckoned. 
at two hides, but now at two yardlands and a half. 
In the counteſs Ifabella's roll, we find that Ro- 
bert de Glamorgan held of her, in capite, one fee 
and the ſixth part of a fee, which included the 
manors of Motteſton, and Burton, the chaplains of 
the latter then holding of him one ſixth of a fee, 
from whence we may conjecture that Motteſton 
contained lands amounting to one fee. We find 
the ſame manors, in the 17th of Henry the Sixth, 


in the poſſeſſion of John Chyke, under the ſame 


circumſtances. 

Tuar it was formerly part of the — of 
the family of de Inſula, or Liſle, is extremely pro- 
bable from a record which is cited by Madox, 
wherein it appears that William de Glamorgan and 
two others were heirs to his lands, by marriage 
with his coheireſſes, and had livery of his lands in 
the 19th year of Henry the Third. It alſo appears 
to have been held by Sir John de Langford, whoſe 
widow preſented to this church in 1361, as did 
Edward Chyke, Eſq. to whom it ſoon after came, 
in 1374, and remained in this family for more than 
three hundred years, till it was purchaſed by Sir 
Robert Dillington, of Knighton; it was afterwards 
ſold by Sir Triſtram Dillington to John Leigh, 
Eſq. of North Court, near Shorwell, whoſe daugh- 
ters and coheireſſes ſucceeded to it. A watch and 

two men, under Capt. Bowerman, was kept on the 
down fo late as 1638. 


Tt 3 =—_ 


* 
* 
1 

} 

#4 
* 
Co 
; 


e 8 5 


2 * — — 
» We. THY 


* . . - 

SY - f : - * — - 

4 ks , — — * 3 
— * a” r 


. * 1 . - * 
—ůů —-——ẽ ͤ r —U—FkP— c « ⁵ꝗꝓœgõ: i — * 
o . >. T __ — 8 * ” — 0 — 
— < - 2 = = 
== o - - - 
K E = U 3 —_— 
\ - — 2 2 — _ - . 


= — . 2 - 5 — 8 — 2 Lon 4 
: PF — — * p, | - 
1 2 _ l — = o mers N = 
_ - > > — — wy Lf - 2 — — . 
3 = = = 9 8 


638 HISTORY or THE 


IT may not be improper juſt to notice, that SIT 
John Cheke, of this family, was profeſſor of Greek 
in the Univerſity of Cambridge, and in 1544 ap- 
pointed joint tutor with Sir Anthony Cooke, to 
prince Edward in the Latin tongue. He was alſo 
made canon of New College, now Chriſtchurch, in 
Oxford, and had a penſion in lieu of his canonry, 
when that College was diſſolved. When that 
prince came to be king, he rewarded his merits, 
of which he was thorough!y jenſi'-le, but his im- 
mature death blaſted all the preceptor's hopes and 
preſent enjoyments. After a ſeries of diſtreſſes at 
bome and abroad, he was reluctantly forced pub- 
| hely to recant his proteſtant principles, by the 
threats and intrigues of cardinal Pole: but died of 
a. broken heart in little more than a year after in 
Sept. 1557, at the premature age of forty-three. 


2 


© Sxer. XI. — Of the PARISH of BROOK. 
| We can only ſay of the village of Brook, that it 
Iies in a receſs between two contiguous mountains, 
which have the effect of affording it a ſhelter from 
violent winds; but of the eractipn of the church 
ve know but little, only that we meet with an 
account of it as ſupplying « one man at arms to de- 
fend the iſland in the 13th year of Edward the 
Third. In the dean of the iſland's return in the 
time of Edward the Firſt, it 1s repreſented as a 
chapel, endowed with the great tithes of the de- 
meſne of the manor of Compton; and paying a 
penſion of ſeven ſhillings 1 to the mother church of 
Freſhwater, 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 639 


Freſhwater, where it is ſaid to have conſiſted ſolely 
in the poſſeſſions of the lands aſſigned to the chan- 
try of the ſaid chapel; and it is mentioned among 
the chapels exonerated from taxation, on account 
of its poverty, in the valuation of cardinal Beau- 
fort, in 1404. When it obtained the privileges of 
a pariſh church does not ſufficiently appear; but 
the reſult of a diſpute concerning the patronage, 
which was claimed by St. John's College, Cam- 
bridge, as a chapel belonging to Freſhwater, was 
favourable to the lord of the manor, who had long 
preſented to it, and ſtill continues ſo to do. Within 
a few years paſt, the church has been repaired and 
beautified in the modern way by the family to 
whom the patronage belongs. The number of in- 
habitants cannot be eſtimated ſo high as one hun- 
dred and forty. | 
Tur manor of Brook is of early date, as we find 
an account of it in the time of the Conqueror, as 
held by the king in demeſne. It had been held 
by earl Tofti in the time of the Confeſſor, and rec- 
koned at three hides, but now at one. - 
| In the roll of the counteſs Iſabella, Robert Gla- 
morgan held of her, in rapite, one fee in Brook 
and Uggaton, ſo that he had the manor of Brook 
in demeſne, and John Paſſelewe held of him half a 
fee in Brook. Sir Ralph de Maſcarell had held it 
foon after Domeſday roll was taken, and had given 
the tithes of his demeſnes at Brook to the abbey 
of Lyra, which was alſo confirmed by his grandſon. 
It was in the family of Glamorgan during the reigns 
of the three Edwards, till Nicholas Glamorgan, the 
Tt 4 laſt 


640 HISTORY OF THE 


laſt male heir, who died in the thirty-ſixth of Ed. 
ward the Third, left his eſtates to fix ſiſters, when 
his eldeſt fiſter Iſabella, by her marriage with 
Roucle or Roucley, transferred this manor to that 
name, in which it was held for ſeveral deſcents, 
but at length terminated in two daughters, who 
were coheireſſes. The manor was from that time 
held in common by Bowerman and Gilbert, to 
whom they had been married, and king Henry the 
Seventh, in the fourteenth year of his reign, ho- 
noured dame Joanna Bowerman, lady of the manor 
of Brook, with a viſit, to whom he made a preſent 
of a drinking-horn, which to this day is preſerved 
in the family. Nicholas Bowerman, in the third 
year of Edward the Sixth, purchaſed the other 
moiety, and the family have ever fince been ſole 
poſſeſſors of the manor. In the year 1792, we find 
Henry Howe, Eſq. purchaſed the manor of Wil- 
liam Bowerman, Eſq. at whoſe death in 1793, it 
came to his brother William Howe, Eſq. 


— — 


Ster. XII. - Of the PARISH of SHALFLEET. 
As mention is made of this church in the Domeſ- 
day roll, it is a natural conjecture that it had been 
erected after the death of William Fitz Oſborn, as 
this was not given to Lyra with the other churches 
of the iſland by that lord. The building has a 
broad and low ſquare tower, with a ſpecies of dome 
upon it, and many marks of Gothic antiquity 
about it, but it has been robbed of its antique 
windows, which always add to the grandeur and 
ſolemnity of ancient fabrics, and afford ſo much, 
| | pleaſure 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 641 


pleaſure and ſatisfaction to the amateurs of that 
ſtile of architecture and ornament. The arms of 
William Montacute, earl of Saliſbury, to whom it 
was granted by Edward the Third, have eſcaped 
the ravages of time and plunder, and are ſtill to 
be ſeen in the painted glaſs of its windows. This 
earl endowed the abbey of Buſtlefham or Biſham, 
in Berkſhire, with the profits of this church, with 
whom it continued till the diſſolution of religious 
houſes. 

From the dean of the iſland's return in 1305, 

we learn that the abbey and convent of Lyra had 
all ſorts of the great tithes and half the ſmall tithes 
of the ancient demeſne of Ningewood in this pa- 
riſh, as well as the great tithes of the ancient de- 
meſnes of Cheſſel and Shalfleet. The redtor*of 
Calbourn alſo has in part of Shalfleet the ſmall 
tithes of the lands and tenements which William 
Fitz Stur formerly appropriated to it, and the rector 
of Shalfleet takes the great tithes. In the roll of 
armed men of the iſland, we find the rectory was 
to furniſh one armed man, and the vicarage two 
bowmen, in the 13th year of Edward the Third; 
and in cardinal Beaufort's valuation in 1404, Shal- 
fleet is rated at forty marks, and the vicarage at 
one hundred ſhillings. The impropriation of this 
church, at the reformation, was purchaſed by lord 
chief juſtice Fleming, and by him deviſed to a 
younger branch of the family. It from thence has 
paſſed into ſeveral hands, and it is now the pro- 
perty of the family of Reeves. 


By 


A © HISTORY or THE 


- By the return of king Edward the Sixth's com- 
mĩſſioners, the report of plate ſold here was ſtated 
to the amount of 31. and 16d. 
Tux inhabitants of this pariſh are eſtimated to 

wb about ſix hundred. 
SHALFLEET, as a manor, by the common people 
corruptly called Shalfleet, claims the preference in 
dur account of the ſeveral demeſnes of this pariſh. 
It is ſtated in Domeſday to belong to the poſſeſſions 
of Gozelin Fitz Azor, and the ſame which Edric 
held in the time of the Confeſſor at ſix hides, but 
now at three hides and half a yardland. Geoffry 
had two yardlands and a half of this, and Turgiſs 
half a hide. Liof had alſo a hide. - 
WATCHINCWOOb or WATCHINGWELL, called in 
Demeſday-book Matingewelle, is there repreſented 
as belonging to the nunnery of St. Mary of Wilton, 
and was held by the abbeſs, and there ſaid to have 
been always in the monaſtery. It was reckoned at 
three hides, and to defend itſelf in the time of the 
Confeſſor, but now at two and a half, half a hide 
being conſidered as taken into the king's park; ſo 
that Woodſtock Park, which was not made till the 
reign of Henry the Firſt, was not, as our hiſtorians 
have generally aſſerted, the firſt park in England. 
Is the time of the counteſs Iſabella, we find that 
Watchingwell manor was held in demeſne with 
Shalfleet and Cheſſel, making in the whole one 
fee, by Henry Trenchard in capite. And in the 
reign of Henry the Sixth, it was poſſeſſed by Ed- 
ward Brutenell, who had married the daughter of 
Thomas 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 643 


Thomas Dupſden, to whom it had come from 
Trenchard. After paſſing through the families of 
Trenchard, Waller, Worſley, Serl, and Goodenough, 
it is now in the poſſeſſion of the Barrington family, 

to whoſe manor of Swainſton it is contiguous. 
Sta RICHARD WorsLey, in his hiſtory, calls 
them two diſtinct manors, and makes the one juſt 
mentioned to be the lower Watchingwell, and ſays 
that the upper Watchingwell is the property of 
John Bull, Eſq. adding alſo, that theſe two manors 
compoſe that detached part of Shalfleet pariſh, 
which we have already mentioned, in deſcribing 
the limits of Northwood and Calbourn. Of this 
we have ſome doubts, and have thought it our 
duty to make enquiry, from which we learn that 
Watchingwell is now the property of Mr. Wm. 
Jolliffe, of Little Park, who bought it of Richard 
Bull, Eſq. and Watchingwood of Sir J. Barrington; 
but ve are ſtill in ſuſpence as to the preciſe line of 

ſeparation from the pariſhes ſurrounding it. 
Ws have already mentioned under Watching- 
well, that Henry Trenchard held a fee of the coun- 
teſs Iſabella, by which he had this and other manors; 
a perſon of the ſame name alſo held a fee. in the 
time of Edward the Third in Shalfleet; and John 
Trenchard held of Henry the Seventh part of a fee 
in Shalfleet. It alſo paſſed with that and Cheſſel 
to the families of Dupſden and Brutenell, and, 
after ſucceeding to Trenchard and Waller, came 
to the Worſleys of Appuldurcombe, in whoſe fa- 
mily it now remains. We are told that there is a 
| farm, 


644 Hs rok or THE 


farm within this manor, called Wallerans, from 
Walleran Trenchard, a younger ſon of Sir Henry 
Trenchard, to whom it was given by his brother 
John in the 23d year of Edward the Firſt. 

| Taz manor of Ningewood, or, as it has been 
ſometimes called Lingwood, is to the weſt of Shal- 
fleet, on the road to Yarmouth. The manor houſe 
is on the ſouth or left hand towards Ningewood 
Green, in the way to Wellow and Thorley. We 
have no mention of it in Domeſday, but it occurs 
'in the record of Iſabella de Fortibus, in the eighth 
year of king Edward the Firſt, where the prior of 
Chriſtchurch 1s ſaid to hold a fee. Baldwin, earl 
of Devon, granted it to the monks of Chriſtchurch, 
with whom it remained till the general diſſolution 
of religious houſes, when this, as well as Sharcombe, 
which we have noticed under St. Nicholas pariſh, 
was exchanged for Marybone by Henry the Eighth, 
with Thomas Hopſon, Eſq. anceſtor of the admiral 
of that name. It was afterwards ſold to a perſon 
of the name of Comber, and, by means of female 
deſcendants, came to Sir Thomas Miller, Bart. — 
The manor houſe has been lately rebuilt; and is a 
very handſome building fronting the ſouth, and 
having a full view of the ſouthern downs and of 
Freſhwater Clilfs. It is the property and ſummer _ 
reſidence of John Pinhorn, Eſq. a banker in Lon- 
don, and a native of Newport. Ningewood pays 
to the crown for its tenths four pounds ſeven ſhil- 
lings and two pence, which was probably paid, 
before the diſſolution, to the prior and convent of 
Chriſtchurch. | TuorxxIx 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 645 


TuRNING to the weſt from Ningewood we come 
to Wellow, which is another manor of this pariſh, 


and was part of the king's lands at the time of 


Domeſday, which he held in demeſne. Ir is there 
called Welige, and had been held in abeyance of 
king Edward, when it was reckoned at two hides, 
but now at three yardlands. It continued to be 
held by the lords of the iſland, and returned to the 
crown by the purchaſe of king Edward the Firſt. 
In the ſeveral grants of the crown lands to the 
ſubſequent lords of the iſland this was included, 
and among others to the duke of Clarence, who 
was proſcribed for treaſonable practices; after 
which it continued with the crown till the time of 


James the Firſt, when this was purchaſed by 


Comber, and deſcended, through the female line, 


to Sir Thomas Miller, Bart. in the ſame manner 


as Ningewood. We find that it paid to the crown 
a fee farm rent of fifteen pounds and twelve pence in 
the reign of Henry the Seventh, and now of fifteen 
pounds three ſhillings and four pence. 

BeroRe we leave the northern part of this pariſh, 
we muſt take notice of Hamſtead on the weſt fide 
of Newtown Bay, near the coaſt, of which we have 
two entries in Domeſday, under Ke name of Hame- 
ede. One of theſe was held by William Fitz Azor 
at half a hide, and by Nigel of him, which Aluric 


had held in abeyance in the time of the Confeſſor 


at the ſame rate. Gozelin Fitz Azor had the other, 
which Aluric had before held in like manner at 
half a hide alſo. | 


Ws 


"I 9 


m - a Ki — * 
— — * - © + - 
— — — 2 — 2 
Z 221. 3 e 8 
— —— 
M _ —— — 
Li 


— 2 


—— —_ 


* 
www 


* — 


— — 


x by, 
ee a nd 


. 
„ os _— 


HISTORY OF THE 


646 
Wr have alſo two entries of it in the counteſs's 
record, where William de Cockevil is faid to hold 
half a fee of Sir John Lifle, as of her poſſeſſions, 
in Hamſtead and Sheat, and where Sir John Liſle 
and the prior of Chriſtchurch are alſo ſaid to hold 
two parts and a half of one fee here and at Brid- 
dlesford. There was a watch kept here in the time 
of Edward the Second, of four men by night and 
two by day; and a watch of two men was alſo re- 
turned for this place in the time of Charles the 
Firſt. 

Cnrssrr, as a manor, is at the fouth weſt angle 
of the pariſh, and contiguous to Shatcombe. Tr 
is needleſs to ſay more of it, than that it belonged 
to the Trenchards, and paſſed, as the other manors 
of Shalfleet and Watchingwell already mentioned, 
through the names of Dupſden, Brutenell, Trench- 
ard, and Waller, till it came to the family of 
Worſley, of Appuldurcombe, in whoſe * 
It continues. 

Horvrxs rox, near the ſouth eaſt extremity, in 

the narrow neck between the pariſhes of Brook 
and Motteſton, occurs in the Domeſday roll, where 
it is ſaid to be held by the king, and that Eddeva 
had held it of earl Godwin in the time of the Con- 
feſſor, being then aſſeſſed at half a hide, but now 


not rated. 


8 


— — 


Ster. XIII. Of the PARISH of THORLEY. 


Tae church of Thorley, which was built by 


Amicia, counteſs of Devon, was given to the priory 
of 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 647 


of Chriſtchurch in Hampſhire, which conſequently 
became poſſeſſed of the rectory, and of the patron- 
age of the vicarage, that was afterwards eſta- 
bliſhed there. In their hands it continued till the 
general diſſolution of religious houſes; and we find 


in the dean of the iſland's return in 1305, that 


they had the appropriation of this church, paying 
annually to the abbot and convent of Montſburg a 
penſion of twenty ſhillings, on account of the great 
and ſmall tithes which the prior and convent of 


Chriſtchurch take in Thorley of the demeſne for- 


merly belonging to Amicia, counteſs of the iſland, 
which that abbey had anciently been accuſtomed 
to take. This penſion is mentioned in cardinal 
Beaufort's valuation, beſides which Thorley was 
then rated at twelve marks. In the time of Ed- 
ward the Third, the priory and vicarage ſupplied, 
each of them, one bowman to defend the iſland. 
SUBSEQUENT to the time limited for ſurrender of 
priories, it ſeems that Chriſtchurch held out, and 
that the vicarage became vacant; the preſentation 
to which accordingly differs from the accuſtomed 
form, and is expreſſed in the biſhop's regiſter, 
patientia Dei, or, © by divine ſufferance,” imply- 
ing that they did not preſent by right. This 
church was exchanged, with other eſtates of the 
priory, as we have more than once occaſionally 
mentioned, for the manor of Marybone, with Tho- 
mas Hopſon, Eſq. who preſented to it in 1546.— 
Its inhabitants ſcarcely amount to one hundred 

and fifty. | 
Iv 


648  _ HISTORY or THE 


Is the Domeſday roll, we find that earl Tofti 
had held Torlei in the time of the Confeſſor, which 
was rated at three hides ; but that Alfi the fon of 
Brixus was now the tenarit, and that it was rated 
at two hides. Richard de Redvers, earl of Devon, 
obtained it by grant from Henry the Firft, when 
it continued with the lords of the ifland till the 
counteſs of Devon ſold the whole to the crown. 
It has been ſaid that the favoured Piers Gaveſton 
afterwards obtained it, but that, perhaps, may be 
| doubted; or if he held it, when the iſland was 

granted to him, the time was ſo ſhort, as ſcarce 
to deſerve the name. Montacute, earl of Saliſbury, 
afterwards poſſeſſed it, but it was forfeited by the 
attainder of his grandſon John; after which king 
Henry the Fourth granted it to Edward, duke of 
York, together with the iſland. George, duke of 
Clarence, held it from king Edward the Fourth, 
but, after his forfeiture, the crown retained it till 
the reign of queen Elizabeth ; it was then granted, 
with Freſhwater, &c. to David Urry, Eſq. with a 
reſerved rent of thirty pounds ſeventeen ſhillings 
and five pence a year, which had been paid to the 
crown in the time of Henry the Seventh as a fee 
farn: rent for this manor. In 1780, it is charged 
with thirty two pounds ſeventeen ſhillings and ten 
pence. His ſon left an heireſs, who married Ri- 
chard Lucy, Eſq. by whom it was ſold to Sir Robert 
Holmes, at that time governor of the iſland, and 
from him it has deſcended to the preſent Leonard 
Troughear Holmes, Eſq. of Weſtover. 
| . | THrouGH 


-ISLE OF WIGHT. 649 


1 Taovon this pariſh is not extenſive, it is ex- 
tremely fertile, and admitted to be one of the beſt 
manors in the iſland. But it has not always main- 
tained this aſcendancy; for by a grant of the coun- 


teſs Iſabella to the prior of Chriſtchurch of one 


fifth part of the coneys in the manor of Thorley, a 
conſiderable portion of it at leaſt muſt have been 
a warren, From a petition of the ſaid prior and 
convent to parliament, it appears that William 
Ruſſell, warden of the iſland; had reſiſted a claim 
made by the ſaid priory of the tithe of rabbits 
within the manor, granted to them, as it ſtated, 
by Iſabella de Fortibus; in reply to which they 
were informed; that a writ of enquiry ſhould iſſue 
to the treaſurer and barons of the exchequer, whe- 
ther they were ſeized of thoſe tithes, by virtue of 
any grant to them made reſpecting the matter in 
queſtion; and that juſtice ſhould be done. 


Ix the time of Edward the Third, the office of 


warrener of Thorley and Wellow was conferred on 
Walter White. The iſland formerly contained 
ſeveral rabbit warrens; but they have been deſ- 
troyed in a good meaſure, and converted to more 
advantageous uſes. Great quantities were formerly 
carried from hence to London weekly; at which 


time there were very few hares. We have ſeen in 


the hiſtory of the governors, what meaſures were 
taken by Sir Edward Horſey to ſtock the iſland 


with theſc latter-mentioned animals; 


No, 14. a: Sect, XIV. 


- — — — - 
. 
* 
4 
* = „ 
2 — 
£& wer => —— 


6 a — oy 
. ˙ og O_o 


"1 


1 
. 
| 
El all, 
1 * 
& = 
| oy 
1 
= 
* * 
1 ; * 
1 77 
1 
Bj * 
NI 
mr) 
* # 
{ # 
yr) 
1 3} 
HEN 
U 


=, 
— —< 
© I Sa 


650 HISTORY OF THE 


Ster. XIV.—Of the PARISH of YARMOUTH. 
As a diſtin& pariſh, we muſt briefly take notice 
of this ſmall diſtrict, though its hiſtory has been 
ſocopiouſly detailed in the chapter of the boroughs. 
Bes1Des noticing Yarmouth, as a church or cha- 
pel, in the dean of the iſland's return of 1305, 
where it is ſaid to pay a penſion of one mark to the 
church of Shalfleet, we find that it was rated to 
furniſh a bowman for defence of the iſland in the 
13th of Edward the Third. In the year 1766 ͤ the 
inhabited houſes were 59, and number of inhabi- 
tants 240; and in 1795 the houſes inhabited are 
63 and 330 ſouls, though the large houſe belong. 
ing to the family of Holmes, and four others, are 
vacant, | 
I the time of Henry the Seventh the fee-farm 
of the town was twenty ſhillings, payable to the 
crown, which it ſtill continues to pay to the gover- 
nor of the iſland. 


Sxcr. XV.—Of the PARISH of FRESHWATER; 

We have been favoured with much authentic 
information reſpecting this pariſh by one of our 
benevolent patrons, reſident there, which with 


pleaſure we lay before our readers. 
Taz church of Freſhwater at firſt belonged to 


the priory of Cariſbrooke, and was afterwards tranſ- 


ferred, with others, to the abbey of Lyra, in Nor- 
mandy, who had the preſentation in conſequence, 
and with whom it continued till the ſequeſtration 
of all the churches and lands belonging to the alien 
priories. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 651 


Priories. After this church came to the crown by 
the aſſumption of theſe priories, the captains of 
the iſland frequently had the patronage by virtue 
of its inſertion in their grants, till it was given by 
Henry the Seventh to the prior and convent of 
Shene, in Surrey. It continued in their hands till 
the general diſſolution of religious houſes in the 
time of Henry the Eighth ; after which the patron- 
age remained with the crown till the reign of James 
the Firſt, when a grant of it was obtained by Wil- 
liam, biſhop of Lincoln, who was then lord keeper 
of the great ſeal. But this biſhop afterwards con- 
veyed it, on the 24th of March 1623, to the pre- 
Tent patrons, .** The maſter, fellows, and ſcholars 
of St. John's College, Cambridge.” The living 
is ſuppoſed to be the moſt valuable in the iſland. 

| WaitsT this living was in the patronage of the 
priory of Shene, an agreement was made between 
the prior John Eves and the convent of the one 
part, and Richard Wilpole the then rector of the 
other part, to prevent diſputes with reſpect to 
tythes, by which the prior and convent agreed to 
give up all their right to the tythes upon the pay- 
ment of the annual ſtipend of 71. 13s. 4d. On the 
ſuppreſſion of the monaſteries this ſtipend was 


granted by the king to the lord of the manor of 


Cariſbrooke, to whom the ſaid annual payment 
of 71. 13s. 4d. is ſtill continued. The church of 


Freſhwater is dedicated to All Saints, and the pa- 


tronage, as we have ſtated, to St. John's College, 
Cambridge ; but we may alſo add, that the maſter 


has an option of it. Uu 2 In 


— — — — — OY 
o 1 
8 
5 * 
1 


— 


- 
. 
4 — — 2 
— 7  _— + wa_ 
eee 8 


— 2 
— \ 


U 
N 5 
* 
” 5 
b 4 
. 4 * 
+ 
F 
n '%, 
Wi 
F '"% "Ad 
. 
* 
1 4 
5 ; 
* 


— >, + 


652 HISTORY OF THE 


Is the dean of the iſland's return to biſhop 
Woodlock, in 1305, it is expreſſed that the abbey 
and convent of Lyra had all the great tithes of the 


demeſne of Sir Robert de Affeton, Sir Robert 


Auguillon, and Sir William Brekebeuf, with the 
great tithes of the, Glamorgans. We alſo find in 
the 13th of Edward the Third, that this church 
ſupplied one man at arms towards the defence of 
the iſland; and that in the time of cardinal Beau- 


fort's valuation, in 1404, it was rated at ſixty marks, 


with a penſion of half a mark. 

Hav paſſed through ſo few hands, nothing 
farther occurs relative to it till the return of king 
Edward's commiſſioners, when the account of 


plate, &c. ſold, was taken for nine ſhillings and 


two-pence. The inhabitants of the pariſh, as taken 


in November 1794, are fix hundred and forty-four, 


of which three hundred and twenty-eight are males 
and three hundred and ſixteen females. 
We cannot reſiſt the wiſh to introduce the fol- 


lowing epitaph, which is in the chancel of this 


church. 


Memoriz Sacrum | 
The moſt vertuous Mrs. Anne Toppe He of Mr. 
Thomas Cardell ſometimes of the Privy Chamber to Queen 
Elizabeth and Queen Anne and Wite of Mr. John Toppe 
of Wiltſhire. 
In her Widowhood by a memorable Providence preſerved 


out of the Flames of the Iriſh Rebellion. On the fecond of 


September 1648, and 7 1ſt. year of her age expired under the 
roof ot her neareſt kinſman then Rector of this Place, to 
his unſpeakable loſs and grief. 


c ene 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 


— —— — repente 
Sublatam ex oculis, proſequitur lachrimis 
Nepos ma ſtiſſimus, CARDELLUS GOODMAN. - 
It Beauty, Grace, or Vertue's Store, 
Might have diſcharged Nature's Score: 
If Wit and Language, finely ſpent, 
Or Muſick, could the Fates have bent, 
Her Soule and Body had been one, 
Until the Refurrection, 
And then to Heaven (if any might) 
Without a Change, have taken Flight. 
The Prophet 'twixt his wheel of Fire 
Might faſter mount, but not yet higher 
Than ſhe was wont, who, righteous Soule! 
In Flames of Zeale did upwards rowle. 
As Enoch then in ſacred Story | 
Made but a Step from Earth to Glory 
She needed only a Remove 
Whoſe Converſation was above. 


Scribendi certus, Dolendi vix Terminus. 


Tat pariſh, including the downs, contains about 
three thouſand five hundred acres, of which ſome 
part can boaſt of great fertility, and another part 


can only put in its claim to mediocrity ; but there 


is a great part of very inferior land, when compared 
with the productive ſoil of the ſouthern part of 
this fruitful iſland. The wool of the ſheep which 
are fed on theſe downs is very much prized, and 
the mutton is held in the higheſt eſtimation. 

Or the fix manors that are comprehended within 
this extenſive pariſh, we may obſerve in general, 
that Afton, Compton, and Wilmingham, are on 
the eaſt fide of the river, and King's Freſhwater, 

1 Uuz | Prior's 


654 HISTORY or THE 


Prior's Freſhwater, and Weſton Braybeuf, on the 
weſt ſide. The lord of the manor of King's Freſh. 
water holds a general court leet for the three ma- 
nors on that ſide, at which two conſtables are 
annually appointed, with the tithingmen for Nor- 
ton, Eaſton, Middleton, and Weſton. The tithing- 
men for the manors on the eaſt ſide of the river are 
_ choſen at the court leet, which is held by the 
governor's ſteward for the hundred of the Weſt 
Medine. It may be proper to obſerve, that in an 
old mapof the Britiſh iſles inſerted in an early edition 
of Cambden's Britannia, the weſtern part of the 
pariſh, including the three manors firſt mentioned, 
is pointed out as © the Ifle of Freſhwater.” 

Wr have been favoured with a liſt of the incum- 
bents from 1640, which, on this as on ſome for- 
mer occaſions, it has been found neceſſary to 
poſtpone. 

Dx. Rozerr Hooke was a native of this pariſh, 
of which his father was curate, and born the 18th, 

of July, 1635 ; he was patronized and educated by 
Doctor Buſby, after the death of his father, and 
from thence removed to Chriſt church, Oxford. 
Dr. Willis and the hon. Robert Boyle, Eſq. were 
his particular friends. His mechanical inventions, 
of which the mathematical and philoſophical world 
1s abundantly convinced, are too numerous for. 
us to repeat, but his whole life was a ſeries of ex- 
perimental improvements. The advantages accru- 
ing to poſterity from thence have ſerved to render 
his name immortal; but to do juſtice to his won- 
920 derful 


ISLE or WIGHT. 655 


derful diſcoveries would be to make a tranſcript of 
his whole life. After June 27, 1698, when he read 
his laſt lecture, he viſibly declined, and his ſight 
ſo greatly failed him, as to render him incapable 
of reading at all. He died, after a long ſplendor 
of excellence, and the higheſt character and abili- 
ties, at the age of 67, on the 3d of March, 1702, 
and his name will ever be mentioned with grati- 
tude and veneration by the ſcientific and the 
learned. We muſt refer our ingenious readers to 
the Biographia Philoſophia, Ed. Lond. 1764. p. 
322—332 for a fuller account of this wonderful 
phænomenon. | 

THERE are two manors, denominated from the 
pariſh, one of which is called, by way of diſtinc- 
tion, King's Freſhwater, and the other Prior's 
Freſhwater. Of theſe we have two entries in the 
Domeſday roll. One of theſe is there ſaid to be 
held of the king in demeſne, and that earl Tofti 
had held it in the time of the Confeſſor. It de- 
fended itfelf, and was rated at fifteen hides, but 
now at fix, The abbey of Lyra had three yard- 
lands of theſe fifteen Gs; and William Fitz Azor 
one hide. 

Waerarn the other entry in | Domeſtay i is 4 re- 
capitulation of this, or a diſtin& manor, afterwards 
called Freſhwater, though we incline to the opinion 
that the manor fo called muſt have been the lands 
mentioned in the preceding entry as held by the 
abbey of Lyra, we cannot take upon ourſelves to 
determine, but ſhall leave to our, readers to form 

Uu their 


| 656 HISTORY or THE 


their own conjectures upon it. William Fitz Azor. 
is there ſaid to hold one hide in Freſhwater, and 
Roger of him, which was aſſeſſed for ſo much, and 
had been held aforetime by earl Tear in the manor 
of Freſhwater. | 

As this was vſually conſidered for the king 8 pro- 
perty, it was ſeldom granted away for any conſi- 
derable term of time, and ſometimes only for life. 
It ſeems to have paſſed through the hands of 
D' Arſie, but in the time of king John it was in the 
poſſeſſion of Margery Vernon, who paid forty 
marks, and furniſhed two horſes for the livery of. 
the manor. It was in the hands of the crown in 
the time of Edward the Firſt, who granted it for 
hfe to his daughter Mary, a nun at Ameſbury, or 
Ambreſbury, in the county of Wilts, with ſeveral 
other manors, as we have occaſionally related; and 
it was confirmed alſo by her brother, king Edward 
the Second, with whom were made ſome ex- 
changes of lands. In the following reign Giles 
Beauchamp, lord of Alceſter and Powick, held it, 
and obtained privilege, amongſt other things, to 
fortify his houfe at Freſhwater, and to embattle 
the walls; and in the thirteenth year of that reign, 
the faid Giles had a ſpecial exemption from fur- 
| niſhing ſix ſoldiets in the iſland, on account of his 
being in the king's fervice beyond ſea, though i in 
ern of that year the armed men he is only charged 
with'twofor Freſhwater, Aſter this time, the manor 
was granted with the lordſhip of the ifland to ſeveral 
families, brit reverted'to the crown on the attainder 
1191127 e 


1811 or WIGHT. 


pf George, duke of Clarence, and was granted in 
fee-farm by queen Elizabeth. Thomas Urry, Eſq, 
purchaſed it of theſe, and it deſcended by a female 
heir to T. Morgan, Eſq, from whom it was pur- 
chaſed by the late lord Holmes, and has deſcended 
by the ſame way as his other manors to the preſent 
Leonard Troughear Holmes, Eſq. In the time 
of Henry the Seventh, this manor paid a fee-farm 
rent of thirty-one pounds thirteen ſhillings and 
four pence, and now pays thirty-two pounds. In 
the year of 1635, we alſo find that certain tene- 
ments in Freſhwater, appertaining heretofore to 
the priory of Cariſbrooke, paid rents amounting to 
four pounds nine ſhillings. A watch of three men 
by night, and two men by day was maintained on 
Schirpenorde, in Freſhwater, and in 1638 a watch 
and ward, each of two men, on the down near it. 

| Is the record of the counteſs Iſabella, in the 


reign of Edward the Firſt, mention is made of 


Hugh de Braybeuf holding half a fee in Freſhwa- 
ter, as of the poſſeſſions of Sir John Lifle, and the 
prior of God's houſe in Portſmouth, Walter Hor- 
ringford, and the aſſigns of William Leon, as hold- 


ing half a fee, parcel of the poſſeſſions of the lord 


of Yaverland. The prior of Chrift church is alſo 
faid te have a tenement in Freſhwater, which had 
formerly belonged to Henry Hurſt. | 
Wurz the laſt belonged to the manor, dif. 
tinguiſhed as Prior's Freſhwater, we ſhall leave 
undetermined; of which we have only to obſerve, 


that it was purchaſed by the family of Comber, 
from whom it deſcended, to Sir Thos. Miller, bart. 


* 


, CL 
f 
pl 
| 


i 

| 

; 

id 
7 

ö he 
1 


— — 


2 K 
** 


> — 
* 8 
s 4 — 


65 HISTORY OP THE 


Tux next manor of which we ſhall take notice 
in this pariſh, is Aﬀeton or Aſton, which was in 
the king's hands in the time of the Domeſday roll, 
and had been held by earl Tofti in the time of the 
Confeſſor. It had been rated at four hides, but now 
at a yardland ſhort of three, from whence we may 
conclude it to have been a very valuable manor. 

Soon after the compilation of Domeſday-book, 
it gave name to its poſſeſſors, as appears from 
grants made to the abbey of Lyra, from Robert de 
Affeton and Wm. de Affeton, of the tithes of their 
fiſheries. They have no dates, but, it is very pro- 
bable that they were made before the foundation of 
Quarr Abbey, which afterwards, was moſtly, if not 
wholly, the object of perſons religiouſly diſpoſed. 
In the time of the counteſs Iſabella, Richard 
Affeton held one fee there, and was much entruſted 
by her in the management of her property, as ap- 
pears by his depoſition before the parliament re- 
ſpecting her ſale of the iſland to king Edward the 
Firſt, which we have given in a former chapter.“ 
We cannot doubt, from theſe circumſtances, that 
he was inſtrumental in promoting the ſale of the 
iſland, by which means he had a fair opportunity 
of ingratiating himſelf with the king; for he was 
afterwards, in the 23d year of that reign, joined 
with Sir Adam Gordon in the office of warden of 

the iſland, in which ſervice he was allowed a ſum 
of money to provide for the ſoldiers arrayed to de- 
fend the iſland, and for engines and inſtruments of 
1 ® 'Sce chap. 6, p. 146. 


. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 659 


war. As a manor we find it afterwards, in the th 
of Edward the Third, in the poſſeſſion of Richard 
de Aﬀeton, eſtimated at a knight's fee, but in the 
1;th year of Edward the Third in the family of 
Brokenford, from whom it paſſed to the family of 
Ringbones, and it was found in poſſeſſion of an 
ancient family of the name of Bruen, or Bruin, 
lords of the manor of Fordingbridge, in the county 
of Southampton, in the ſurvey of the 2d of queen 
Elizabeth. The family of Urry afterwards pur- 
chaſed this manor, and John Urry, Eſq. a captain 
in his majeſty's navy, whom we have had occafion 
to mention under the borough of Yarmouth, is 
the preſent poſſeſſar. The houſe is pleaſantly 
ſituated on the eaſtern banks of the river. 
Ox the eaſtern ſide of the river, and nearly con- 
tiguous to the pariſh of Brook, juſt within the 
boundary, is Compton, a manor, which, in king 
Edward's time, had been held by earl Tofti, but 
then, as appears in Domeſday, by the king. It 
had been rated at three hides, but then at one. 
The manor gave name to the family, and was poſe 
ſeſſed by them, together with Atherfield, in the 
pariſh of Brixton. In the record of the counteſs 
Iſabella, Odo de Compton is ſaid to hold of her 
in capite, this manor in demeſne; the abbot of 
Quarr alſo then held a yardland in it without ſer- 
vice, and William White another yardland by the 
ſervice of a pair of ſpurs. Adam de Compton alſo 
held of Odo by the ſame ſervice. Towards the 
latter part of Edward the Third's reign, in whoſe 
time 


655 HISTORY or TAR 


Tur next manor of which we ſhall take notice 
in this pariſh, is Aﬀeton or Aſton, which was in 
the king's hands in the time of the Domeſday roll, 
and had been held by carl Tofti in the time of the 
Confeſſor. It had been rated at four hides, but now 
at a yardland ſhort of three, from whence we may 
conclude it to have beena very valuable manor. 
Soon after the compilation of Domeſday-book, 
it gave name ta its poſſeſſors, as appears from 
grants made to the abbey of Lyra, from Robert de 
Affeton and Wm. de Aﬀeton, of the tithes of their 
fiſheries. They have no dates, but, it is very pro- 
bable that they were made before the foundation of 
Quarr Abbey, which afterwards, was moſtly, if not 
wholly, the object of perſons religiouſly diſpoſed. 
In the time of the counteſs Iſabella, Richard 
Affeton held one fee there, and was much entruſted 
by her in the management of her property, as ap- 
pears by his depoſition before the, parliament re- 
ſpecting her ſale of the iſland to king Edward the 
Firſt, which we have given in a former chapter.* 
We cannot doubt, from theſe circumſtances, that 
he was inſtrumental in promoting the ſale of the 
iſland, by which means he had a fair opportunity 
of ingratiating himſelf with the king ; for he was 
afterwards, in the 23d year of that reign, joined 
with Sir Adam Gordon in the office of warden of 
the iſland, in which ſervice he was allowed a ſum 
of money to provide for the ſoldiers arrayed to de- 
fend the iſland, and for engines and inſtruments of 
See chap. 6, p. 146, 
1 12 War. 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 669 


war. As a manor we find it afterwards, in the 7th 
of Edward the Third, in the poſſeſſion of Richard 
de Aﬀeton, eſtimated at a knight's fee, but in the 
1;th year of Edward the Third in the family of 
Brokenford, from whom it paſſed to the family of 
Ringbones, and it was found in poſſeſſion of an 
ancient family of the name of Bruen, or Bruin, 
lords of the manor of Fordingbridge, in the county 
of Southampton, in the ſurvey of the ad of queen 
Elizabeth. The family of Urry afterwards pur- 
chaſed this manor, and John Urry, Eſq. a captain 
in his majeſty's navy, whom we have had occafion 
to mention under the borough of Yarmouth, is 
the preſent poſſeſſar. The houſe is pleaſantly 
| ſituated on the eaſtern banks of the river. 
Oy the eaſtern ſide of the river, and nearly con- 
tiguous to the pariſh of Brook, juſt within the 
boundary, is Compton, a manor, which, in king 
Edward's time, had been held by earl Tofti, but 
then, as appears in Domeſday, by the king. It 
had been rated at three hides, but then at one. 
The manor gave name to the family, and was poſ- 
ſeſſed by them, together with Atherfield, in the 
pariſh of Brixton. In the record of the counteſs 
Iſabella, Odo de Compton is ſaid to hold of her 
in capite, this manor in demeſne; the abbot of 
Quarr alſo then held a yardland in it without ſer- 
vice, and William White another yardland by the 
ſervice of a pair of ſpurs. Adam de Compton alſo 
held of Odo by the ſame ſervice. Towards the 
latter part of Edward the Third's reign, in whoſe 
| time 


660 HISTORY or THE 


time Sir Adi de Compton had commanded the 
band of Freſhwater, it ended in a daughter, mar- 
ried to a perſon of the name of Lyete, In queen 
Elizabeth's ſurvey, it was poſſeſfed by three pro- 
prietors, who might probably deſcend from the 
daughters of that family. It afterwards came into 
the family of Comber, and, with ſeveral other 
lordſhips, which we have elſewhere noted, paſſed 
by inheritance to Sir Thomas Miller, Bart. We 
are informed that ſome years ago it was purchaſed 
of him by William Bowerman, Eſq. of Brook, to 
which pariſh it is contiguous. Leonard Troughear 
Holmes, Eſq. is lord of the manor of Compton. 

| PzrHays we ſhould not omit to remark the ele- 
vated ſituation of Compton, being conſiderably 
above the level of the fea; notwithſtanding which, 
it has been aſſerted by Sir John Oglander, that a 
large pair of ſtag's horns: was diſcovered there, 
about two fathoms deep in the ground, by the 
mouldering of the cliff, in 1624. He conjectures, 
that theſe had remained here ever fince the iſland 
had been ſeparated from the oppoſite ſhore ; and 
the country people frequently dig nuts out of the 
ground, which they diſtinguiſh by the appellation 
of Noah's nuts. We are farther informed, that 
the late David Urry, Eſq. of Afton, remembered 
one of the barrows on the downs at the weſt end 
of-the iſland, containing an urn full of bones. 

© Near the eaſtern boundary alſo, but contiguous 
to Thorley pariſh, is the manor houſe of Wilming- 


_ on the road from Afton houſe to Thorley, 
and 


181 r or WIGHT: 66t 


v5 4% 
a *# # 


and from thence to Yarmouth, It was held in 
demeſne by king William at. the time of the 
Domeſday-roll, and had been held of the Confeſſor 
by his huntſman at one hide. We have no account 
of it in the counteſs Iſabella's roll, ſo that pro- 
bably it was held by her and other lords of the 
iſland in demeſne. It was given to the duke of 
Clarence, and forfeited, with his other poſſeſſions, 
on his attainder. This was amongſt the lands ex- 
changed by Henry the Eighth with Thomas Hop- 
ſon, Eſq. for the manor of Mary bone; of whom it 
was, purchaſed by Thomas Coteile, Eſq. and from 
him deſcended, with his other lands, to lord 
Edgecumbe. Edward Ruſhyorth,  Efq. is lord of 
the manor of Wilmingbam. 

Or the manor of Weſton, to the LAM of Freſh- 
water village, we have to obſerve that it gave | 
name to a reſpectable family, the lord of Middle- 
ton or Milton in Bimbridge. There are two en- 
tries of it in Domeſday, one of which was held by 
William Fitz Azor, the ſame which Godric had 
held of the Confeſſor in fee, containing a yardland 
and one third. Edric alſo held half a yardland in 
Weſton, as he had before held it of the Confeſſor. 
In a ſurvey taken in the reign of Edward the Firſt, 
Middleton and Weſton, at the two extremes of the 
iſland, were held by this family ; they occur to- 
gether, at half a fee, held by John de Weſton, as 
part of the poſſeſſions of Sir John Liſle, belonging 
to the counteſs. Roger Vavaſor alſo then held of - 
Thomas D'Everey, parcel of her lands, the fourth 

part 


652 HisToRY or THE 


part of a fee in Weſton; and in the reign of Ed- 
ward the Third Sir John de Weſton was appointed 
one of the watdetis of the iſland. Whilſt it was in 
the poſſeſſion of Sir William Braybeuf, ſheriff of 
Hampſhire, it obtained the name of Braybeuf in 
addition, ſince corruptly called Weſton Braybrook. 
John Urry, Eſq. is lord of the manor of Weſton. 

IT may now be proper to take notice of the two 
great bays, which form the coaſts of this pariſh, 
one to the north eaſt, and the other to the ſouth 
eaſt, from the remarkable rocks called the Needles 
at the weſtern extremity of the iſland. Theſe 
rocks derive their name from the reſemblance 
which they bear by their ſharp and craggy points; 
and though they have, doubtleſs, reſiſted for many 
ages the violence of the rugged waves, it is within 
recollection of a great part of the inhabitants of 
the iſland, and thoſe on the oppoſite ſhore, as well 
as of mariners, being little more than twenty years 
ago, that one of theſe wonderful pyramids was un- 
dermined and thrown down by a furious ſtorm. 
That which fell is ſaid to have been 120 feet in 
height above low water mark. 

Exczyr Carey's Sconce, on the weſt point of the 
entrance of Yarmouth river, and the ſcite of 
Worſley's tower to the weſt of that, the coaſt, which 
from thence turns to the ſouth weſt, has nothing 
very remarkable, till we come to Allum Bay near 
the weſt end of the iſland. If it were not for the 
vicinity of theſe rocks, Warden Ledge would be 
an object of attention; but its beauties vaniſh from 

the 


rsLt or wicHt; 663 


the mind on the pictureſque view which theſe 
rocks exhibit, being in ſome places near 700 feet 


from the ſurface of the ſea at low water. The na- 
ture of the rocks has given the name to this bay; 


beſides which theſe cliffs produce copperas ſtones, 


which are often ſhipped for London, red and yel- 


low ochre, Fuller's earth, tobacco pipe clay, and 
vaſt quantities of white ſand that is carried from 
Hence to London, Briſtol, and even to Worceſter, 
as a principal ingredient in forming the compoſi- 
tion for the finer ſorts of glaſs and porcelain. 

Tux vein of ſand is found at the height of about 
one hundred feet from the ſurface of the beach, 
between two ſtrata of clay, and experiments have 
been made which afford reaſon to conjecture that 
it runs entirely through from the extremity of the 
point oppoſite to Yarmouth as far as the downs of 
Afton. Captain Urry, of Yarmouth, to whom it 
belongs, makes a very conſiderable profit from it. 
But the ſand pits are ſeldom wrought longer than 
October, and ſometimes not ſo long; as the ſouth 
weſt ſwells break into them, and ſometimes un- 
dermine them ſo much as to bring down great 
quantities of the mountainous rocks above, which 


make a tremendous noiſe by their fall. In ſea- 


ſonable weather, veſſels lay in Allum Bay to load 
with the produce of theſe cliffs. 


Tux whole coaſt of this pariſh is fortified by 
theſe ſtupendous rocks. On the eaſt ſide of the 


Needles, facing the ſouth, they are no leſs amazing 
than on the north ſide. With the exception of the 
| flat 


i Ent AZ. = > — 8 


88 


IR —y =>. : 
of - - 3 — r . ä 5 uf 


— 


_— 


_ 


— MZ , 


56 HISTORY or TE 
flat and low valley, which extends. from Yarmouth 
to Freſhwater Gate, the greateſt part. of the pariſh 
is mountainous, and the cliffs eſpecially are very 
lofty. They form a very wild and rocky bay, which 
is alſo remarkable for a ground tide, or a violent 
agitation of the water when the other parts of the 
ſhore are becalmed probably occaſioned by a bot- 
tom which is interſperſed with broken roc ks. The 
ground tide roars ſo loudly as to be heard at the 
diſtance of ſeveral miles. 
1 Tur cave of F reſhwater, which is not quite three 
4 hundred yards to the weſt from the inn, can only 
be viſited when the tides are remarkably low; for 
which reaſon we would recommend to the ſtranger 
to viſit this ſpot, near the times of new or full | 
moon, about four hours. after 15 is high water at 
Ney port. Within two days after theſe periods, 
from three to five i in the afternoon, muſt, there- 
fore, be the moſt eligible ſeaſon; a and the mean 
time, probably, the beſt of all. It has two en- 
trances, and the height of the main arch ſeems to 
be from twenty to thirty feet; but the pier between 
the openings has not the appearance of a ſufficient 
ſtrength to ſupport the vaſt quantity of chalk rock 
above it. The cave does not run very far back 
under the rock, before it is too low to be followed 
without great inconvenience. The inſides of the 
arches are overgrown with moſs and weeds, and 
are not only a fine contraſt to the cliff, but ſerve 
to give it the appearance of a grotto. 


Ws: have already mentioned Brook Chine as the 
caſtern 


ISLE OF WIGHT. 665 


eaſtern limit of this pariſh on the ſouth ſhore ; be- 
twixt this and Freſhwater Gate, the moſt remark- 
able places are Grange Chine and Compton Chine, 
and Aſton Cliff to the weſt of the latter. As we 
have already deſcribed the general nature of theſe 
Chines, we ſhall not repeat the appearances of + 
theſe in particular. Of Freſhwater Bay we may 
obſerve that its cliffs are very high, and the very 
look from them is enough to excite terror in the 
mind. At the houſe at Freſhwater Gate, parties 
may be frequently accommodated, in a very com- 
fortable manner, if not in the ſtyle of elegance and 
luxuriouſneſs, where they may occaſionally ſtop 
for the night. It ſtands very near high water mark 
on a low bank of pebbles, not more than ſixty or 
ſeventy yards in width, and about two, hundred in 
length. This is all which ſeparates the ſea from 
the ſpring head of Yarmouth river; and even this 
is inſufficient in high ſpring tides, and ſouth weſ- 
terly gales, to keep off the ſurges, which then fre- 
quently fly over with great violence. 

SOMETIMES the name of Freſhwater Bay is con- 
fined to the inlet before Freſhwater Gate, but it is 
more uſually underſtood to comprehend the whole 
circuit of coaſt from Brook Chine, or even Sod- 
more Point on the eaſt, to the weſtern extremity 
of the iſland nearly. That particular part of the 
beach to the weſt of this low land is called Main 
Bench, and contains many chaſms or rents, caves 
and receſſes, till you approach the Needles. 

Tux curious rocks ſo called are off the weſtern, 
Neo. 14. 8 extremity 


, 
* 
1 6 1 * . — —— 8 * 3 , . 
— 7 om _:; b 4 4, Wn =; - — ft = - pe. —_ 
82 2 = . — — Þ : EINE - oe L 5 2 2 ** * — -— r 
s 4 — 


7 


666 HISTORY OF THE 


_ extremity of the iſland, and are three in number. 
Their ſharp and craggy points have pointed out 
the propriety of the name; but this title was ſtill 
more applicable to a fourth, which was undermined 
and fell down with a prodigious craſh about the 
year 1764, and is now totally loſt, being upwards of 
one hundred feet high, when it was ſtanding. 

Tur importance of early intelligence of the ope- 
rations of the channel and other cruiſing fleets and 
ſquadrons being very great, government have this 
year (1795) eſtabliſhed ſignal poſts on Freſhwater 
downs, which are ſeen diſtinctly at St. Catherine's, 
and there repeated fo as to communicate advices 
to Wroxal, and from thence to Shanklin; which 
laſt repeat them, ſo as to be ſeen at Aſhey down, 
from whence they are ſeen at Spithead and Portſ- 
mouth. By this means, the appearance of an enemy 
is known in leſs than half an hour, with an ac- 
count of their number, force, &c. The eſtabliſh= 
ment of each poſt conſiſts of a lieutenant and mid 
ſhipman, and two men to keep a look out, and to 
make and repeat the ſignals. This meaſure, it 
muſt be manifeſt, has the promiſing proſpect to be 
of much utility. There are alio ſeveral additional 
forts in contemplation to be erected round the 
iſland. | 


CONCLUSION» 


j : a wp 


CONCLUSION. 


Y i HE very great extent to which our pages have unavoidably ſwelled, prevents 


25, as was deſigned, from taking a retroſpective view of our labours, and therein 
preſenting our readers with a ſummary of the whole, As it has been our anxious 
ziſh to fulfil our engagements in the moſt liberal manner, we can only ſay that we 
have ſpared neither pains or expence to accompliſk the object we had in view. 
The liberality and candour of our friends have been eminently conſpicuous in the 
progreſs of our Work; and we have, with an equal ſenſe of gratitude, to acꝶ not- 
ledge the communications of our patrons, and the friendly intimations of ſuch inad- 
dertencies, as either, from a miſtaken information, or quotations from authorities 
not duly founded, have been incorporated in theſe pages, We may, in general, 
ob ſerve that theſe are but few ; but it is incumbent on us to notice particularly be- 
fore we cloſe this hiſtory, that the anecdote at page 314, ſo far as it relates to 


a gentleman, whoſe name is mentioned as having been a principal concerned in the 


tranſaction there ſtated, is not founded in fact. The ſame may be obſerved with 


reſpect to the coffin mentioned at page 440, ſtated on authority which we then had 
reaſon to conſider as correct; but on more authentic grounds it appears that no 
ſuch coffin has been dug up at Quarr Abbey ſor eighty years paſt ; that ſuch an one 
lies at preſent as a paving-ſtone in the waſh-houſe there ; but that no uſe of tha 
nature was ever known during the term of fourteen years paſt that the laſt tenant 
reſided there; and that the farm had been in their family ſor one hundred and 
8#wenty years. We farther learn, that the Rev. Thomas Worſley, about the year 
17772 ſearched for ſems dates and inſcriptions, but in vain, 


APPENDIX, 


F 
* 
* 
it 


A 
3 — % 


8 —— 


2 
„ 23 


% 
- 
" 2 : 8 1 
a ——0 8 = ” 


I. 


APPENDIX. 


— 


T is à conſideration of no ſmall 
moment to ſtrangers, whoſe con- 
tinuance in the iſland may frequently 
be limited by a variety of circum- 
ſtances, unavoidable or accidental, 
to be informed in what manner they 
may viſit in the ſhorteſt time the 
moſt ſtriking and picture ſque parts 
of this favorite ſpot. This aſſiſtance 
we ſhall endeavour to afford them; 
ſuppoſing that they have alrcady 
eſtabliſhed Newport for their prin- 
cipal reſidence. We need ſcarcely 
that at the Bugle, the Sun, or 

the Dragon Inn, every accommo- 
dation and comfort may be procured; 
but no time ſhould be loſt in pro- 
curing horſes or carriages, if families 
or parties do not bring their own 
over the water, on account of the 
eat demand for them during the 

ummer months. 

The general di viſion of the iſland 
into three principal routes, as laid 
. down in a late celebrated and elegant 
deſcription of it, may be called the 
weſtern, the north-eaſtern, and ſouth- 
eaſtern. Theſe are diſtinctly laid 
down in our map of the iſland, and 
muſt be obvious at firſt fight. 

Of the IRsr it will be ſufficient 
to point out the diſtances, and to 
mark by an aſteriſk prefixed to their 
reſpective names, thoſe places only 
where travellers can be accommo- 
dated with refreſhment. 

MILES, 
From Newport to Cariſbrook 1 

Shorwell 
Brixton 
Motteſtone 
Brook Down 
*Freſhwater Gate 
Needles Point 
Back to Freſhwater and 

to Yarmouth 


W 0 % % % 


| 


— — 


| MILES: 
Calbourn 6 
Swainſton 2 
Newport o 
| : Fotdt-\. 2s 


Of the s2zcoOND the fame ob- 


ſervation may be made. 


From Newport to Wootton 

Brid 4 
Binftea 3 
*Ryde 2 
St. John's 1 
The Priory 3 
St. Helen's Green 1 

*Brading "IS 
Sandham Heath 3 

Brading Down 3& 
Aſhey Sea Mark 14 
Newport 5 
Total 31 


Of the Tn1ro, 
verſally admitted as the grandeſt of 
all, we ſhall next take notice. 


From Newport to Standen 15 
Pidford 15 
*Niton 6 
St, Lawrence 34 
*Steephill 1 
St. BonifaceorBonchurch 2 
®Shanklin 3 
Arreton = 
St. George's Down © 
Newport 4 2 

288 


In this tour is that part called 
Under Cliff, extending from the 
ſouthward of Niton to the eaſt along 
the ſhore towards Bonchurch ; 
which is ſo ſtriking and piftureſque 
as to exceed all deſcription, 

But whilſt we point out theſe 
principal routes, there are others 


which deſerve the attention of the 
| curious. 


which is uni- 


APPENDIX. 


curious. On the weſtward of the 
river to Blackgang Chine and St. 
Catherine's Tower, is a tour to be 
recommended, 


MILES. 
From Newport to Widcombe 13 
Gatcombe it 
Chillerton Farm 1 
Billingham 1 
Chale Church 4 
Blackgang Chine & return i 
St. Catherine's Hill & 
return 1+ 
Kingſton = 
Shorwell 2 
Newport 6 
Total vol | 


On the eaſt, the old road to St. 


Helen's, was this. 


From Newport to Stapler's 2 
Combley Lynn, 2F 
Haven Street 9 
Camp Hill 1 
Barnſley Farm 3 
Park Farm 1 
St. Helen's 1 

| Total a 
from whence return by the ſeco 


general tour, 
A ſhort ride from Newport has 
been much noted. 
From Newport to Pann, over 
Coppin's Bridge 1 

Standen Farm 14 
Shide Bridge 2 
Cariſbrooke Caſtle 1 
Round it to Newport 2 


Total 8 


Diverging from the third general | 


route to the ſouthward of Pidford, 
is the road to Godſhill on the left, 
near 3 miles, or from Newport, 6, 
to Whitwell, 3, or, to Appuldur- 
combe, from Godſhill, 2, to Prince- 
lett Shoot, 14, and return by Arre- 
ton, or diverge from thence to Aple, 
Shanklin, and Sandown or Sandham. 
Before we notice the rides from 
Cowes, we ſhall point out an ex- 
curfion from Brading to the penin- 
ſula of Bembridge. | 


| 


it to 


669 
MILES. 
To Nunwell 1 
p Brading Down 1 
To the Grove 0 
Sandown Fort 12 
Yaverland - 1 
Bembridge Down and 
Culver Cliffs 2 
Longland Farm 14 
To the Windmill 1 
Foreland Farm 17 
Varbridge 3 
Brading 1 
Total 15 
The excurſions from Weſi Co 


ſuppoſing the ſtrangers to be at that 
place of public reſort, are chiefly to 


be performed on horſeback. The 
firſt is to the weſtward. 

From Cowes to Gurnard's Bay 2 
Rue Street 2 
Thorneſs 21 
Newtown 4 
Shalfleet 1 
Swainſton 3 
And back to Cowes 7 

Total! 20 


The next is acroſs the water te 
the eaſtward. 


To Eaſt Cowes | > = 
Oſborne | 14 
Barton 
Brockwood 1 

. Wootton 1 
Wootton Bridge 2 | 
uarr Abbey * 
bippingham, back by 
Alverſton 4 
Weſt Cowes 3 
Total 14 
Nor ſhould the ride from Cowes 


up the weft fide of the river to 
ewport, and dowa the caſt ſide of 
aſt Cowes be overlooked. 
From Cowes to Northwood 
Newport | 27 
Croſs the water to Fairlee 1 
Whippingham 3 
Eaſt Cowes 2 
Welt Cowes by the Ferry 2 
Total 12 
. Ocher 


ke £4 


re EI Ir ICY 


— —— —„-— 
* 
= 


4 
- 


. 


670 | APPENDIX. 


Other excurſions and digreſſions 
from the principal routes, it is to 


be conſidered, might be pointed out. 
But we preſume that we have given 
abundant directions to the ſtranger ; 
and to the natives of the iſland, any 


farther information would be ſuper- | 


fuous. 


| 


[Of the Publiſher may be 
had, a nem and elegant MAP of the 
ISLAND, wherein the principal 
routes are pointed out; and by 
means of which the other propoſed 
excurſions and digreſſions may be 
immediately ſeen. 


Allum, found in the Iſland, 
Amuſements of Newport, 
Appley, deſcribed, 


Page. 
Array. King, W firſt the Channel of Pirates, Ty 


3 
325 
303 


Appuldurcombe, when poſſeſſed by Sir James Worſley, 184 


> 0405, 6a Attempts to convert its Haven, 


4 «S&T Pri | » 550 
ARRETON, Diſturbances of the Monks there, _ 431 
— Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 535 
Artillery provided by the Pariſhes, : bs 
Aſh Farm, Spring near it, | 570 - 
Aſhey Manor, Curioſities relative to it, 512 
Aſs, for drawing Water, 93 
Atherfield Manor, ſome Account'of, 625 
Avington Manor, ſome Account of, 593 
B. 

Barons oppoſe King John, 130 
Barton Oratory, Rules, &c. 441 
BinsTED Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 521 
Birds in the Cliffs, 

Blackgang Chine, 61 
BoLToON, Duke of, Governor, 281, 285, 287, 288 
BONCHURCH Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 495 
St. Boniface, or Bonchurch Down, 494 
Bord wood Foreſt, 415, 478 
Mr. Borlaſes s Account of Vedtis, 13, 20 
Boroughs of the Iſland, their Hiſlory, 292 
. - - Hiſtory of, quoted, 313, 309 
Botany Bay Mill, 534 
BRADING Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 458 
. its Antiquity, 466 
. , anciently a Borough, 471 


73 
Brittany. 


Þ 7 INDEX. 


Page. 
Brittany, fatal Expedition thither, 3 173 
B&k1xToN Pariſh, its Hiſtory, | 620 
Brook Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 638 
Burial, ancient Effe& of the Privilege, | 457 
Burials at Newport, when firſt allowed, 329 
Burley, Captain, 1s executed, 232 
Burton Oratory, Rules, &c. 441, 531 
Bury Gate, | 578 
. 5 
Capocan, Lord William, Governor, 283 
CALBOURN Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 6590 
Captains of the Ifland, Succeſſion of 177 
Carey, Sir George, Account of, | 68, 193. 211 
Carey's Sconce, Repairs of, "448 
Carpenter, Anecdotes of a, 626 
2 CARISBROOKE Caſtle, a Place of Retreat, 34» 87 
3 222222222 ſupplied with: Stores, &c. 3 
| C Ordnance there, 62 
C - - -- - - - 1ts annual Expence, 5 17 
33 . its Erection, &c. | 2 
00000000 its Repairs,” © .; 97 
—T((ĩ Proceedings were, | « 1 B37 
C - Pariſh, its Hiſtory, | 388 
N . Priory, by whom an kee, 120, 42g 
Caſtte Hold, probable Meaning of, ub. 299 
St. Catherine's Tower, 0% e 609 
Ceadwalla extirpates the Pagans, 28, 118 
Cerdic, the Saxon, took the Iſland, W 
CHALE Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 2 606 
Bay, a dangerous Coaſt. 612 
Chalybeate Springs, | 8 
Chapels, &c. of the Iſland, | 450 
CHART Es I. King, arrives in the ITfland, . _ 227; 
„„ 15 2 a Priſoner, _. 228 
"XU „ ans for his Eſcape, 233, 239, 24 
A Letters to Mr. Werbe, c 35 1 — 7 
G ſeized at Newport. 1 oo $45) 
CORR carried to Hurſt, Caſtle, M. 41 ASH 
„ Plan of Eſcape from New Porz. 251 
EEE: bo Cob oli Sane -cs gives his Watch to Mr. Worſley, £7, 
I CHARLES II. King, landed at Brading, - 00 4 
= 753 Gurnard Bay, 
VVV e Cove, 5 
8 787 Sir Jon, Account ar} 7 


| | | x | C hine, 


IND Ex. | 1 


+ Page. 
Chine, its Derivation, | 493 
Church of Newport, | 5 326 
0 Houſe Fraternity, 446 
Churches deſpoiled, Conſequences of, 175 
Clarendon's; 3 Reply to a Petition, 268 
Clay, a hack Stratum through the Iſland, 2 4 
Coal, robably, in the Iſland, ibid. 
Bs, Br. \ Native of Godlhill, 555 
Cotton, Sir 8 Tt; his Account of the Tin, 17, 21 
Weſt Cow Es Caſtle, its Expence, &c. 63, 67, 116, 582 
Eaſt Cowes deſcribed, : 529 
Crabs of the Iſland, | | 7 
St. Croſs Priory, . 446 
Crown Lands, State of, 178 
| Culpeper, Lord, Governor, | 265 
Culver Cliff deſcribed, 476 
Cutts, John Lord, G-wernor, | 277 
ENS 55+ 54-02 + 2 gens -t0 Articles, 278 
Danes eſtabliſh themſelves in Britain, 230, 118 
Daniſh Pirates infeſt the Britiſh Seas, 29, 31 
Deadman's Lane, why ſo called, 35 
Deed of Conveyance of the iſland, 152 
Defence of the Iſland, under Edw. II. 40 
Deſign of this Hiſtory. vi 
Devon, Earls of, Lords of the Iſland, | 42; 125 
Dillington, Mr. impriſoned, | 201 
Diodorus Siculus, his Account of VeRtis, 13, 20 
Diſpenſation to hold large Po ſſeſſions, 183 
Duncomb, knighted at Cariſbrooke, 231 
Dunnoſe, 496 
Dutchman' s Hole, 626 
E. 
E gs, how ten tron the Cliffs, 8 
Eleabeth, Princeſs, her Vault diſcovered, 339 
Endowments, their Neceſſity, 12 | 455 
Epitaphs, their Importance, Vit 
| Excommunications, how anciently praiſed, 432 
F. 
Fairlee deſcribed, 533 
Fairy Hill deſcribed, 502 
Farms of the Iſland limited by Parhament, 174 
Farms, the Effects of monopoly in, 628, 629 


- 
oe. 


: 
4 
. 


. 
"Las. 


1+ 
- — 


DL ea —— —e 


—> 
— — 


iv „ INDEX. 
Fern Hill deſeribed. 644 
Mr. Firebrace corceſponds with King Cha los I. 293 
A is ſuſpected, | 241 
Folly, Account of it, „ 5 
Forts of the Ifland, why built, 38, 61 
Freebolders in the Ifland in 1606, 213 
French invade the Ifland, 33» 34. 36, 61, 159 
Fleet attempt chat of the Engliſh, 36, 60 
FRESHWATER, Repairs there, | 111 
N 3333 Pariſh, its Hiſtory, | 650 
. 6. 
Game, King Henry VIII.'s Order to ales it, 188 
GAT OBE Pariſh, its Hiſtory, | 602 
Gaveſton, Piers, Warden of the Iſland, 158 
St. George's Down, 539 
-GopsA1LlL Pariſh, its Hiſtory, | 546 
3 Church, how ſituated, 548 
C ſtruck by Lightning, .- 88 
Codwin plunders the Iſland, | 31, 118 
Governors, their Privileges, 395 . 
Gurnard Bay, Charles II. landed there, 585 
Hammond, Col. his Character, | 259 
Harby, Curate of Newport, his Ingratitude, 76 
St. HELEN's Pariſh, its Hiſtory, N 498 
—— * Priory, 444, 501 
3 Sea Mark, 499 
Mr. Heath's Boarding School, 627 
Hermit's Hole deſcribed, | bi 05 482 
Hiſtorian, Duty of one, | | ii. 
Hiſtorians, Cauſes of their Errors, 4 ibid, 
Hiſtory, Pleaſure and Importance of it, i. 
Holmes, Sir Robert, Governor, | 274 
33 -- -- Vviſſled by King Charles II. 275 
CTT his Epitaph, 366 
.... . Thomas, Lord, Governor, 288 
Hunny Hill, Conveyance of, 320 
Hunſdon, Lord. Account of, 193 
owe cw os Letter to Yarmouth Corporation, 954 
Hurſt Caſtle Point, | | 23 
I. abd 8 „ „ 
Port Jackſon Mills, | _ 
. Dr. a Native of menon,” 597 
5 Indulgences 


| 


INDE. | * 


f Page. 
Indulgences granted to the Ifanders, ON „ 
Induſtry, Houſe of, deſcribed. 373 
TT its good Effefts, | 382 
eee annual Reports of, 32323 
C Reflections on it, 23092 
"Tofalibiliy, no Claim of Pope Alexander Vw. 428 
Inhabitants reſtrained from en Iſland, 33.44 
Innovation, Fondneſs for, its Effect on Hiſtorians, 5 
Introduction, | 8 B 
Iron Ore, r 
Vabella. Counteſs of Albemarle, aſſerts her Ri his 1 
0 „„ ſells the land, | |" 199 
Iſland defencelels 1 RAM 7: to ons! 

KR od | 7 
KincsroN Pariſh, its Hiſtory, »& Nis 614 
Knight's Services in the Iſland. oben 
Knighten Courts, n 416 
Knighton Gorges Manor, 11 56516 
Knowles, its ſituation, Dolls © 14177 679 
Lanes of the Iſland, Character of. | 923 
St. LAWRENCE Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 99 ' 56s 
Lemerſton, Manor of, p 623 
Lieutenant Governor, when appointed, 284 
Liſle Family, an Account of them SIT - 2 - 
8 John Lord Viſcount, Govertivy, 286 
M. | 

Marriage of the King 's Daughter, Aid for, 401 
Medine, Eaſt, 458 
„ Weſt, * * 581 
Members of Parliament, paid for Attendance, 39g 
Men at Arms to defend the Iſland, _ 42, 47 
Militia of the Ifland, in 1625, | | 69. 72 
2... „in 1651, | | 
Monks abuſe their Truſt, | 426 
Montagu, Duke of, Governor, 286 
MorrESTON Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 636 
| N. | 
Nettleſtone Pri 10TY, 502 
NEWCHURCH Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 504 
NzweokT Charter, 10, 136, 296 
„„ Treaty there of King Charles 1. 2 

and the Parliament, 243 


NEewPORT 


TDT 


Newronr, Borough of, | 
3 Confirmation of its Charter, 
3 Church, when eredcted, FE 
3 incorporated by Charter, 

2. its Charter Powers enlarged. 

„ GO IPEFL deſcribed, 

. N Cburch, how ſupplied, 
ä Rate for its Miniſter, 
e iran elected their Miniſter; 
2. > "FAS SUGAR Agreement with Shepton Mallett, 
 NeEwToOwN, Petitions against Lord Cutts, i 
n its Hiſtors, | 
A „ancient Deſcription of, 
5 - Deciſions on 1ts Elections, 

OT IE "M hapel, how ſupplied, 
 $tNicnor as Pariſh, Account of, 
Ningewood Marior, 

Niro Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 

Nobility preſent a Remonſtrance to'the Pope, 
Node Hill, why ſo called, | 
Norris deſcribed, 

NoRTHWOOD Pariſh, its Hiſtory, 10 
Nunwell deſcribed, „ent al 

O. 


Officers to defend the Idand, —_— 
Oglander, Sir John, Account 61. 2 be, 
Orchis, or Satyrion, deſcribed, 1 


© Fitz Oſborn, Lord of the Ifland, 


1 founded Cariſbrooke Priory, 
| Otborne deſcribed, 


P. 
Pio Manor, its Hiſtory, 
Park hurſt Foreſt, 
Pembroke, Earl of, Governor, 
Petition againſt Lord Culpeper, 
Petitions to the King and Parliament, in 1449, 
Pheenicians, their Trade to Britain, 
Plotnore, the Stratum of the Iſland, 
Potter, William, an Account of him, 
Portland, Earl of, Governor, 
3 ag Counteſs of, her Velour, 
Portſmouth, Fortifications there ſurveyed, 
Powderham Caſtle, by whom built, 
Powlett, "gs Hon. Thomas Orde, Gvveritor, 
WEE es conan e Cn3a „ . gives a Fete, 


545 
Prins | 


INDEX. vii 


25 | | Page. 
Prawns and Shrimps. | 3 bes 
Prejudice, Effects of it on Hiſtorians, iv. 
CAE Money of the Iſland,  oB41617 6,417, A0OF HLABSIBA 
Q. : | L —_ - 4 4 33s x a f f # 
Quar Abbey, its Hiſtory, 33 : 494 
| 1 N. thi 
Read Mayor of Newport, his Charafter, x * 225 
Reigate in Surrey, Barons“ Cave there, 130 
Ride deſcribed, 308 
Roger, Earl of Hereford, his Conſpiracy, 128 
No 2, Major, his Character, | 22560 
Royal Heath, Villa of, deſcribed, N 483 
Sale of the Iſland, Enquiry about it, une n ö 140 
„ Depoſitions concerning it. — 75 
Sand. ſor Glaſs, &c. 3 
Sandown, or Sandham Fort, 9, 63 95 11 5s 45 
School of Newport, FEM 88 
SHALFLEET Pariſh, its Hiſtory, | | 649. 
SHANKLIN Parilh, its Hiſtory, 1 | 49 
„ Chine nne 492 
Sharpnode Block Houſe, | : 63, 67, 111 
SHORWELL Pariſh, its Hiſtory, . 616 
Shrewſbury, its Houſe of 2 | | 394 
Slave Trade, Petition on it, * | 290 
Southampton, Earl of, Governor, N 214 
Stanley, Hans, Eſq. Governor, | "A © 
Stannaries at Southampton, | 3 
Starch Manufactory, 758 E 318 
Steephill deſeribed, tn | 560+ 
Stenbury Manor, Account of, | 36368 3 
Swainſton, Manor of, | 632 2 
Syaenham, Colonel, Governar, CY: 249 2428264 | 
Tenures of the Ifland, Bill _—_—_ them, | 495. 4 
THORLEY Pariſh, its Hiſtory, | 646 | 
Tides, their State within the Iſland, 18. 23 | 
Timber of the Iſland, 1 San | 
Tithes, Obſervations upon, | 452 3 
Tojti invades the Iſland, CRE 32, 448” | 
Topographical Hiſtory, 1 | 
Fruffles, | 11 | 
4 umults _ Diſorders, Act again, 271 | 
Vanity, | 


" 6 3 


* 


Is! P age, 
V. and U, gon fe bn 21mg? 
| Vanity, Effects of it on Hiſtorians, „i. 
4 4% an took the Iſland, 1. 34986 
Tiers at St. Lawrence, : | 564 
Vipers, EZ 21, 11 
 Uggaton, Manor of, | | 624 
Under Chff deleribel, . ES 578; 
Warden of the Ifland, etefted, 8 55 43 
—:A. $I , bis Office and Authority, 33 
Warwick Duke of, crowned 111 ot the Illand, 165 
Watches of the Iſland, | 33» 49, 72 
MWatchingwell Manor, N 8 642 
Watchingwood Manor, ibid. 
Webb, General John Richmond, . | 
Wellow Manor, = . 645 
Weſtover Manor, | 635 
WariePlNGHAM Pariſh, its Hiſtory, | 527 
Mr. Whitaker's Account of the Tin Trade, 16. 
Mfite, John, curious Anecdote of, 629, 690 
Wuirwrrr Pariſh, its Hiſtory, . 504 
Wreur, Iſle of, diſtinguiſhed in Hifory, . - 'N 
= popomm —— eneral Appearance of it, 1] 14D 
_— quiry of its ancient t Stat, WE 12. 
8 Woolverton, Manor of, +1511 Seal e Gag 
Wool of the Iſland, Ee ell | 2 
'WoortToxN Pariſh, its Hiftory, | * 6324 
Worſl:y's Tower, Lind 6x 
--»-- - - Commiſſion ſlated, 64 
-=- -- - - Sir Richard, Governor, 289 
„ Wins iſſued to return Abſentees, 52 
4 Waulfer, King of Mercia, conquers the Iſland, 28, 118 
i Y. | 
| YARMOUTH Calile, Ordnance, &c. aire: 62 
. 4343335 l „its annual Expence, 67 
4 „ , its Repairs in 1588, „ 
4 „ „ its Hiſtory, | oP 352 
| . Charter of King James I. „355 
| ---4----- -» Its Petition to Parliament. 339 
N 3 -, Deciſions on its . ee 
HWA - Pariſh, its Hiſtory, Kr 650 
fk VuR Pariſh, its Hiſtory, — 88 


— 


7 | | FINS. 


