
(Qarnell Ininerattg Sithtarg 



3tt|aca. S^etD loth 



-4 



BOUGHT WITH THE INCOME OF THE 

SAGE ENDOWMENT FUND 

THE GIFT OF 

HENRY W. SAGE 

1891 




TTie date shows when this volume was taken. 

To renew this book copy the call No. and give to 
the librarian. 

...-itiC...IiOV.2.0.54. HOME USE RULES 

All Books subject to recall 

All borrowers must regis- 
ter in the library to borrow 
books for home use. 

All books must be re- 
turned at end of college 
year for inspection and 

repairs. 

Limited books must be 

returned within the four 

wsek limit and not renewed. 
Students must return all 

books before leaving town. 

Ofr;cer5 should arrange for 

the return of books wanted 

during their absence from 
town. 

Vohunes of periodicals 
and of pamphlets are held 
in the library as much as 
possible. For special pur- 

,,„ poses they are given out for 

u limited time, 

Borrowers should not use 

their library privileges for 
the benefit of other persons. 

.^ Books of special value 

and gift books, when the 

giver wishes it, are not 

allowed to circulate. 

Readers are asked to re- 
port all cases of books 
marked or mutilated. 

Do not deface books by marks and writins. 



4 



Cornell University Library 
DA 396.A22H65 



Narratiye of the attempted escapes of Ch 





028 050 940 



3% 




^\^ 



A NARRATIVE 



THE ATTEMPTED ESCAPES 



CHARLES THE FIRST 



FROM CARISBROOK CASTLE. 




Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tliis book is in 
.tjie Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924028050940 



A 

NARRATIVE 

of the Attempted Efcapes 

OF 

CHARLES THE FIRST 

from Carisbrook Caftle, 

Arid of his Deterition in the IJle of Wight ^ from 

November, 1647, t° *he feizure of his 

Person by the Army, at Newport, 

in November, 1648. 

INCLUDING 

THE LETTERS OF THE KING 

TO 

COLONEL TITUS, 

Now firft Deciphered & Printed from the Originals. 

BY GEORGE HJLLIER. 



L O N D O N I 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 



IM.D.ccc.Lii. ^, y K Is! I: M. 

^ UKt|Vl=iu;nY 

I. II; 1^ A in' 



I^V^^lsi: 



London : 

Imprinted by Harrifon & Son, at The London Gazette Office, 

in St. Martin's Lane. 



TO 

EDWARD S. DENDY, ESQ., 

ROUGE DRAGON PURSUIVANT OF ARMS AND EARL MARSHAL'S 
SECRETARY, 

THIS VOLUME IS INSCRIBED 

BY 

THE AUTHOR. 



INTRODUCTION. 



Silas Titus was born at Bufhey, in Hertford- 
fhire, in 1622, and entered Chriftchurch Col- 
lege, Oxford, in the year 1637 ; but after con- 
tinuing about three years in that univerfity, he 
removed to one of the inns of court, and upon 
the breaking out of the civil war engaged in 
the fervice of the Parliament, under whom he 
held a captain's commiilion. 

He afterwards efpoufed the royal caufe, being 
found in attendance upon King Charles the 
Firft, at Carifbrook, in the year 1648, where 
the remarkable correfpondence it is the efpecial 
objedt of this volume to elucidate, was contrived. 
At the Treaty of Newport, he was again in 
waiting upon the king, after whofe execution 

bo. 



vi IntroduBion. 

he attended Charles the Second into Scotland, 
whence, in 165 1, he was defpatched to the 
queen-mother with fecret inftrudtions* refpeft- 
ing a propofed marriage of the king with a 
daughter of the Marquis of Argyle. 

At the battle of Worcefter he was l^kewife 
with his majefty, and continued a correfpondence 
with him during the time of his exile ; whilft 
at the Treaty of Breda he reprefented the 
Engliih party, in conjundion with Lord Wil- 
loughby of Parham, Major-General Maffie, 
Colonel Richard Graves, and Alderman Bunce. 

Captain, ultimately Colonel Titus, is however 
better known to the public as the author of the 
celebrated pamphlet, " Killing no Murder," 
which he publifhed in 1657, under the fictitious 
name of William Allen ; and in it endeavoured 
to prove that killing the Protector would be 
both a legal and meritorious aft. Cromwell is 
faid to have been fo powerfully affeded by the 
perufal of this publication, as to cause him ever 
afterwards to become gloomy and fufpicious, 
feldom fleeping two nights in the fame bed, and 
invariably carrying fire-arms. Having by fome 
fecret intelligence difcovered the real author, he 

* See Appendix. 



IntroduSlion. vii 

made the following attempt to fecure his perfon. 
Underftanding the royalifts were in the habit of 
holding meetings at a certain tavern in London, 
he fent an officerj in whofe attachment and fide- 
lity he placed great confidence, to feize Colonel 
Titus and Firebrace. The officer ordered his 
men to halt at the door until he went into the 
houfe for further information. He there pri- 
vately afked the landlord whether Titus and 
Firebrace were within, affuring him that his 
purpofe was to fave, and not to take away their 
lives; and going into the room where they 
were, threw his red cloak over his head, and 
exclaimed, " if Titus or Firebrace be in the 
room, let them efcape for their lives this in- 
ftant." He then returned, and called in the 
foldiers to take them; but they, heeding his 
advice, had in the meantime efcaped through 
the window, and mounting their horfes, pro- 
ceeded into Scotland, where they joined General 
Monk.* 

After the Reftoration, in confideration of 
the many important fervices he had rendered, 
Titus was appointed one of the grooms of the 

* Additions to "Camden's Britannia," by Gough; article 
" Huntingdon." 



viii IntroduSiion. 

bedchamber, and his wife, Catherine Titus, lady 
of the queen's privy chamber ; whilft as a further 
recognition, he received an augmentation of his 
arms, viz. or, upon a chief embattled gu. a lion 
of England, paflant-guardant or, to be borne 
by him and his defcendants, quarterly, together 
with the arms of his family. 

The grant exprefled that this mark of favour 
was rendered in confideration, " that in the 
years 1646, 1647, ^"^^ 1648, he was by our 
royal father intrufted in his affairs of the greatefl: 
importance, both in relation to his reftitution 
and in order to his efcape out of the captivity in 
which he was held by the rebels, for which he 
was by them charged with high treafon, and 
forced to fly beyond the feas. After which, as 
the higheft teftimony of our royal father's juflice 
and confidence, he did, even at the time of his 
execrable murder, and upon the accurfed fcaf- 
fold, recommend him, the faid Silas Titus and 
his Angular fidelity, unto us, by the late Arch- 
bifhop of Canterbury then affifting, who happily 
lived to declare the fame ; fince when, even unto 
our happy reftoration, we being as highly fatis- 
fied with his great prudence, loyalty, and zeal 
to our fervice, have entrufted and employed him 



IntroduStion. ix 

in our moft private affairs and defigns, whereby 
he was expofed to the greateft dangers, had his 
eftate confifcated by the rebels, and was, by an 
aft of theirs, condemned of high treafon; not- 
withftanding which he croffed the feas in order to 
our fervice about twenty times; and by his pen 
and practices againft the then ufurper Oliver, 
vigoroufly endeavoured the deftruftion of that 
tyrant and his government. And after our ref- 
toration (being then a member of Parliament), 
he did as vigoroufly purfue to juftice the ac- 
curfed regicides \ and by his motion, the carcafes 
of Oliver Cromwell, Bradfhaw, and Ireton, were 
taken up out of our royal chapel at Weftmin- 
fter, drawn to Tyburn, there hanged, then 
burned under the gallows, and the heads fet 
upon Weftminfter Hall; for which, and other 
his fervices and fufferings, he has three thoufand 
pounds voted him by the two Houfes of Parlia- 
ment, in fuch terms as the honour thereof was 
equal to the gift." 

After the preparation of the draft from which 
this extraift is copied, an .alteration in the in- 
tended grant feems however to have been made 
by the heralds, as the chief in his coat is not 
embattled. 



X IntroduSiion. 

In 1678 he was elefted member of Parliament 
for the county of Hertford ; and in the follow- 
ing year, by oppofing the prerogative on the 
occafion of Gates' Plot, he loft his place at 
court. 

In the year 1681 he was elefted for Hunting- 
don, and fhowed great zeal in favour of the 
Bill of Exclufion. The following extempore 
lines, which formed part of his fpeech in oppofi- 
tion to the Duke of York's claims, have fince 
been oftentimes quoted : 

" 1 hear a lion in the lobby roar. 

Say, Mr. Speaker, ftiall we ftiut the door ? 
Or, do you rather choofe to let him in ? 
But how then fliall we get him out again ?" 

In November 1687, notwithftanding the pro- 
minent part he thus played, he procured an 
introduftion to James the Second, after his ac- 
ceffion, by William Penn the quaker, and was 
the following year fworn of the Privy Council, 
but retired on the abdication of the king. 

Soon after the revolution, he was elefted to 
ferve for the borough of Ludlow, in Shropfhire ; 
and having lived to the age of eighty-four, died 
in December, 1704^ leaving three daughters, 
who were never married. 



IntroduSiton. xi 

The letters and papers of Colonel Titus, to- 
gether with his refidence in Bufhey, were in- 
herited by his defcendant Mrs. Shorte, and as 
part of her fortune, conveyed by marriage to 
the Rev. Dr. James Ibbetfon, formerly redlor of 
Bufhey, by whose reprefentative they have been 
recently fold to the truftees of the Britifti 
Mufeum. 

As defcriptive of that remarkable epoch in 
the life of Charles the Firft, his incarceration at 
Carifbrook, the feries of fifteen letters written 
there by the king to Captain Titus, are invalu- 
able ; and it having appeared, upon confidera- 
tion, that many portions of England's hiftory 
which were of lefs intereft to the general reader 
than the events to which thefe letters refer, had 
been more fully chronicled, it was refolved, in 
connexion with their publication, to colled: into 
one perfedt whole the many fcattered illuftrations 
of the Angular incidents attendant on the refi- 
dence of Charles in the Ifle of Wight. 

From this determination originated the fol- 
lowing pages ;* and in offering them to the 

* I would here acknowledge the valuable advice and kindly 
co-operation I have received in furtherance of the defign, from 
John Henry Hearn, Efq. of Newport. 



xii IntroduBion, 

public, I would only wifh to remark, that my 
endeavour has been the rather to prefent an in- 
terefting fummary of all the recorded fafts I 
could difcover bearing on the fubjedt, than to 
produce a felf-opinionated efFufion, perhaps fatis- 
fadtory neither to myfelf nor my reader. 

Under thefe circumftances the work has been 
compiled; and niy only hope is, that the im- 
menfity of intereft which is attached to all retro- 
fpeftions of this memorable time, will create for 
it the little attention which, in a literary point of 
view, it could not claim, and I have no preten- 
tion to afk. 

George Hillier. 

London, Auguft 185Z. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I, 

Page 
The King comes to the Ifle of Wight . . . . i 

CHAPTER n. 

Hammond's Proceedings after the King's Arrival — Recep- 
tion of the Warrants for the Arreft of Afhburnham, 
Berkeley, and Legg — Interviews of the Parliamentarian 
and Scottifh Commiffioners with the King, and his Rejeftion 
of the four Bills — Faffing of the Ordinance of no further 
Communications with the King — Extrafts from contem- 
porary Pamphlets — Firft propofed Efcape, and Difmiflal 
of Afliburnham, Berkeley, Legg, and other Attendants . 2 1 

CHAPTER III. 

Mutiny at Newport — Apprehenfion, Trial, and Execution 
of Captain Burley — Arrangements of the Royal Houfe- 
hold, and Habits of the King 59 

CHAPTER IV. 

Condition of the King — Arrangements for the Tranfmiffion 
of his Correfpondence — Overtures and Services of Captain 
Titus and others — Firft attempted Efcape — Change of 
Lodging — and Arrangement for the Reception of Charles 
in the Quarters of the Chief Officer . . .82 



XIV CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER V. 

Page 
Sir John Bowring's Narrative — Preparations for Second At- 
tempt to Efcape — Letters to Captain Titus — Difcovery 
and Fruftration of the Attempt — Accufation againft Major 
Rolph — Curious proceedings confequent thereon — Trial 
and Acquittal of Rolph at the Affizes at Winchefter . 127 

CHAPTER VI. 

State of the Kingdom at large — Renewal of Correspon- 
dence with Captain Titus — A Treaty Propofed by the 
Parliament, and Accepted by the ^ing — Preparations for 
the Treaty — The Treaty of Newport . . .213 

CHAPTER VII. 

Deportment of the King during the Treaty — Overtures to 
Hammond by the Army, and his Recall to Windfor — 
Seizure of the King by the Army at Newport, and his 
Removal to Hurft Caftle . . . . . . 273 

Appendix : InftruSions received at various times by 
Colonel Titus from King Charles the Second and Queen 
Henrietta Maria 321 



NARRATIVE 

OF THE 

DETENTION OF CHARLES I. 

IN THE 

ISLE OF WIGHT. 



CHAPTER I. 

The King comes to the lile of Wight, 

The details of the flight of King Charles tht 
Firft to the Ifle of Wight, in the month of 
November, 1647, g^^^ ^'^^^ to fo much theore- 
tical fpeculation, as well as variety of reprefenta- 
tionsj on the part of nearly all contemporary 
writers and after commentators, that an endea- 
vour was made by the late I^ord Afliburnham, 
in the attempted vindication of his anceftor's 
reputation in the affair, to unveil much of the 
obfcurity in which the hlftory of the tranfadion 
had been concealed; and the interefl which is 



2 T^he King comes to 

attached to. every occurrence connefted with' 
that difturhed unhappy period of our hiftory, 
efpecially in connexion with thofe who were in 
immediate attendance upon the unfortunate 
monarchj muft ferve therefore as the reafon for 
bringing the following pages before the public* 
The king, having a fufpicion that his life 
Would be endangered if he remained at Hampton 
Court, where he was then refiding, refolved, 
after a conference with Sir John Berkeley, and 
Mr. Aftiburnham and Mr, Legg, grooms of 
his chambers, to retire from thence to the Ifle 
of Wight, where he would have an opportunity 
of fojourning with his tried and right loyal 
adherent Sir John Oglander,-|- until the feel- 
ing of Colonel Robert Hammond, who was 
then governor of the ifland, could be afcer- 
tained. Early on the evening of the nth of 

* The principal publiflied authorities fmm which information 
can be derived relative to the king's refidence in the Ifle of 
Wight are, Aihburnham's " Narrative," Berkeley's " Memoirs,'' 
Herbert's "Memoirs," Firebrace's "Narrative," Warvpick's 
" Memoirs," Cook's " Narrative ;" all attendants on his majefty. 
Clarendon's " Hiftory of the Rebellion," the various Hiftories of 
England, Journals of the Houfes of Parliament, Wagftaffe's 
"Vindication," Ruihworth't " CoUeftions," Mafere's "Trafls," 
■ — coUeftion of cotemporary pamphlets, Lingard's " Hiftoi-y," 
Peck's " Defiderata," Clarendon's " State Papers," &c. &c. &c. 
* Of Nunwell Houfe, near Brading. 



the IJle of Wight. 3 

November, 1647, after leaving three letters on 
his bed-room table, addrefled to the Parliament, 
Colonel Whalley, and Lord Montague, wherein 
he ftated his reafons for privately withdrawing 
from the palace, the king accordingly made his 
way from his apartments, through a door where 
no guard was fet, into the park unperceived, at 
once croffed the Thames by means of a boat 
ready to convey him, and landed at Ditton, where 
Afhburnham had been previoufly refiding, and 
where his majefty was received by him. Sir John 
Berkeley, and Mr. Legg. In their company, 
he immediately direded his courfe into Hamp- 
fhire ; but on arriving within twenty miles of 
the coaft, Charles ordered Mr. Afhburnham and 
Sir John Berkeley to proceed to the ifland, and 
afcertain how the Governor would receive him— 
a command they were relu6tantly compelled to 
obferve; whilft. he at the fame time, accom- 
panied only by Mr. Legg, progrefled towards 
Tichfield Houfe, the refidence of the Earl of 
Southampton, where, in the abfence of her 
fon, he was entertained by the old Countefs 
of that name, during the time his adherents 
were profecuting their miflion in the Ifle of 
Wight. 

B 2 



4 The King comes to 

Colonel Hammond, at this time Governor of 
the ifland, was the fecond fon of Robert Ham- 
mond of Chertfey, in Surrey, Efq., elder brother 
of Dr. Henry Hammond, the eminent divine, 
and chaplain to the king, and fon of the phy- 
fician to Prince Henry, Dr. John Hammond, 
whofe daughter Jane married Sir John Dingley, 
of the Ifle of Wight. Colonel Hammond was 
born in the year 1621, entered a commoner of 
Magdalen Hall, in the Univerfity of Oxford, in 
the year i St, 2,* and having continued there three 
years, left the Univerfity without the honour of 
a degree. Upon the breaking out of the war 
in 1642, he engaged in arms on the fide of the 
Parliament, by the perfuafion of his uncle, 
Thomas Hammond, then captain of horfe, and 
-afterwards lieutenant-general of the ordnance, by 
whofe intereft his nephew was made a captain, 
and then major, under Colonel Edward Mafley, 
during the fiege of Gioucefter. In the courfe of 
this fiege he killed a Major Gray for giving him 
the He, when he was ordered to be tried by the 
.Council of War in the Lord-General's army,f 
by whom, however, he appears to have been 

* Dr. Birch, in a note to Hammond's "Letters." 
f Whitelock, page 106, ed. 1732. 



the IJle of Wight. 5 

acquitted. He was afterwards raifed to the 
rank of colonel of a regiment of foot, in which 
he continued until the end of the war ; and on 
the 6th September, 1647, by an ordinance of 
both Houfes of Parliament,* was appointed 
" Captain and Governor of the Ifle of Wight, 
and of all ports, forts, towers, and places of 
ftrength therein, until the Lords and Commons 
in Parliament aflembled fliall otherwife order ;" 
and, on the 9th of the fame month, it was 
likewife ordered that Mr. Bulkeley and Mr. 
Lifle, and the reft of the gentlemen that ferve 
for the Ifle of Wight, do go down with the 
Governor, for the better fettling him in the 
government of the faid ifle : it being alfo worthy 
of remark, that the ordinance contained a claufe, 
wherein it was ftated that " the faid Colonel 
Robert Hammond be fubjedt to the commands 
of Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight, Commander-in- 
chief of all the land forces in the kingdom of 
England, and in the pay of the Parliament," 
fliowing that, although fubordinate in matters 
ftridly military, in the civil appointment of 
Governor he was dependent on the Parliament 
alone, — a fadt which enables a pofitive inference 

* Commons' and Lords' "Journals." 



6 The King comes to 

to be drawn of the jealoufy which exifted in the 
Prefbyterian party of that time relative to the 
power to which the organifation of the army 
was then rapidly tending. 

The king's parting inftrudions to Afhburnham 
and Berkeley were, that they .fhould carry to 
Hammond a copy of the letter his majefty had 
left at Hampton Court, and of two letters fent 
to him — one by Cromwell,* and the other with 
only the initials E. R. attached — which laft- 
named communication contained great appre- 
henfion and fears of the ill intentions of the 
levelling party in the army and the city againft 
his majefty, and ftated that Mr. Dell and Mr. 
Peters, two of the preachers of the army, would 
willingly bear company in the defign ; for they 
had often faid to thefe agitators, " Your majefty 
is but as a dead dog;" Cromwell's efpecially 
adding, that in profecution thereof a new guard 
was the next day to be put upon his majefty of 
that party. The king's letter exprefled his dif- 
truft of the diforderly part of the army, and 
his neceffity thereupon to provide for his own 
fafety, which he would do fo as not to defert the 

* See Whalley's Letter to Lenthall, in Peck's "Defideiata 
Curiofa." 



the IJle of Wight. 7 

ihterefts of the army ; whilft he verbally defired 
them, at the fame time, to intimate to Ham- 
mond, that he made choice of him as one in 
whom he imagined' he could confide, on account 
of his being a perfon of good extraftion ; and 
that, although he had declared againft him in 
the war, he had ftill never fhown any animofity, 
but, on the contrary, had fpoken in terms of 
refpedl towards his perfon. His majefty's pur- 
pofe in fending to him being, that he might not 
furprife him, and to requeft a promife of protec- 
tion to the befl: of his power for himfelf and his 
fervants; and if it fhould happen he had neither 
the ability nor inclination to forward his defires, 
that he fhould fufFer thofe by whom he was 
addrefled to depart freely and unmolefted. 
Berkeley, however, making rejoinder that he 
knew nothing of Hammond, and, therefore, 
could not tell whether he might not detain them 
in the ifland ; and fhould they not return by the 
next day, his majefly had better fecure his own 
efcape, without looking to their fafety. Berke- 
ley alfo flates in his memoirs, that on his after- 
wards interrogating Afhburnham concerning his 
acquaintance with the governor, he elicited that 
" he knew but little, yet had lately fome dif- 



-L.c".^ 



8 The King comes to 

courfe with him upon the highways near King- 
fton {upon Thames), and found him not averfe to 
his majefty ; but that which made him conceive 
the beft hope of him was, the charafter Mr. 
Denham {The Cavalier Poet) and the commen- 
dations my Lady Ifabella Thynn gave him." 

On reaching Lymington, the inclemency of 
the weather prevented them croffing the Solent 
until the next morning, when they made their 
way from thence to Carifbrook, arriving there 
between ten and eleven o'clock; and having 
learned that Hammond had gone to Newport, 
to meet fome gentlemen and officers connedted 
with the ifland, followed and overtook him ; 
Berkeley, apparently in a moft unfkilful and 
abrupt manner, at once telling him the king 
had left Hampton Court, under dread of aflaffi- 
nation, and was then in the neighbourhood : to 
which Hammond made anfwer, " that he knew 
not what courfe to take;"* but having, upon 
ferious confideration, weighed the great con- 
cernment that the perfon of the king was of, on 
this jundion of aifairs, to the fettlement of the 
peace of the kingdom, refolved it his duty to 
the king, to the Parliament, and the kingdom, 

* H ammond's " Letter" in Rulhworth. 



the IJle of Wight. 9 

to ufe the utmoft of his endeavours to preferve 
his perfon from any fuch horrid attempt, and to 
bring him to a place of fafety, where he might 
alfo be in a capacity of anfwering the expecta- 
tions of Parliament and the kingdom, in agree- 
ing to fuch things as might extend to the fettle- 
ment of thofe great divifions and diftradtions 
which abound in every corner thereof." On 
this much controverfy enfued, and diftrufl: as to 
Hammond's charadter evidently fprung up in 
the minds of both Afhburnham and Berkeley ; 
it being, however, ultimately agreed, that Berke- 
ley fhould remain at the caftle, whilft Afhburn- 
ham took horfe and returned to the king, with 
the vague intimation from Hammond, " that he 
believed his majefty had made choice of him as 
a perfon of honour and honefty, to lay this great 
truft upon, and, therefore, he would not deceive 
his majefty's expeftations." Berkeley, hereupon, 
to ufe his own language, " embraced the motion 
mofl: readily, and immediately went over the 
bridge into the caftle, though I had the image 
of the gallows very perfedlly before me. Mr. 
Aftiburnham, I believe, went with a better heart 
to horfe ; but before he was gone half a flight- 
fliot, the governor (being before the caftle-gate) 



I o The King comes to 

called to him, and had a conference of at leafl: a 
quarter of an hour with him ; to what purpofe 
I never knew, until I came into Holland, where 
a gentleman of good worth and quality told me 
that the governor affirmed afterwards in Lon- 
don, and in many places-,, that he then, offered 
Mr. Afhburnham that I fhould go,, and he 
fhould ftay, as believing his majefty to be lefs 
willing to expofe him than me, but that Mr. 
Afhburnham abfolutely refufed. Whatever 
pafled between them, I am fure they both 
came back to me : and the governor, putting 
himfelf between us, faid, that he would fay which 
he was fure ought to content any reafonable man, 
which wa?, that he did believe his majefty relied 
on him as on a perfon of honour and honefty, 
and, therefore, he did engage himfelf to us to 
perform whatever could be expefted from a per- 
fon of honour and honefty. Before I could 
make any, Mr. Aftiburnham made this reply, 
' / will afk no more.' The governor then added, 
'Let us then all go to the king and acquaint 
him with it.' Mr. Afhburnham anfwered, ' With 
all my heart. ^ I then broke from the governor, 
who held me in his hand, and went to Mr. 
Afhburnham and faidy ' What,- do you mean to 



the IJle of Wight. 1 1 

carry this man to the king, before you know 
whether his majefty will approve of this under- 
taking, or no ? Undoubtedly you will furprife 
him.' Mr. Afhburnham faid nothing, but '/'// 
warrant you.' ' And fo you ftiall,' faid I ; 'for 
you know the king much better than I do ; and, 
therefore, when we fhall come where the king is, 
I aflure you I will not fee him before you have 
fatisfied his majefty concerning your proceeding.' 
Well, he would take that upon him. I then 
defired he would not let the governor carry any 
other perfon with him, that in all events we 
might the more eafily fecure him, which he 
confented to." 

This, as I have already ftated, is Sir John 
Berkeley's narrative of this remarkable inter- 
view; to which Afhburnham's verfion differs 
in many refpedts, but, evidently, fo far only 
as to endeavour to exculpate himfelf from any 
blame which might be attributed to the promi- 
nent part he certainly played in the extraordi- 
nary meafure of Hammond's accompanying 
them to the king, which propofition, if it did 
not originate with him, undoubtedly received his 
firft and full concurrence. 



1 2 T^he King comes to 

Sir Philip Warwick, in his Memoirs,* writes: 
" I never had occafion, but once at the Ifle of 
Wight, to fpeak with the king upon this affair, 
and it was by an accident, or the king's letting 
himfelf into that difcourfe ; and he did but touch 
upon it, nor durft I feem to be more inquifitive. 
But when I mentioned that the world had an ill 
opinion of my friend Mr. Afhburnham's guiding 
him thither, I remember he freely replied, ' / do 
no way believe he was unfaithful to me; hut I 
think he wanted courage at that time,' (which I 
interpreted his majefty meant, his not flaying 
with the governor,) ' whom I never knew wanted 
it before.' " 

On the completion of the arrangement jufh 
related, Afhburnham and Berkeley, accompa- 
nied by the governor, at once proceeded to 
Cowes ; where Hammond, notwithflanding the 
remonflrances of his companions, was joined by 
Captain Bafkett, who held the command of the 
caflle there, and two fervants, and from thence 
crofTed the channel to Tichfield, when Afhburn- 
ham alone went upflairs to the king, and 
aflounded him by announcing the governor's 

* Page 306. 



the IJle of Wight . 13 

prefence, who, he faid, had come with them to 
make good what he had promifed. The king, 
ftriking himfelf on his breaft, exclaimed, " What, 
have you brought Hammond with you? O 
Jack, you have undone me ; for I am by this 
means made faft from ftirring." To which Mr. 
Afhburnham replied, "that if he miftrufted 
Hammond, he would undertake to remove 
him ;" a propolition the king moft difdainfully 
rejected by faying, " I underftand you well 
enough ; but the world would not excufe me. 
For if I fhould follow that counfel, it would be 
faid and believed that he (Hammond) had ven- 
tured his life for me, and that I had unworthily 
taken it from him. No, it is now too late to 
think of anything but going through the way 
you have forced upon me, and to leave the iflue 
with God;" and as if Fortune had fet herfelf 
to confound his plans and fruftrate his hopes, 
he was not allowed even a few moments to 
think calmly over his fate and let refolution fix 
itfelf, for Hammond and Bafkett grew fo impa- 
tient, a fervant belonging to Lord Southamp- 
ton was obligated to remind his majefty they 
were in attendance ; confequently, in about half 
aix hour their prefence was defired, and after 



1 4 The King comes to 

kiffing the king's hand were received cheerfully 
by him, the king addrefling the governor to 
this efFed: — "Hammond, after an intolerable 
reftraint to my perfon at Hampton Court, I 
found there was a further defign againft my 
perfon, by fome which infinuated themfelves 
into divers regiments of the army ; and having 
an earneft defire of the fettling of the kingdom 
in fuch fort as might befl: conduce to a lafting 
peace throughout my dominions, and not to be 
an inftruraent of ftirring up 'a new war, I have 
thought good to come in this place, with confi- 
dence of your fidelity in proteddng my perfon 
from danger, until, by fuch addrefles as ihall 
be made unto us by the Parliament, there be a 
mutual agreement concluded, and our kingdom 
fettled." * 

To which Hammond declared " that he ten- 
dered his majefty's perfon above his own life, 
and would not fail in doing his utmoft in fulfill- 
ing his majefty's juft defires (in relation to the 
orders and diredtions which he fhould receive 
from the Parliament) :" thus promifing more 
unrefervedly than he had done to Aflibumham 
and Berkeley at Carifbrook. His majefty, how- 

* Tracey's Letter from Cowes Caftle, November 17, 1647, 



the IJle of Wight. 15 

ever, taking Berkeley afide, faid "to him, " Sir 
John Berkeley, I hope you are not fo paflionate 
as Jack Afhburnham?" pathetically adding, 
" Do you think you have followed my inftruc- 
tions ?" Anfwer was made by Berkeley : — 
" No, indeed, fir ; but it is none of my fault, as 
Mr. Afhburnham can tell you if he pleafes : I 
have expofed my life to prevent it ;" repeating 
the fubftance of what had pafled, particularly of 
his being a prifoner in the caftle, and of Afh- 
burnham's firfl: leaving without him, fads, it 
appears, he in his ftatement had. omitted. 

Further temporifing being now ufelefs, the 
king, attended by Hammond, Baflcet, Afhburn- 
ham, Sir John Berkeley, and Mr. Legg, left 
Tichfield Houfe for Cowes, where they remained 
during the night, the king fojourning at an ale- 
houfe,* as the caflle was then appropriated for a 
prifon, and the next morning faw the unfortu- 
nate Charles quietly condufted to the caflle of 
Carifbrook. In his progrefs thither " a gentle- 
woman, as he pafl"ed through Newport, pre- 
fented him with a damafk rofe, which grew in 
her garden at that cold feafon of the year, and 
prayed for him, which his majefly heartily 

* Oglander MSS. 



1 6 The King comes to 

thanked her for;"* an incident fingularly and 
intereftingly illuftrated in the following com- 
munication. The writer fays, " When vifit- 
ing Paris fome years fince, in looking over the 
catalogue of the gallery of the Luxembourg,! 
the name of " Newport, I'lle de Wight," caught 
my eye when curioufly fcanning its pages, and 
on examination I found the fubjed of the pidure 
to be the fuppofed voluntary furrender of King 
Charles to Mofes Read the mayor, and a young 
girl, 'Frances Trattle,' prefenting the king at 
the time with a rofe. This defcription was 
interefting to me, and the infpedtion of the pic- 
ture equally fo, as I found the corn-market place 
moft accurately pourtrayed; tlie fmall houfes 
ftanding in the angles of the church, the butchers' 
fhambles, and the old corn-market houfe, drawn 
in exad: accordance with the defcription afforded 

* Herbert's " Memoirs," 

•j- In the fucceeding editions of this Catalogue the picture ftill 
appears, but thus defcribed : — 

" gz. Sujet tird de la vie de Charles i". 

" ' Charles i", apres f'etre echapp^ d'Hampton-Court, vint 
fe livrer au gouverneur de Newport, qui, apres de longues 
hefitations, le fit arreter et conduire priffonnier au chSteau de 
Cariftrook. Au moment ou il traverfait la place, une jeune 
fille, touch^e de fon abattement et de fes malheurs, fapprocha 
de lui et lui ofFrit une rofe.' " 



the IJle ofWight. ij 

by our muniments ; it being alfo equally correft 
that Mofes Read was mayor of Newport at this 
time." 

In thus proceeding to the Ifle of Wight, the 
king had probably fettled on no particular place 
in preference to another, his flight having been 
fo fudden ; although it is believed he had origi- 
nally intended to fail for Jerfey, and had ftill 
fome hopes to procure a veflel. The fhip was 
mentionedj but there was no time to procure 
one, and the refult was as I have defcribed. 

There can, however, be little, if any, doubt 
but that Charles was unthinkingly purfuing the 
courfe which Cromwell's machinations had been 
devifed to drive him upon ; it being alfo evident 
that the circumftance of Cromwell's informing 
Colonel Whalley, the officer who commanded at 
Hampton Court, of the defign of the agitators 
to feize the king's perfon, was done with the 
fole intent of infligating Charles to remove from 
thence : but to believe that Hammond had been 
placed in the Ifle of Wight in readinefs to re- 
ceive the king is morally impolTible, there having 
been no vifible caufe to direft his majefly's flight 
in that diredtion — the one circumstance fortui- 
toufly and cafually led to. the other. 



1 8 'The King comes to 

Hammond's firft care was to defpatch infor- 
mation of the king's arrival in the ifland to 
Cromwell, who, almoft immediately, after the 
receipt of the intelligence, began to dired: 
his energies againft thofe proceedings in the 
regiments which had been firft introduced into 
the army by his connivance, and fomented for 
his own ambitious ends, making Fairfax the 
dupe of himfelf and his coadjutors, Ireton and 
Skipton. Ludlow, Afhburnham, ■ Berkeley, 
Hobbes in his Behemoth, and others, fpeak of 
the inftitution to which I am now alluding as 
" adjutators," although the corred: appellation 
was the fignificant one of agitators ; Mr. God- 
win, in his hiftory of the commonwealth, ex- 
plaining their office as one devifed to aid the 
regular councils of war, and to agitate fuch 
queftions as the interefts of the army required 
to have confidered. At first two perfons were 
chofen, by the private foldiers of each troop or 
company, to form a kind of fubordinate council, 
whilft the fuperior officers arrayed a general 
aflembly of themfelves ; but this body being 
found too numerous, the eleftive principle was 
adopted, and two or more reprefentatives, either 
foldiers or fubalterns, were chofen for each regi- 



the IJle of Wight . 19 

ment, — a council of agitators : a captain of horfe 
in Fairfax's regiment, named Berry, who had 
formerly been a gardener, but was now a confi- 
dential ally of Cromwell's, being chofen as the 
prefident foon after its inftitution. At this 
jundure three of the principals were tried, and 
one fummarily executed at the rendezvous at 
Ware ; a procedure which, having partially re- 
ftored the neceflary difcipline, Cromwell, under 
the advice of Ireton, aflembled a council of 
officers at Windfor, to deliberate on the iettle- 
ment of the nation and the future difpofition of 
the king's perfon. In this conference, fays 
Hume, following Clarendon, "which com- 
menced with devout prayers, poured forth by 
Cromwell himfelf and other infpired perfons, 
was firft opened the daring, cruel, and unheard- 
of counfel of bringing the king to juftice, and 
of puniftiing by a judicial fentence their fove- 
reign for his pretended tyranny and mal-admi- 
niftration." * Cromwell well knowing that while 
the king lived, whether in prifon or at large, 
he muft be the rallying point for the efforts of 
thofe large bodies of his fubjefts who were 
fincerely attached to the monarchy and to his 

• See Hallam's " Conftitutional Hiftory," vol. ii. p. 303. 

C 2 



20 King comes to the IJle of Wight. 

perfon, and of all thofe other numerous clafles 
who were now difgufted with the oppreflive 
domination and immenfe pecuniary levies of the 
army and the Parliament. * " To murder him 
privately," .fays Hume, "was expofed to the 
imputation of injuftice and cruelty, aggravated 
by the bafenefs of fuch a crime. Some unex- 
pedted procedure muft, therefore, be attempted, 
which would aftonifh the world by its novelty, 
would bear the femblance of juftice, and would 
cover its barbarity by the audacioufnefs of the 
enterprife." And towards fuch a confummation, 
events from this memorable furrender of the 
king to Colonel Hammond quickly progreffed. 

" And Hampton ihows what part 
He had of wifer art, 
Where, twining fubtle fears with hope, 
He wove a net of fuch a fcope, 
That Charles himfelf might chafe 
To Cariftroolc's narrow cafe." -j- 

* Trial of Charles the Firft. 

t Andrew Marvell's " Ode on Cromwell's Return from 
Ireland." 



CHAPTER II. 

Hammond's Proceedings after the King's Arrival — Reception 
of the Warrants for the Arreft of Afliburnhara, Berlceley, 
and Legg — Interviews of the Parliamentarian and Scottifli 
Commiffioners with the King, and his Rejection of the four 
Bills — Faffing of the Ordinance of no further Communica- 
tions with the King — Extracts from contemporary Pamph- 
lets — Firft propofed Efcape, and difmiffal of Afhburnham, 
Berkeley, Legg, and other attendants 



npHE hiftory of the Caftle of Carlfbrook 
may be faid to commence with the burial 
of Withgar, and conclude with the imprifon- 
ment of Charles, and although amongft the thou- 
fands who annually make their pilgrimage to 
this hallowed relic, which feems to exift but as 
a mere phantom of paft fcenes — one of thofe 
refrefhing tombftones which tell of the mailed 
power of the baronial times and the conflid 
between civilization and feudalifm, there are 



22 Carijbrook Caftle. 

doubtlefs but few who ha-ve heard of the Saxon 
chieftain, yet none look on the mofs-woven 
tapeftry of its walls without beftowing some 
pitying ejaculation on the sorrows of the mo- 
narch who was so long immured within them, 
or fail to ponder on the sad but too true a tale 
of the endeavours of a few faithful adherents 
to releafe him from the keeping of men whofe 
fympathies were none of his. 

Carifbrook was at this time, 1 647, a ftructure 
of fucceffive eras, and confequently incongruous 
defign, ranging from the reigns of the firft 
Plantagenets to that of Elizabeth, when the 
old caftle had been furrounded by a counter- 
fcarp, and many of the internal buildings recon- 
ftruded under the fuperintendence of Genebella, 
an Italian engineer of confiderable eminence; but 
although fcarcely a century had elapfed fince 
thefe repairs were effeded, its ftrength had 
already become confiderably impaired. The go- 
vernor's houfe then confifted of a portion of the 
habitation of the early lords, and of the more 
lofty elevation erefted by Montacute, Earl of 
Salifbury, who held the lordihip of the ifland 
in the reign of Richard the Second, which ftill 



Hammond's Letters. 2J 

remains nearly in its priftine ftate, having his 
arms fculptured on one of the buttrefles, and 
was appropriated as the royal lodging on the 
king's arrival, — a fad eafily deducible from the 
evidence which exifts, of there having been three 
rooms immediately over each other, an arrange- 
ment no other part of the fortrefs then prefented. 
Having fecured the perfon of the king, Ham- 
mond's firft care was, to convey an intimation 
of the incident to Cromwell, in priority to a 
letter he difpatched to both Houfes of Par- 
liament, containing the like information, but 
ufing in addition this remarkable expreffion, 
" found the king near the water-fide (at Tich- 
field), and conceiving my/elf no way able to 
Jecure him there, I chofe (he defiring it) to 
bring him over into this ifland, where he now 
is. My lord (Manchefter), my endeavour (as 
for my life) fhall be to preferve and Jecure his 
perfon." A fecond letter was at the fame time 
received couched in fimilar terms from Captain 
Bafkett, governor of Cowes Caftle ;* and a de- 
bate arifing upon the fubject-matter of their 

* Rufhworth, p. 847, vol. iv., part 2. 



24 Parliamentary 'Thanks. 

contents, it was referred to a committee of both 
Houfes further to confider the bufinefs, and 
draw up inftrudions for Colonel Hammond re- 
fpefting the difpofal of his majefty's perfon 
during his ftay there. Captain Rolph, the 
bearer of Hammond's communication, having 
aoZ. given him by the Commons, and the 
perfon who conveyed Bafkett's, \ol. Whilft 
on the 17th November, Wednefday, a letter 
of thanks to Colonel Hammond was reported 
and pafled, and the inftructions concerning his 
majefty pafled both houfes, the Lords the fame 
day fending a meflage to the Commons, with 
a lift of fuch perfons as might attend his majefty 
in the Ifle of Wight, which they referred to 
the committee of revenue. 

Thefe inftrudlions (called the firft or old in- 
ftrudions) are set forth in feveral cotemporary 
pamphlets, but are fttill worth transcribing : 

"DieMartis, 16 Nov. 1647. 

" Refolved by the Lords and Commons in 
Parliament aflembled : 

" I. That the fecureft place, during the time 



Hammond's Injlriictions . 25 

the houfes fliall think fit to continue him in 
the Ifle of "Wight, be Carifbrook Caftle. 

" 2. That no perfon who hath been in arms, 
or aflifted in this unnatural war againft the Par- 
liament, be permitted to come or remain in the 
faid ifle during the king's relidence there, unlefs 
they be inhabitants of the ifle, and have com- 
pounded with the Parliament. 

" J. That no perfon who hath been in arms, 
&c., fhall be permitted to come into the king's 
prefence, or into any fort or cafl;le in the faid 
ifle during the king's refidence there, although 
he be an inhabitant, and hath compounded with 
the Parliament. 

" 4. That no fl:ranger or perfon of a foreign 
nation fliall be permitted to come into the king's 
prefence without (the) directions of both houfes : 
except fuch as have warrant from the Parliament 
of Scotland, or from the committee of that Par- 
liament, thereunto authorized, and are not dif- 
abled by the propofitions agreed on by both 
kingdoms. 

"5. That a fufEcient guard be appointed by 
Colonel Hammond, governor of the faid ifle, 
for fecurity of the king's perfon from any 



26 Feeling in the Island. 

violetjce, and (for) preventing his departing the 
faid ifle without the directions of both houfes." 

The popular opinion throughout the ifland 
had, however, fet in greatly favourable for the 
king after his arrival, whilft the garrifon of the 
Caftle of Carifbrook confifted but of twelve old 
men who had ferved under the Earl of Port- 
land; and as no reftraint was perceptibly put 
upon the king's movemeats, it was confidered 
he might choofe his own time of leaving the 
ifland — a feeling of fecurity which was, however, 
too foon to be difpelled ; for on the receipt of 
thefe inftrudtions, Hammond inftantly iffued 
orders commanding " all mafters of boats be- 
longing to Hampfhire or the Ifle of Wight, 
that they fliould land neither perfons nor goods, 
in any part of the ifland, but at Yarmouth 
Cajlle, Cowes Caftle, and Ryde, where alfo a 
guard was placed with diredtions as at the 
two firfl;-named cafl:les, to examine all perfons 
landing, and to detain and fecure thofe who 
could not give a very good account of them- 
felves or their bufinefs ;"* it being, however, 

• Hammond's Letter to the Speaker of the Houfe of Lords, 
Nov. 19. 



'The King's Reception. 27 

likewife incumbent on me to ftate that at his 
firfl; coming Hammond endeavoured, by every 
outward appearance, to make the king's lodge- 
ment in the caftle partake more of the nature of 
the entertainment of a gueft than a prifoner^* 
accompanying him whilft hunting in the foreft 
of Parkhurft, which was at that time plentifully 
flocked with deer ; and believing his houfe to 
be badly ordered for his majefty's comfort, he 
being a bachelor, fent for his mother, who 
was then refiding at Chertfey,f to fuperintend 
his domeftic arrangements, whilft on a repre- 
fentation to the Houfe of Commons of the 
infufficiency of his houfehold appointments,^ 
it was ordered on the 24th of November, 
"that the feals fhould be removed from his 
majefty's bedchamber at Hampton Court, and 
the furniture therein tranfmitted and employed • 
for his prefent service." The gentry of the 
ifland were alfo allowed freely to vifit the court, 
and many of them admitted to kifs the king's 

* On the Thurfday after his arrival, he vifited and dined 
with Sir John Oglander at Nunwell. — Oglander MSS. 
f Tracey's Letter from Cowes Caftle. 
X Hammond's Letter, i6th Nov. 



28 ConduSl of the King. 

hand, the inhabitants of Newport further de- 
claring themfelves as promifing fecurity to his 
majefty's perfon, and to preferve and defend him 
from all danger whatfoever. 

The fudden and unexpected efcape of the 
king made a great impreffion upon the minds of 
moft of his fubjedts, every man's predilections 
imagining he would a6t the part he wiflied 
him to perform ; and although Charles at this 
time was undoubtedly infincere with all par- 
ties, excepting the old and devoted royalifts, 
now headed by the Marquis of ' Ormond, 
who, after making terms with the Parlia- 
ment in Ireland, had been permitted to come 
over to England, it is a queftion, confidering 
the peculiarity of his pofition, if the charge of 
perfidy can with any degree of juftice be urged 
againft the vanquifhed and more than half- 
dethroned monarch, for receiving the overtures 
of the three prominent parties, and for being 
willing to clofe either with the Scots, the army, 
or the Parliament, accordingly as the offers of 
the one or the other were bafed on the greateft 
probability of ultimate advantage. 

On the 17th of November the king addrefled 



Hammon(fs Letter. 29 

a letter to both Houfes of Parliament, containing 
propofals for a perfonal treaty in London, which 
was read in the Houfe of Commons on the 
19th of the fame month without comment, and 
on the fame day a communication was tranf- 
mitted by Hammond from Carifbrook, wherein 
he ftates, " that yefterday there came to me an 
officer belonging to the ferjeant of the Houfe of 
Commons, with particular warrants for the ap- 
prehending and bringing up in fafe cuftody the 
perfons of Mr. John Afhburnham, Mr. William 
Legg, and Sir John Berkeley, who came hither 
with the king, the faid warrants requiring my 
afliftance to and aid here in the execution of 
them, but with no order to me from either or 
both houfes for that purpofe; and finding the 
matter to be of very great importance, I have 
defired the meflenger to forbear the execution 
of his warrants till I have given the houfes 
to underftand that in cafe the faid warrants 
Ihould be ferved and put in execution, it would 
be impoffible for me to anfwer the expec- 
tations of Parliament in preferving the perfon 
of the king in fecurity to be difpofed (of) by 
them, unlefs I fhould keep him clofe prifoner, 
which is a bufinefs of that naturej that it is 



30 Hammond's Letter. 

neither fit nor fafe for me to do, efpecially of 
myfelf." 

Further adding, that the king intimates " in 
cafe thefe gentlemen be taken from him, and 
puniflied as evil doers, for counfelling him not 
to go out of the kingdom, but rather to come to 
the place where he now is, and for their endea- 
vouring accordingly in attending him hither, he 
cannot but himfelf expect to be dealt with ac- 
cordingly, his cafe being the fame; and from 
fuch apprehenfibns, your lordfhip may eafily 
judge what he will do by his former actings, he 
having that liberty which hath ever been allowed 
him fince hath he been difpofed (of) by the 
Parliament. 

" My lord, I fhall further let you know, that 
befides the care I fhall always have of thefe 
gentlemen, they have engaged their honours 
not to depart from me, fo that I am moft con- 
fident of their fecurity. 

" And truly, were not their ends the fame 
with their pretences (in relation to the peace of 
this kingdom), I am confident they would never 
have advifed nor conducted the king to this 
place. 

" Befides, were they at this time removed 



Hammond's Letter. 



31 



from the king, there would be none left for 
his attendance, which (befides the offence) how 
great the inconvenience would be to him your 
lordfhip cannot be ignorant. 

" And further, give me leave to add (if fo 
unworthy a fervant of your lordfhip as I am, 
and that which concerns my honour, were at all 
worthy your confideration) whether it would 
not much reflect upon me, in cafe thefe gentle- 
men fhould be thus removed from hence, the 
king and themfelves having freely thrown them- 
felves upon me for fafety upon confidence (as 
they pleafe to fay) of my honour and honefly, 
and the fatisfaction they expect it would have 
given the Parliament, the king being neceffi- 
tated to remove."* 

In addition to the Serjeant's meffenger, there 
was alfo a command forwarded to Ham- 
mond by Sir Thomas Fairfax, " that he fhould 
with all fpeed and conveniency fend up Sir 
John Berkeley, Mr. John Afhburnham, and 
Mr. Legg, and the gentlemen that went with 
his majefly from Hampton now refiding in the 
Ifle of Wight, that they may give an account 

* Hammond's Letter, publifhed by R. Ibbitfon, Smithfield, 
1647. 



32 Letters to Hammond. 

to the Parliament of his majefty's proceedings 
and carriage in his journey from Hampton to 
the Ifle of Wight, and in cafe he fliould ftand in 
need of men to guard them up or the like, his 
excellency hath ordered Captain Peck's troop to 
Redbridge, near Southampton," a private injunc- 
tion to the fame effect being likewife found in 
a letter from Ireton of the 21 ft November, 
1 647 ; but notwithftanding thefe reprefentations, 
Hammond's interceffion feems to have prevailed 
with the houfe, as no ulterior meafures were 
adopted againft them, and the warrants iflued by 
the fpeaker for this purpofe were called in on 
a motion of Cromwell's the 2nd of December. 
The king had, therefore, as yet little apparent 
reafon to repent his confidence; but the gover- 
nor, whilft he granted every indulgence to his 
captive, had evidently no intention of feparating 
his own lot from that of the army. He con- 
fulted the officers at head-quarters, and fecretly 
refolved to adhere to their inftructions.* 

In No. 6 of the Mercurius Anti-fragmaticus 
of the 25th November, 1647, there appears fo 
quaint and ftrangely prophetic a paragraph in 
connexion with the foregoing matter, that I 

• Lingard, vol. viii. p. 191, 



Cotemporary Pamphlets. 33 

cannot forbear quoting it, believing it not alto- 
gether foreign to the fubjeft before me. " But 
the king being gone, it is good to fear the chil- 
dren's fhoes be made of the fame running 
leather, and therefore the houfes have fent a 
meflage to the Earl of Northumberland, their 
guardian, to have a ftrift eye over them, that 
they be not ftolen away, and have alfo ordered 
that Sir John Berkeley and Mr. Aftiburnham 
be examined, as, concerning the matter of the 
king's departure, it is good policy to keep 
them from refiding near his majefty, he loving 
the one (Afhburnham) as well as ever the 
Second Edward did his Piers (Pierce) Gave/ton, 
and who is likely to bring as many inconve- 
niences upon his majefty as ever that fantaftic 
minion did upon his deluded lord. This fire- 
drake led his majefty out of the way cleane 
when he forfook Oxford in difguife, and ftiould 
have come to London, and not into the Scottifti 
camp ; but his majefty will have better guides 
when he forfakes the Ifle of Wight ; he forfook 
paradise for this ifle, and when he leaves it and 
comes to his palace at Weftminfter, it's but a 
ftep to heaven." 

On the 14th December following, the Parlia- 



34 Parliamentary Refolutions. 

ment pafled four refolutions drawn up in the 
form of four Adts, which, when the king had 
figned, he was to be admitted to a perfonal treaty 
in London. The firft of thefe propofitions 
enacted, after veiling the command of the army 
in the Parliament for twenty years, it might, at 
the expiration of that time, be reftored to the 
crown, but not without the previous confent of 
the Lords and Commons, and that ftill whenever 
they fhould declare the fafety of the kingdom to 
be concerned, all bills pafled by them refpedting 
the fea or land forces fhould be deemed A(5ts of 
Parliament, even though the king, for the time 
being, fliould refufe his affent — the fecond de- 
clared all oaths, proclamations and proceedings 
againfl: the Parliament during the war void and 
of no effeft — the third annulled all titles of 
honour granted fince the 20th of May, 1642, 
and deprived all peers to be created hereafter 
of the right of fitting in Parliament without 
the confent of the two houfes, and the laft gave 
to the houfes themfelves the power of adjourning 
from place to place at their difcretion.* 

The Scottifh commiflioners who had poflibly 
been acted on by Lauderdale, Lanark, and 

* Journals, vol. ix. p. 575. 



Arrival of CommiJJioners. 3 r 

Berkeley, and who had received feveral com- 
munications from the king himfelf, through the 
agency of Dr. Gough, one of the queen's chap- 
lains, protefted against fending thefe bills to 
Charles before he fhould be treated with in Lon- 
don, neverthelefs the Commiflioners appointed 
by the two houfes — the Earls of Digby, Nor- 
thumberland, Kent, Rutland, Pembroke, Salif- 
bury, Warwick, and Mulgrave, on the part of 
the Lords; and Mr. Bulkeley, Mr. Lifle, Mr. 
Robert Goodwin, and Mr. Kemp, on the part 
of the Commons, together with their chaplains 
Mr. Marfhall and Mr. Rye, proceeded to the 
Ifle of Wight; and on the 24th of December, 
at two o'clock in the afternoon, prefented thefe 
bills to the king at Carifbrook, his majefty 
returning for anfwer " he was afTured that they 
could not expedb a prefent reply, but he would 
take the fame into confideration, and give his 
anfwer in a few days." Consequently four days 
were allowed for a reply, in obedience to the 
orders of the houfe. The next day, however, 
there came the Scottilh Commiflion in all ap- 
pearance to proteft againft them, but covertly 
with the more important defign of making fuch 
conceflions to Charles as would enable him to 

D 2 



36 Departure of Commiffioners. 

conclude and fign the treaty that had been so 
long agitated between them, and which was now 
done. The parliamentary commiffioners re- 
turned to London at the time appointed with the 
anfwers to the two houfes from the king, " that 
neither his present sufferings, nor the apprehen- 
fion of worfe treatment, fhould ever induce him 
to give his afTent to any bill as a part of the 
agreement before the whole was concluded;" but 
he sent immediately afterwards fundry propofi- 
tions of his own not much lefs advantageous to 
the Parliament than their own Acts, and defired 
a perfonal treaty for the purpofe of fettling the 
peace of the kingdom. The Parliament denied 
them to be sufficient for the purpofe, and on the 
3rd of January, having fat from morning until 
night on the queftion, *' whether any addrejfes 
Jhould be mads hereafUr to his majejty" refolved, 
ift. That no more addreffes be made from 
the Parliament to the king, nor any letters or 
meflages received from him. ind. That it fhall 
be treafon for any perfon whatfoever to deliver 
any meffage to the king, or to receive any letter 
or meffage from him, without leave from both 
Houfes of Parliament, jr*^. That the members 
of both houfes of the committees of both king- , 



Vote of Non-addrejfes. 37 

doms have power to fit and adt alone (as for- 
merly the committees of both kingdoms had) 
for the fafety of the kingdom, /^th. That the 
Earl of Kent be added to this committee in the 
place of the Earl of Eflex, deceafed ; and Sir 
John Evelyn and Mr. Fiennes in the place of 
Sir Philip Stapleton, deceafed; and Mr. Glyn, 
recorder (now in the Tower), ^th. That a 
committee be nominated to draw up a decla- 
ration to be publifhed, to fatisfy the kingdom 
of the reafon of paffing thefe votes. Laftly. 
That the concurrence of the lords be desired to 
thefe votes ; * votes extorted principally by the 
fpeeches and menaces of the army-faction then 
prefent in the Houfe of Commons, Sir Thomas 
Wroth advifing thefe three points : f \Jt. ■ To 
fecure the king in fome inland caftle with guards. 
ind. To draw up articles of impeachment againft 
him. 2>^d. To lay him by and fettle the king- 
dom without him. 

Ireton faying that his denying the four bills 
was refufing protection to his fubjects, and that 
therefore they might deny him fubjection, alfo 
adding that till the Parliament forfook the 

* Riiihworth, vol. iv. pi. 2, p. 952. 
f Pari. Hift., vol. xvi. p. 491. 



38 CrontweU's Letter. 

army, the army would never forfake the Par- 
liament. 

And laft of all Cromwell himfelf telling them 
it was now expefted that the Parliament fliould 
govern and defend the kingdom, and not any 
longer let the people expedb their fafety from a 
man whofe heart God had hardened, nor let 
thofe that had fo well defended the Parliament 
te left hereafter to the rage of an irreconcileable 
enemy, left they fliould feek their fafety in fome 
other way, laying his hand upon his fword as he 
fpake it. 

Hereupon the vote of non-addreffes was made 
an ordinance, which the houfe would after- 
wards have recalled, but was forced by Crom- 
well to keep their word,* who in the joy of his 
heart immediately returned to Lord Wharton's, 
and the fame night penned the following letter 
to Hammondi announcing the fuccefsful termi- 
nation of the queftion. 

Superfcribed — " For Colonel Robert Hammond, 
Governor of the Ifle of Wight, thefe for the 
fervlce of the kingdom, hafte, poft hafte. 

* Hobbes' " Behemoth," in Maferes' tracts, p. 596. 



Cromwell's Letter. 39 

"Dearest Robin, 

" Now (blefled be God) I can write and 
thou receive freely, I never in my life faw more 
deep fenfe and lefs will to fhow it unchriftianly 
than in that which thou didft write to us when 
we were at Windfor, and thou in the midfl: of 
thy temptation, which indeed (by what we un- 
derftood of it) was a great one, and occafioned 
thee greater by the letter the general fent thee, 
of which thou waft not miftaken when thou didft 
challenge me to be the penner. 

"How good has God been to difpofe all to 
mercy ! and although it was trouble for the 
prefent yet glory is come out of it, for which 
we praife the Lord with thee and for thee ; and 
truly thy carriage has been fuch as occafions 
much honour to the name of God and to reli- 
gion. Go on in the ftrength of the Lord, and 
the Lord be ftill with thee. But, dear Robin, 
this bufinefs hath been (I truft) a mighty provi- 
dence to this poor kingdom and to us all. The 
Houfe of Commons is very fenfible of the king's 
dealings and of our brethren's in this late tranf- 
aftion. You ftiould do well, if you have any- 
thing that may difcover juggling to fearch it 
out, and let us know it. It may be of admir- 



40 Cromioeirs Letter ^ 

able ufe at this time, becaufe we fliall (I hope) 
inftantly go upon bufinefs in relation to them, 
tending to prevent danger. The Houfe of 
Commons has this day voted as follows : ift, 
"They will make no more addrefles to the king. 
2ndly. None fhall apply to him without leave of 
the two houfes, upon pain of being guilty of 
high treafon. jr^/y. They will receive nothing 
from the king, nor fliall any other bring any- 
thing to them from him, nor receive anything 
from the king. Laftly. The members of both 
houfes who were of the committee of both king- 
doms are eftabliflied in all that power in them- 
felves for England and Ireland which they had 
to a6t with both kingdoms ; and Sir John Evelyn 
of Wilts* is added in the room of Mr. Recor- 
der,f and Nath. Fiennes in the room of Sir 

* Evelyn was afterwards appointed one of the Council of the 
State, with General Monk, at the head of it, on the 23rd Feb- 
ruary, 1659-60. — Kennett's "Regifter," p. 66. 

f The Recorder was John Glynn, Efq., educated at Hart 
Hall, Oxford. He had been one of the managers of the Houfe 
of Commons at the trial of the Earl of Strafford, and was him- 
felf one of the eleven members impeached of high treafon by 
the army on the i6th June, 1647, and in January following 
deprived of his place of the Recorder of London, but in Octo- 
ber, 1648, made Serjeant-at-law. In June, 166 5, he was appointed 
by the Protector Cromwell, Lord Chief Juftice of the Upper 
Bench, and afterwards one of the lords of the other houfe. He 



CromwelPs Letter. 41 

Philip Stapleton,* and my Lord of Keritf in the 
room of the Earl of Efsex. I think it good 
you take notice of this, the fooner the better. 
Let us know how it is with you in point of 
ftrength, and what you need from us. Some 
of us think the king well with you, and that it 
concerns us to keep the ifland in great fecurity, 
becaufe of the Frenchy &c., and if fo, where can 
the king be better ? If you have more force 
you will be fure of full provifion for them ; the 
Lord blefs thee : pray for 

" Thy dear friend and fervant, 

"Oliver Cromwell." 

" My Lord Wharton's, near ten at night, 
January 3rd, 1647." 

The diminutive Mercuries, and many with 

was chofen knight of the ftiire for county of Carnarvon in the 
parliament which began at Weftminfter, 25th April, 1660; and 
after the Reftoration made, on the 8th November, 1660, the 
king's oldeft ferjeant-at-law, and on the i6th of that month had 
the honour of knighthood. He died at his houfe in Portugal 
Eow, Lincoln's Inn Fields, November isth, 1666. — Dr. Birch. 

* Sir Philip Stapleton had diftinguiihed himfelf at the battle 
of Newbury, but was afterwards one of the eleven members 
impeached by the army in June, 1647, upon which he retired to 
Calais, where he foon after died. — ^Whitelock. 

f Henry, Earl of Kent, who was appointed by the Parliament 
one of the Commiffioners of the Great Seal on the 15th March, 
1647, and died in April, 1649. 



42 New/papers. 

ftrange defignations to our ears there were, True 
Informers, and Daily Journals of the year 1647 
—48, feem to have been as equally alive to the 
importance of early intelligence as their more 
imposing fucceflbrs of the prefent day ; no fooner, 
therefore, was Charles located in the Ifle of 
Wight than the fervices of a feries of corre- 
fpondents appear to have been inftantly enlifted 
for the purpofe of detailing the minuteft occur- 
rences conne6ted with his detention there' — moft 
valuable records of matters which were then per- 
chance confidered of only paffing intereft, but 
in our generation of confiderable moment, in 
rendering a perfed knowledge of the real ftate 
and pofition of the unfortunate monarch in his 
latter days; for although the firft reports were 
of fomewhat a cheerful defcription, each succeed- 
ing ftatement became more and more tindlured 
with fuch gloom as evidently foreboded the part 
it was the intention of the afcendant party here- 
after to perform. On the 9th December, I find 
it ftated: "His majefty is very ftriftly looked 
to, his lodgings being locked up every night 
and the keys carried to the governor, and this 
is done becaufe they now know his ihajefty's 
defign was not for that place. On the loth 



New/papers. 43 

January, "Here is a melancholy court, walking 
the round is the daily recreation, for other there 
is none. Horfe are fuperfluous. His majefty 
is cheerful, notwithftanding his knowledge of 
the refult at Weftminfter. The vigilancy and 
induftry of the governor. Colonel Hammond, 
is admirable; fuch is his faithfulnefs and care, 
he deferves much honour and reward;" and 
on the 1 2th, " The king is now kept from de- 
ftructive counfels; the governor of the Ifle of 
Wight finds no mifcarriage in thofe courtiers 
fent by the Parliament. His majefty is fad, 
and fpends much time in writing and at his 
books, and for refrefhment takes air about the 
caftle (Colonel Hammond waiting upon him) 
but pafleth not the works, and becaufe he may 
not have epifcopal men to preach to him hears 
none at all; but the Houfe of Commons refolv- 
ing to ufe what means they can to convince his 
majefty, (this day) appointed fome of their mem- 
bers to confider of fome able divines to be 
fpeedily fent thither." 

To fuch an extent, however, had the publi- 
cation of thefe pamphlets at this time reached, 
and in fuch unmeafured terms did the majority 
of them refledt upon the conducSt of the Parlia- 



44 -New/papers. 

ment in their treatment of the king, that a 
fpecial committee was appointed by the houfe, 
on the 6th January, 1 648,* to fupprefs all " un- 
licenfed and fcandalous pamphlets," with power 
to meet daily and reward thofe who made known 
either the authors or publifhers thereof to the 
authorities ; but, notwithftanding fuch ordinance, 
they apparently daily increafed both in number 
and freedom of expreffion. No. 13 of the 
Mercurius Melancholicus, or news from Weft- 
minfter and other parts, of the 29th Novem- 
ber, 1 647, (anonymous) writes : " I pray you 
who was it that ordered his majefty to have not 
fo much as a man to wait upon him, left his 
three fervants, Mr. Afliburnham, Major Legg, 
and Sir John Berkeley, without fword or fpear, 
fhould conquer the three kingdoms of England, 
Scotland, and Ireland? Who was it that refufed 
a perfonal treaty with his majefty for fear the 
people ftiould take a furfeit in the enjoyment 
of too fudden a peace ? Who was it that fent 
the malapert and faucy agents or agitators to the 
feveral gaols of Newgate and the Gate-houfe, 
for demanding things deftruftive to the being of 
parliaments and the fundamental government of 

* Rufhworth, vol. iv. pt. 2, p. 957. 



Neivfpapers. 4^ 

this kingdom ? and all this within the compafs 
of one week, befides what they have done for 
the fpace of feven years before ; was it not the 
Parliament? I hope the kingdom will take 
thefe worthy ails into confideration, and for the 
future fpeak better of them than ever they did 
deferve." 

" Colonel Hammond, ftand to your tacklings, 
for I know not how you can come off with 
credit ; there is fuch antipathy between the king 
and the Parliament that all the eyes and fpec- 
tacles that I have cannot fee how you can well 
ferve two mailers : you have hitherto gained the 
reputation of a good fubject and an honeft man ; 
it requires policy to continue fo, though there I 
muft confefs my faith ftaggers. I do not like 
that claufe in your letter, dated November 19, 
1 647 : ' "That whatever is commanded by autho- 
rity , ejpecially that of Parliament, though never 
Jo contrary to your Jenje of honour, you will never 
difobey !' How now, Mr, Hammond! Should 
the Parliament authority command you to do 
that in the IJle of Wight which fhould have been 
done at Hampton Court (you know my mean- 
ing),- would you do it? Truly by this you 



46 Play of Crafty Cromwell. 

have dulled the good opinions which many 
thoufands befides myfelf had of you." 

Whilft in a curious ftage-play iflued about 
the fame time, entitled " Crafty Cromwell ; or 
Oliver ordering our new ftate; a Tragical 
Comedy, wherein is difcovered the traiterous 
undertakings and proceedings of this faid Nol 
and his levelling crew," (an anonymous pamph- 
let), occurs the following fcene : 

"Actus Quartus. 

"Enter Colonel Hammond, his majefty's 
jailor, with a bunch of keys at his girdle ; a 
fervant. 

" Hammond.-^ls the guard placed about the 
privy chamber, and are the caftle gates barred 
fure? 

" Servant. — They are, fir. 

" Hammond.' — On what a ticklifh point I ftand ; 
and like a man walkes a ridged battlement, if 
he digrefle to the right hand or the left, hazards 
the bruifing of his flefhly tenement, and forfei- 
ture of his foul ; fo I, betwixt the fealtie I owe 
unto my rightful king and the commands of an 
all-powerful ftate, am doubly plunged : the one 



Cavalier's Litany. 47 

defires me ftiew z/ubjecfs duty, the other doth 
command a traitor's hate; if I obey the one, 
then I accrue my fovereign's difpleafure; if I 
fatisfie the other, then be I liable to imprifonment, 
or if they pleafe, to death. O Fear, how potent 
art thou ! the man pofleft with thee cares not 
to fell his country and his king, to act the worft 
of crimes that hell ere hatched, fo he fecure 
himfelf. 

" I am refolvM, though LOYALTY diffent. 
To a6l even as 't ftiall pleafe the Parliament." 

\_Exit. 

And in the "Cavalier's Litany, lately com- 
pofed by a well-wiflier to his majefty's person 
and all his moft loyal fubjects ; very fitting to 
be obferved and made ufe of by all thofe who 
defire deliverance from the damnable, execrable, 
unparalleled, and not before heard of deteft- 
able adtions, proceedings, defigns, humours, 
conditions, votes, and ordinances, now fully 
and moft exadtly pradifed, delivered, and di- 
vulged, by the only (yet illegal) governors of 
thefe our fad, defperate, diftradted times" 
(anonymous). 



48 EffeSi on the Public. 

" From being like the army hated, 
From the throne* in which Charles they've re-inftated. 
From by the committee to be fequeftrated, 

Libraaos. 

" From the treacherous votes of the Houfe of Commons, 
From the Parliament's accurfed fummons. 
From every one's ire, efpecially a woman's, 

Libranos." ' 

By the aid of the prefs alfo the king himfelf, 
foon after the pafling of the vote of non-addrefles, 
perfonally endeavoured to appeal to the good 
fenfe of the people — putting it to them to judge 
between him and his opponents, whether by his 
anfwer to the four bills he had given any reafon- 
able caufe for their violent and unconftitutional 
vote, and whether they by the obftinate refufal 
of a conference did not betray their refolve not 
to come to any perfonal accommodation ;■(■ and 
in confequence of the great impreffion thus made 
in the public mind, a long and laborious anfwer, 
in which they endeavoured to vindicate their 
proceedings, was prepared by the Houfe of 
Commons, copies of which were allotted to the 
members to circulate among their conftituents 

* The Prifon. 

+ The King's Works, and Pari. Hifty. 



Effect on the Public. 49 

as well as fent to the curates to be read by them 
to their parifliioners ; but having inferted much 
queftionable matter, and made numerous ftate- 
ments eafily open to refutation, the advantage 
was eagerly feized by the royalifts, feveral an- 
fwers moft convincingly written being likewife 
circulated in many parts of the kingdom, and 
with the aid rendered by the lefs eloquent, but 
ftill with many clafles equally perfuafive, publi- 
cations from which I have quoted, the king's 
caufe made an unexpedledly rapid progrefs among 
the people, although it muft alfo be acknow- 
ledged that in the army itfelf the principles of 
the levellers were certainly getting an afcend- 
ancy, making a great parade of a fact they had 
recently difcovered in the Bible, ift Kings, 
viii. 8, that the government of kings was odious 
in the fight of God, and contending therefore, 
after fo diredt an aflertion, that Charles had no 
right to the fceptre. 

Such was the feverifh ftate of the public mind 
in England during the king's early refidence at 
Carifbrook, which I have briefly narrated, to the 
intent that my. readers may be enabled fully to 
comprehend the bearings fuch proceedings would 



50 Departure of Berkeley. 

be likely to have on his prefent and fubfequent 
condud: there. 

For fome little time, as related by Sir Thos. 
Herbert and Sir J. Oglander, after his majefty's 
arrival in the Ifle of Wight, there was no prohi- 
bition as to accefs by any one defirous of feeing 
him, and thither, as foon as his place of refi- 
dence was rumoured, repaired feveral of his old 
fervants, and fuch men as his majefty thought 
fit to nominate; whilft, in about ten days, at 
the inftigation of Hammondy Sir Thos. Berke- 
ley,* with a pafs from the captain of Cowes 
Caftle, accompanied by his coufin, Mr. Henry 
Berkeley, left the ifland, charged with two com- 
munications from the king to the general (Fair- 
fax), the one expreffing his defire for a perfonal 
treaty, and the other acquainting him that three 
of his chaplains. Dr. Sheldon, Dr. Holdfworth, 
and Dr, Heywood, had come to the ifland, for 
whom he alked protection.f 

Berkeley was likewife intrufled with letters 
both from his majefty and Hammond to Crom- 
well and Ireton; but by whom, to ufe his own 

• Berkeley's " Memoirs." 
f Rufti worth. 



Cromwell's Reply. 51 

words, "he was faluted very coldly, having their 
countenances quite changed towards him ;" and 
thereupon feeing it was no place for him, on 
coming to his lodging he defpatched his coufin 
to Carifbrook with two letters, the one contain- 
ing a general relation and doubtful judgment of 
things in the army, which he intended to be 
fhown to the governor ; and the other in cipher, 
wherein he gave a particular account of the 
interview above narrated, concluding with a moft 
energetic fupplication to the king to meditate 
nothing but his immediate efcape, which he pre- 
fumed he could eafily do in a few days, the 
wind ferving ; as the queen had fent a fhip for 
that purpofe, and prefled it earneftly by her 
letters. The next morning he fent Colonel 
Cooke to Cromwell, to inform him he had letters 
to him and inftructions from his majefty, from 
whom in return he received word that he could 
not give him an interview, " but he was willing 
to ferve his majefty as long as he could do it 
without his own ruin," defiririg, at the fame 
time, that Berkeley ftiould not expect he would 
peril his life for the king's fake. On hearing 
this Berkeley took horfe for London, where he 
had. feveral conferences on his majefty's behalf 

E 2 



5^ Berkeley's Return. 

with the Scottifli commiffioners, and on the fol- 
lowing Saturday he received a letter from Mr. 
Afhburnham, requiring, in the king's name, his 
immediate prefence, which as he believed it in- 
tended for a fummons to aflift in the projected 
efcape, remarking, " that though Mr. Afhburn- 
ham were willing enough to appropriate employ- 
ments of honour and profit, yet he was contented 
to communicate thofe of danger to his friends," 
was the next morning again with Charles at 
Carifbrook, by whom he was thanked for his 
despatch from Windfor. Sir John Berkeley, 
however, asked the king in return, "if his 
majefty fo highly approved his advice, why he 
did not follow it?" and "why he was ftill in the 
ifland, where he could not long promife himfelf 
the liberty he then had ? " Queftions to which 
his majefty replied, "he would have a care of 
that time enough, and that he wifhed to conclude 
with the Scots before he left the kingdom." 

Several confultations are likewife defcribed as 
having been held before the arrival of the Par- 
liamentarian and Scottifti commiffioners, and as 
many injunctions given to the king to attempt 
the efcape whilft yet there was the opportunity 
of doing fo; but all endeavours were in vain 



Interview with Commifsioners. 53 

until the day of the delivery of his refufal to 
accede to the four bills of the commiffionerSj a 
fcene of intenfe excitement, as when the time 
came for the king to render his anfwer, he fent 
for the Engliih commiffioners, and on their 
entering his apartment, aflced Lord Denbigh, the 
chief commiflioner, whether they had received 
the power to alter any fubftantial part of the 
meflage with which they were entrufted, who 
anfwered they had not, whereupon his majefty 
handed his reply fealed, and they withdrew ; but 
on returning after a fliort lapfe of time. Lord 
Denbigh told the king, that though they had no 
authority to treat or do anything but receive his 
anfwer, yet they were not to be looked on as 
common meflengers to carry back an anfwer 
they had not feen; and that unlefs they might 
fee what was entrufted to them, they would not 
receive the anfwer, but depart without any. 
Charles fearing the confequences that would re- 
fult if the commiffioners returned without any 
reply, after a long controverfy was per- 
fuaded to remove the feal, but fo far from this 
procedure on the part of the king fufficing to 
allay the ftorm, it materially affifted to augment 
it, the governor enlifting himfelf on the fide of the 



54 Refolution to Efcape. 

comrmffioners, who by the opening of the def- 
patch, became aware that the king had waved the 
interefts of both the Parhament and the army 
to clofe with the Scots ; and then, on the termi- 
nation of the audience, apparently reflecting on 
the confequences to be apprehended from fuch 
refufal, he refolved to anticipate the vengeance 
of Parliament by flying the fame evening, or 
early the next morning, to the fliip fent by the 
queen, which ftill remained in the Southampton 
Water. 

It, however, now unfortunately happened that 
not only did the wind, which had hitherto re- 
mained favourable for his purpofe, fuddenly 
change to an oppofite quarter, but that Ham- 
mond, on the departure of the commiflioners, 
accompanied them to Newport, where he in all 
probability became aware of the inconfiderate 
orders and counter-orders which had jufl ema- 
nated from Afliburnham in relation to the move- 
ment of fome horfes on the oppofite coafl:, a^s on 
his return, he ordered the gates of the cafl:le to 
be infl:antly clofed, and the king to be confined 
to his chamber, the next afternoon difmifling his 
chaplains, not excepting even his own kinfman. 
Dr. Hammond, with fome other attendants. 



Difmifsal of Attendants . 5 5 

Including Afhburnham, Berkeley, and Legg, 
who on taking leave of his majefty, managed, 
to inform him " that they would leave the 
captain of the veflel, and two honeft and trufty 
gentlemen of the ifle to aflift him, whilft they 
fhould prepare everything on the oppofite fide 
of the water." 

Sir Thos. Herbert, in his Memoirs, erro- 
neoufly records this occurrence as taking place on 
the 8 th of February, inftead of at the time here 
fet down. In his defcription of it, he ftates that 
Hammond foon after the king's dinner came into 
the prefence chamber, and with a fhort preamble, 
addrefled himfelf to his majefty, by faying he 
was very forry to acquaint him that the orders 
he had the night before received from his fupe- 
riors, were to forbid Mr. Afhburnham, Mr. 
Legg, and the reft of his fervants who were 
with him at Oxford, any longer to remain in 
attendance on him, and that the jealoufies and 
apprehenfions of the time rendered it incumbent 
on him to difcharge them from the caftle. 

On hearing this, the king was not only fur- 
prifed, but his countenance evinced a confiderable 
degree of trouble; and after a ftiort interval, 
beckoning Mr. Afliburnham and fome others 



5 6 Difmifsal of Attendants . 

with his hand to approach him, he told them 
what the governor had communicated to him, 
and faid that it was an announcement that he 
certainly did not expect. 

Remonftrance on the part of thefe gentlemen 
was, of courfe, ufelefs; therefore, the next day 
after the king rofe from his dinner, they all 
came together, and proftrating themfelves at his 
majefty's feet, prayed God for his prefervation, 
then kiffing his hand departed, their affliction 
being only alleviated by the knowledge that they 
could not be excluded from their royal mailer's 
affection. 

After this parting, the king, feeling the bitter 
pang and fearful apprehenfion in his heart, fent 
for Colonel Hammond, between whom the fol- 
lowing converfation is recorded to have occur- 
red,* "a dramatic piece, full of natural touches, 
and perfectly characteriftic of Charles the 
Firft." 

King Charles. — Why do you ufe me thus ? 
Where are your orders for it? Was it the 
fpirit that moved you to it ? 

Hammond, who had no orders from the Par- 
liament, but likely fome advice from the com- 

* See Clarendon's " State Papers," Appendix, vol. ii. 



Charles ana Hammona. 57 

miffioners, faid nothing at firft, but afterwards 
laid it upon his majefty's anfwer. 

King Charles. — Did you not engage your ho- 
nour you would take no advantage from thence 
againfl: me? 

Hammond. — I faid nothing. 

King Charles. — You are an equivocating 

gentleman ; will you allow me any chaplains ? 

You pretend for liberty of confcience — ftiall I 

have none? 

Hammond. — I cannot allow you any chap- 
lain. 

King Charles. — You ufe me neither like a 
gentleman nor a Chriftian. 

Hammond. — I'll fpeak to you when you are in 
better temper. 

King Charles. -r-\ have flept well to-night. 

Hammond. — I have ufed you very civilly. 

King Charles. — Why do you not fo now, 
then? 

Hammond. — Sir, you are too high. 

King Charles. — My fhoe-maker's fault,* then ; 
my fhoes are of the fame laft, &c. {twice or 
thrice to this furpofe.) 

* Sir John Oglander relates this expreflion of the king's, but 
as having occurred on another occafion. 



58 The King's Conviction. 

King Charles. — Shall I have liberty to go 
about to take the air? 

Hammond. — No ; I cannot grant it. 

His majefty then charged him with his alle- 
giance, and told him he muft anfwer this. 

A converfation of dark and ftern fignificancej 
as from this time moft of the courtly fafhions 
were laid afide, the whole of the ifland beyond 
the caftle prohibited to the king's footfteps, and 
previous privileges of communication annulled, 
all thofe arguments which faction can bring 
forth to colour treafon being urged in juftifi- 
cation of fuch unprecedented meafures; whilfl 
Charles, thus made fully fenfible by the break- 
ing up of old aflbciations, that mere words were 
but a frail fecurity for protection, immediately 
commenced directing his own energies, and 
enlifting the fympathies of others, towards his 
enlargement, now well knowing that if he 
inertly remained, he remained only to deftruc- 
tion. 



CHAPTER III. 

Mutiny at Newport — Apprehenfion, Trial, and Execution of 
Captain Burley — Arrangements of the Royal Houfehold, 
and Habits of the King. 

'"pHESE were bufy days in the Ifleof Wight, 
fo manifold the rumours, fo frequent the 
changes, and fo rapid the events ; and notwith- 
ftanding the belief of Hammond that his orders 
would be vigoroufly fupported, if requifite, 
by the majority of the iflanders, the faith of 
the fuperior authorities in the integrity of thofe 
who there profefTed attachment to the Parlia- 
ment, appears to have been more than doubtful, 
as an intimation was fent him by Ireton not to 
confide wholly in the affections of the iflanders ; 
and in order that a fuffici'ent force might be at 
his command, detachments were fent over from 
Southampton, and immediately afterwards from 



6o Reinforcements. 

the head-quarters of Sir Thomas Fairfax, includ- 
ing Hammond's and Captain Rolph's own com- 
panies of foot, as well as Sir William Conftable, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Salmon, and Lieutenant-Co- 
lonel Goffe, to affift the governor, whilft provi- 
fions were ordered to be laid in at Carifbrook, 
and all the forts in the ifland ; and as an addi- 
tional meafure of precaution, a fleet under the 
command of Vice- Admiral Rainfborough, after 
fome little controverfy between the Lords and 
Commons, was fent to watch the entire coafl: of 
the ifland, a ftate of things very different to the 
circumfl;ances in this locality at the king's firfl; 
arrival. 

I have already fl:ated, that on the morning 
after the departure of the Parliamentary com- 
miflioners, amongft; others of the king's atten- 
dants, Afliburnham, Berkeley, and Legg were 
difmifled the caflile, whence they, during fome 
portion of the fame day, proceeded to New- 
port, Afliburnham remaining at an inn, whilfl: 
Berkeley and Legg vifited an acquaintance of 
theirs in fome other part of the town. 
After about an hour's flay, they heard a drum 
beat confufedly, and becoming aware that one 
Captain Burley, and divers others,- had rifen to 



hurley's Infurrection. 6i 

refcue the king, at once returned to the Inn, 
finding Mr. Afhburnham making fpeeches to the 
people, advifing them to defift from their vain 
enterprife ; but on the remonftrance of Sir John 
Berkeley, who deemed it exceedingly dangerous 
in their pofition to be found in communication 
with the populace, not knowing what interpreta- 
tion might be put upon language fo addrefled, 
however amicably intended, he gave over — advice, 
it was foon fhown, to have been moft oppor- 
tune, as many of the perfons feized are repre- 
fented to have had promifes of pardon and liberty 
made them on their implicating thefe three gen- 
tlemen in the tranfaction ; but as fuch a proce- 
dure was totally impoffible, an order was tranf- 
mitted by Hammond to the captain of Cowes 
Caftle to put them immediately on fliip-board, 
and tranfport them to the coaft of Hamplhire, 
where, it appears they remained fome weeks, in 
daily expectation of the accomplifhment of his 
majefty's defired efcape, and confequent arrival 
there. 

Although Alhburnham preferved his reputa- 
tion and his credit among the moft eminent of 
the loyalifts, much opprobrium has been showered 
on him for his fhare of the action in conducting 



62 Who Burley was. 

the king to the Ifle of Wight, it being more 
than infinuated that his honour in the tranfaction 
was not fo pure as he would have it confidered, 
and that if not actually corrupted, he had been 
outwitted by Cromwell and Ireton. It would, 
of courfe, be an impoflibility now to unravel 
the motives which then innately guided him, 
and his own narrative, in connection with the 
more candid ftatement of Sir John Berkeley, 
fhows him to be open to reproach, and liable to 
juft cenfure, for the fatally perfuafive influence 
he exercifed, perchance with integrity, but cer- 
tainly with indifcretion, over his majefty, on 
many occafions, when it is not improbable that 
contrary reafoning would have been better fitted 
to the pofition in which he was placed. 

Captain Burley, the inftigator of this mutiny, 
(as it was defignated in the letter defpatched by 
Hammond to announce the incident to the Houfe 
of Commons,) was of a good family in the ifland, 
his father having held the command of Yar- 
mouth Caflle there, and Captain Burley himfelf 
a captaincy in the Royal Navy, from which he 
was difcharged on the occafion of the fleet re- 
belling againft the king, when he joined the' 
army, and continued an officer of good account. 



Refult of Outbreak. 63 

until finding the king's affairs irremediably 
ruined, he retired to the Ifle of Wight, where 
many of his kinsfolk were refident, and chancing 
to be at Newport on the day the difmiffal of 
the king's attendants had created a confiderable 
commotion, the people feemingly feeling the 
indignity with fo great a degrefe of afperity, as to 
induce him to believe their refentment had 
deeper root than the mere effervefcence of other- 
wife inconfiderate language, caufed a drum to be 
beaten, and urged the inhabitants with the rally- 
ing cry of "for God, King Charles, and the 
people !" to feize upon Carifbrook Caflile and 
refcue the king, an attempt, as the refult provedj 
to be fhort-fighted and utterly impracticable, he 
being joined but by few of the towns-people,* 
except women and children, the entire mufter 
having only one mufket among them. On the 
fummons of the mayor, the military were fent 
from Carifbrook, the moft prominent parties 
arretted, and Burley himfelf committed to a 
dungeon in the caftle he had propofed to attack, 

* Perhaps, remembering the prominent part they had 
taken in originally fecuring the caftle for the Parliament 
in 1643 — 44.. 



64 Orders of the Houfe of Commons. 

for fafe keeping, until the pleafure of the Parlia- 
ment could be afcertained refpecting him. 

On the receipt of Hammond's communica- 
tion by the Houfe of Commons, an order was 
made ''that the general. Sir Thomas Fairfax, 
be required to grant a commiflion to the gover- 
nor of the Ifle of Wight, to try by martial law 
the chief actors in this mutiny, or that fhall 
make any further difturbance; and fuch as are 
not triable by martial law, are to be tried by a 
commiflion of oyer and terminer, to be forth- 
with fent down for that purpofe," a letter of 
thanks being the fame day voted to the mayor 
of Newport, in the Ifle of Wight, and to the 
well-aiFected perfons there for their care and 
good affections exprefl"ed in the late mutiny in 
the town by Captain Burley and others. 
Thus was this ill-judged and unfortunate, but 
well-meant tumult eafily allayed — the inhabi- 
tants of Newport, although mofl: liberal in pity- 
ing and indignant expreflions, evidently confi- 
dered the fl:ep taken by Burley to be too dange- 
rous an enterprize for them fingle-handed to 
embark in, oppofed as they would be by men 
who were then doing a foul wrong, capable 



■ Trial of Bur ley . 6 5 

of anything, and reftrained by no perfonal con- 
fiderations; whilft he, himfelf, after raifing the 
cry, and having no time to revolve the adtual 
poffibihty of the achievement in his mind, was, 
probably like many others who do daring aftions, 
forced on becaufe he had not the opportunity 
given him to think of retreating. 

The trial of Captain Burley^ which took place 
at Winchefter, is, with the exception of the 
king's, which fo foon followed, one of the 
moft peculiar in Englifh hiftory, although 
a perfect record of it has hitherto remained 
unpublifhed; for there was a judge, without 
any legal commiflion, afting againft the law — 
a king's attorney, without the royal defignation, 
adling in the king's nanie, againft the king, in 
purfuing a loyal fubjedb to death, for undertak- 
ing what he believed to be the faithful defence 
of his majefty — and charging him with trea- 
fon, becaufe he oppofed thofe who were com- 
mitting it. 

Sergeant Wild, a man of infamous charafter, 
who was made chief baron of the Exche- 
quer for fuch fervices, prefided ; and every other 
counfellor refufing to adt, Steele, who was imme- 
diately after the trial made recorder of London, 



6^ Trial of Bur ley . 

conduced the profecution; the indiftment charg- 
ing Burley with high treafon, for levying war 
againft the king, and endeavouring to engage 
the kingdom in a new war. 

Some little difficulty was at firfl: experienced in 
procuring a jury; but by enforcing the attend- 
ance of many of the county fequeftrators and 
others in the pay of the Parliament, the tafk 
was ultimately accomplifhed, the roll of their 
names being thus commented on in No. 4 of 
the Mercurius Dogmaticus : 

"Edward Heighes — fuch another knave {I 
warrant you) as Heighes, the bookfeller, at 
Fleet-bridge. Robert Cooper — let every tub 
Hand upon its own bottom. John Knight — 
noble only by name. William Doleing — 
let him know forrow. Thomas Coles — Oh! 
what a price might he have been fold for for a 
Chriftmas block, when coals were kept from 
London. Peter Percival — ^what kin to Per- 
cival, once minifter of Bafmgftoke ? William 
Fisher — no swearer, I'll warrant, tho' he aflifted 
to give up a lying verdid: with the reft. Ai^- 
thur Lipscomb — of Bradley, coxcomb. Wil- 
liam Hiloker — there's a ftoole. John Elliot 
not allied to Tom Elliot, I'll warrant him. 



Trial of Bur ley. 67 

WrtLiAM Hunt — Adeon's kinfman. John 
BiDLEcoMB — two coxcombs in one jury. An- 
thony Casbert — a fharp man, fure, Theo^ 
PHiLUS Smith — Mulciber be thy protecftor." 

A curious and fignificant compilation; but 
one, of courfe, only applicable to the feelings and 
eomprehenfion of the public at the time of its 
publication. 

On the 2'2nd of January, 1648, the grand 
jury, so named, aflembled at the place of trial, 
and after hearing a mod violent and accufatory 
fermon againfl; the prifoner, delivered by one 
Ellis, an Antinomian, the following charge was 
read by Steele : " That the faid Captain Burley 
was the chief caufe, or incendiary, for caufing a 
drum to be beat up for God and King Charles, 
at Newport, in the Ifle of Wight, and caufing a 
mutiny there, contrary to divers ordinances of 
Parliament made in that behalf;" which he 
undertook to fhow the jury was treafon, under 
the ftatute of 25th Edward the Third, and 
other ftatutes ; but on their retiring, the queftion 
was agitated, even among men fo feleded, as to 
the legal evidence on which they were urged to 
find a bill of treafon againfl: the captain, and 
they returned into court, requiring further in-' 

F 2 



6 8 Trial of Bur ley: 

formation on the fubjeft; becaufe the ftatutes 
which Mr. Steele had quoted were found to be 
repealed, and confequently of no efFeft ; whilfl: 
the 25 th of Edward the Third did not appear 
to them to touch the matter in queftion, fince 
the only high treafons there fet down, were — 

I ft. The compaffing or imagining the king's 
death or the queen's, or their eldeft fon and heir. 

2nd. The violating of the king's companion, 
or the king's eldeft daughter unmarried^ or the 
wife of the eldeft fon and heir. 

3rd. The levying of war againft our fovereign 
lord the king in his realm, or to be adherent to 
the king's enemies in his realm, igiving to them 
aid or comfort in the realm or elfewhere; 

4th. The counterfeiting the king's great feal, 
or his privy feal, or his money. 

5th. The bringing of falfe money into the realm; 

6th. The flaying the chancellor, treafurer, or 
the king's juftices, being in their places doing 
their offices. 

If any of the treafons therein mentioned were 
applicable, it dould be only the firft or third, 
and they did not underftand that Captain Burley 
had any thought of compaffing or imagining 
the death of the king, the queen, or their eldeft 



Trial of Bur ley . 6 9 

fon and heir, or of levying war againfl: the king, 
or of adhering to his enemies, 

Steele replied, that the ftatutes to which his 
attention had been called by the jury, were 
indeed repealed, but that fie had forgotten to tell 
them fo, for which he requefted their pardon, 
and that the 25 th Edward the Third was the 
ftatute on which he relied, afking them whether 
they did not believe that the king was virtually, 
in the Parliament, 3. courfe of argument which 
feems to have removed all fcruples, as a true 
bill was thereupon found. Burley pleaded 
"Not Guilty," aflerted his right to challenge 
the jury who were to try him, and addrefs him- 
felf to the court, both of which requefts were 
denied by the judge, who faid in anfwer to the 
latter demand, "Captain Burley, you Ihall be 
fure to have a fair trial, and be heard to fpeak 
at full; but now the king's evidence is to be 
heard, and therefore you muft forbear," 

The witnefles produced againfl; him were a 
boy, a woman, and a man. 

The Boy. — Said he was 14 years of age, and 
that Captain Burley wiflied him to go for. the 
(town) drum, which he accordingly did, and that 
it was afterwards taken from him. 



JQ Trial of Burley: 

, The Woman, — Said fhe heard Captain Burley 
fay he would be the- firft that fliould enter. 

TJie Man. — That the mayor of Newport 
came to the drummer to demand the drum, who 
gave him ill language, and that therefore Captain 
Burley reproved him for fo doing, afking him 
whether he knew who it was he was fpeaking to, 
and telling him it was the mayor of the town 
who demanded the drum, which was accordingly 
then delivered to him. 

This was the evidence for the profecution; 
and on the jury's retiring, Burley defired the 
performance of the promife the judge had made 
him of a fair hearing for himfelf, but to little 
purpofe ; he being told that all he could fay 
would be only for the information of the jury, 
who were gone, and it was therefore too late for 
him now to fpeak. As might have been expefted, 
after fuch an almoft incredible mockery of juf- 
tice, the verdidt of guilty was returned, and a 
fentence pafTed in every way worthy of the man 
who delivered it — "That his body was to be 
drawn upon an hurdle to the gallows and there 
hanged, and afterwards cut down and quartered, 
and the quarters hung upon flakes and pikes. 
Non pana, sed caufa, facit meriyr«m-~it is not 



Addrefs from the fury. ji 

the punifhment, but the caufe, which makes a 
martyr." 

The other perfons taken with Burley being 
only jndid:ed for a riot, were punifhed by fine 
and imprifonment. 

On the 23 rd of January, the day before that 
appointed for his execution, the refult of the 
trial was reported to the Houfe of Commons, 
but upon fome confideration the fentence was 
for the prefent reprieved; and it having pleafed 
the grand jury, ere they feparated, to addrefs 
the Parliament on the then exifting ftate of 
things, there was the fame day a paper read in 
the houfe, purporting to be the "Humble and 
thankful acknowledgment and declaration of 
the County of Southampton, prefented by the 
grand jury of the faid county, at the fitting of 
a commiflion of oyer and terminer, to be pre- 
fented by the knights and burgeffes that ferve 
for the county. 

"To the Right Honourable the Houfe of 
Commons afl"embled in Parliament. 

" As we deteft witli horror the levying of a 
new war, fo we defire with our hearts the firm 
fettlement of a lafting peace. After fo many 



72 Addrefs from the Jury. 

applications to the king made by the Parliament, 
and efpecially after the laft addrefs, wherein the. 
houfes (as we humbly conceive) demand nothing 
but what is moft eflential to the fafety of the 
people; and after the king's abfolute negative 
to the laft meflage of the honourable houfes, we 
exceedingly doubt of any fettlement by future 
application to the king; and therefore we do 
moft humbly acknowledge the wifdom and good- 
nefs of the Parliament in refolving to fettle the 
peace of this poor, miferable, diftracted nation; 
and by the bleffing of God (as in duty we are 
bound) we ftiall not only moft willingly and 
cheerfully fubmit and acquiefce in fuch fettle- 
ment as they, in their grave judgment, ftiall 
find to be moft conducible to our peace ; but 
alfo, in our feveral placings and callings, fliall 
heartily endeavour to promote the fame. 

"Signed by the jury as before rendered." 

For this addrefs the thanks of the houfe 
were ordered, and Sir H. Mildmay received a 
similar vote for the fervices he had rendered at 
the time of the trial. 

After Hurley's condemnation, a vain endeavour 
was made to obtain a commutation of his fen- 



The Execution. 73 

tence into a banifhment for life; and his wife 
petitioned the judge that his eftate fhould 
not be fubjefted to forfeiture, but divided be- 
tween her and her children, and also that the body 
of her hufband might be delivered over to her 
for burial. Wild replied, that as her hufband 
was a traitor, the eftate was not in his power, 
but in that of the Parliament; and if he 
granted her other requeft, " he thought he fhould 
be doing her a difcourtefy in it —for if his body 
was fufFered to hang — the cavaliers that came 
by would fay, ' There hangs honeft Captain 
Burley, that was true to his king.' "* 

The reprieve was, however, but of fhort dura- 
tion, as the execution is recorded to have taken 
place on the 3rd February ; and becaufe no one 
in Hampfhire could be prevailed on to under- 
take the executioner's fundlions, Gregory, the 
London official, was taken to Winchefter to 
perform his hateful duty. Burley took leave 
of his wife and children at the door of the 
prifon; and on entering the cart, requefted to 
be driven fpeedily to his journey's end, in order 
that he might obtain endlefs peace and reft. 

* Relation of the proceedings againft Captain Burley at 
Winchefter, 1648. 



74 ^^^ Execution. 

On coming to the place of execution, where 
were already the faggots to confumehis bowels and 
the cleaver to divide his body, Burley requefted 
the 1 2th chapter of Ifaiah to be read to him, 
together with the 8 th chapter of the Romans, 
and the 69th Pfalm; and having taken leave of 
the world, and repeated a prayer he had written 
for the occafion, which he prefented to the IherifF, 
and which was afterwards publiflied, afcended 
the gallows, where he was again moved by a 
minifter to be humbled, that the Lord might 
have mercy upon him, and to confefs his fms to 
God, particularly the treafon for which he was to 
die. Burley faid he was a finner, but no traitor ; 
and on being told what a fair trial he had, and 
how legally he was condemned, anfwered, it 
was true the judge condemned him upon 
the bench, the minifters in their pulpits, and 
the gentlemen of the county in their verdifts, 
but ftill he was no traitor; whereupon he was 
urged how bloody an ad he had agitated in 
seeking to take away the king through blood ; 
to which he replied, he was happy to die fo, 
and hoped his blood might be the laft that 
fhould be so flied ; when he again pra.yed fer- 
vently, and, concluding with the Lord's Prayer, 



T!he Execution. 75 

proclaimed, with undaunted courage. Fear God 
and honour the King. The hangman thereupon 
pulled the cap over his face, and the unfor- 
tunate man, as he was turned oiF, called out, 
"Lord, preferve my foul — Lord Jefus, receive 
my foul !" 

Such are the particulars of this remarkable 
trial, the firft precedent of a man being brought 
to a formal arraignment, found guilty of high 
treafon, and deprived of life for adhering to the 
king; a procedure which, as Clarendon juftly 
remarks, made a deeper impreffion upon the 
hearts of all men than the cruelties which had 
been already exercifed in the courts of war ; for, 
though they took the lives of many innocent 
men, their eftates were allowed to defcend to 
their families; but when it was seen that the 
condemnation of high treafon before a judge of 
the land might accrue _ for ferving the king, and 
their eftates be thereby confifcated, many began 
to think they would be juftified in keeping their 
hearts entire, without involving themfelves by 
their actions in a capital tranfgreflion. 

Scarcely a day now pafTed that was not marked 
by fome new occurrence indicative of the reftraint 
Charles would ultimately have to endure, aj- 



76 Pqfition of Charles. 

though, as the new defigns of his opponents' 
were gradually developed, he derived the fatis- 
fadtion of finding many who had formerly 
aided the contrivers of thofe machinations which 
had refulted in th'e unforefeen thraldom of their 
king, folicitous to wipe off the inadvertencies into 
which they had been so led, by a proportionate 
zeal in any notable fervice that could now be ren- 
dered him. It being a Angular but truthful afier- 
tion, that the mofl: energetic and faithful of his 
adherents, and thofe who preferved their reputa- 
tions moft unfpotted in the tranfadtions connedbed 
with his attempted efcapes from Carifbrook, 
were the men who thus voluntarily proffered 
their allegiance from the ranks of the Parlia- 
ment for that efpecial purpofe. 

Charles was, in fadt, now a clofe prifoner; 
although fuch was the vigilance and ingenuity of 
his confidants that an adtjve correfpondence was 
immediately commenced and fecretly carried on 
between the royal captive and his friends in 
London, Scotland, and France, in defiance of the 
endeavours of a committee fitting daily at Derby 
Houfe, compofed of feven peers, viz., the Earls 
of Manchefter, Northumberland, Kent, and 
Warwick, and the Lords Say and Seale,Wharton 



Committee at Derby Houfe. "jy 

and Roberts, together with thirteen merri- 
bers of the Houfe of Commons, Mr. Pierre- 
pont, Mr. Fiennes, Sir Harry Vane, Harry 
-Vane, junior. Sir William Armine, Sir Arthur 
Hafelrig, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir John Evelyn, 
Lieut.-General Cromwellj Mr. St. John, Mr. 
Wallop, Mr. Crew, and Mr. Brown, who held 
power to reprefs tumults and infurredions, to 
raife forces as they faw occafion, and to whom 
thofe having the cuftody of the king were for the 
future to be refponfible. The power to place 
and difplace any attendant, or to ufe any mea- 
fures in relation to the fafety and fecurity of his 
majefty's perfon, had been already deputed to 
Colonel Hammond and Sir William Conftable 
by vote of the Houfe of Commons, on the 5 th 
January, 1 648 ; but on Sir William Conftable's 
receiving another appointment, a few days after- 
wards, at the suppbfed inftigation of Cromwell, 
the fole refponfibility devolved on Hammond, 
by whom an intimation from the above-named 
committee was received on the 21ft of the fame 
month, informing him that as they were under 
an oath of fecrecy,* he might fafely commu- 
nicate any intelligence to them, and that for its 

* Letter to Hammond. 



yS Committee at "Derby Houfi. 

better concealment a cipher ftiould be tran^ 
mitted to him ; whilft fo fubtle were their pre^ 
cautions, and well-devifed their efpionage,. that 
there was fcarcely a movement of the king, or 
of thofe in correfpondenee with him, but was 
henceforward known to them; the firft inform- 
ation of many of the intrigues neeeflarily en- 
tered into for the purpofe of accompliftiing the 
efcape of Charles, being adlually communicated 
to Hammond from Derby Houfe, although 
contrived in his own refidence, and almoft in 
his immediate prefence. 

The death of Captain Burley, which had at 
firft materially afFeded the king, was, in the 
prefTure of other matters, in the prefent pofir 
tion of his affairs, quickly forgotten ; the princi- 
pal private griefs now affedling him being the 
lofs of his chaplains (his majefty's wifh for 
the return of whom, or at leaft Dr. Hammond 
and Dr. Sheldon, had been reprefented to the 
Parliament); as he was firm in his purpofe of 
abftaining from hearing thofe who miniftered 
according to the dire6tory then practifed ; and the 
reftriction of his ufual out-of-door exercife. This 
determination, however, did not prevent his 
private devotions, which he. daily and care- 





A. B. Cane Head, and top of Cane Head, used by Charles the First at Carisbrook j 

now in the possession of Thomas Cooke, Esq., of Newport. 

C. Bing worn by King Charles at Carisbrook ; now in the posseBsion of 

George Wallace, Esq., of Southaea. 




The Hall in which the Treaty of Newport was held in 1648. 



Recreation of the King. jg 

fully attended to, especially obferving the Lord's- 
day by reading the Bible and other books fitting 
him for prayer and meditation in his clofet. 
The cefTationof his accuftomed exercife, which was 
always more violent than moderate, as when he 
walked on foot he rather trotted than paced, he 
went fo faft, and invariably ufed a cane or ftafF, as 
was the cuftom of the time,* involved him, how- 
ever, in frequent bickerings with the governor ; and 

• An anceftor, of the name of Howe, of Mr. Thomas Cooke, 
now refidcnt at Newport, in the Ifle of Wight, was at this time 
mafter gunner at the caftle of Carifliroolc, and as a mark of the 
king's fenfe of the attention paid him by that officer, he on one 
occafion prefented him with the ftaff he was fo ufmg. The 
ivory head of this relic is ftill in the poffeffion of Mr. Cooke ; it 
is inlaid with filver, and unfcrews, the top forming a fcent-box. 
Mr. Howe had also a fon, a little boy who was a great favourite 
of Charles : one day, feeing him with a child's sword by his 
fide, the king aflceil him what he intended doing with it? " To 
defend your majefty from your majefty's enemies," was the 
reply; an anfwer which fo pleafed the king, that he gave the 
child the fignet ring he was in the habit of wearing upon his 
finger. The ring has defcended to a Mr. Wallace, a kinfman 
of Mr. Cooke. 

It is alfo recorded that Mr. Worfley, of Gatcombe, received 
his majefty's watch (ftill preferved in the family) as a gift, the 
morning he was leaving the ifland ; but this fuppofition muft 
be erroneous, as Mr. Worsflcy was at that time not only pro- 
fcribed from the precinftsj but the removal of the king fo fecret 
that none were aware of the procedure. The probability there- 
fore ia that Mr. Worfley faw him in his route from Hurft Caftle 
to London, and then received this interefting memorial. 



8o ReJiriSiions in the Houfehold. 

on the 4th of February, he pointedly told him, 
that that was the laft " argumentation " he would 
hold with him about it, and he might yet ere long 
be beholden to one of his fons for his life. But 
little were his appeals heeded, and no fhadow of 
hope appeared by which he could difcern the pro- 
bability of any relief, as not only were one 
thoufand pounds granted for repairing the caftle,' 
but on the following day, the 5 th of February, 
Hammond was expressly ordered to remove fuch 
attendants about his majefty as he could not im- 
plicitly truft in, and power at the fame time de- 
puted him " to appoint eight fuch perfons as he 
can repofe confidence in to ferve the king until 
the family arrangements now in progrefs fhould 
be fettled by the general," who demanded a lift 
from Hammond of " thofe who were then about 
his majefty, as well as gentlemen in the ifland fit 
to be confided in, and that if he could not fill up 
the number of thirty, to which they were to be 
reftrifted, including gentlemen, their fervants, 
cooks, butlers, &c., the quality of thofe he could 
not fupply was to be ftated, in order that they 
might be fent from London." Ten pounds were 
allowed for the expenfes of the king's table, nine 
pounds for the pay of a guard of two hundred 



Habits of the King. 8i 

men and their officers, and thirty fhillings for 
the governor's table daily, and Hammond alfo 
received a gratuity of one thoufand pounds, with 
an annuity of five hundred pounds per annum to 
be fettled on him and his heirs. 

Of the habits of the king at this period of 
his imprifonment, a very perfect account may 
be rendered by following the ftatements of Her- 
bert and Rufliworth, wherein it appears that it 
was his usual pradice, the weather being fair,, in 
the morning and afternoon, to walk round the 
caftle walls, accompanied by Hammond, who, as 
a farther means of recreation, converted the place 
of arms without the caftle wall, • but within the 
counterfcarp, into a bowling-green, with a fum- 
mer-houfe, where, as the fpririg advanced, the 
king was in the pra6bice of fpending many vacant 
hours. At his dinner-table his majefty converfed 
with his attendants, principally refpedting the 
occurrences tranfpiring in the other parts of the 
kingdom; and after dinner foon retired to hig 
chamber, where he remained fecluded, but in- 
variably obferved his allotted hours for devotion 
9,nd writing.' The unpleafant altercations with 
the governor, for a ftiort time, apparently ceafed ; 
and, notwithftanding his reftraint, it, was the 



82 Habits of the King. 

cuftom of difeafed perfons, troubled with the evil, 
to refort to the ifland from all parts of the king- 
dom, and to ftay in Newport and the furround- 
ing villages, until they could find means of accefe 
within the caftle, there to watch the opportunity 
of the king's going to the bowling-green, to pre- 
fent themfelves before him and be touched for 
their diftemper. 

The chaplain to the governor and the garrifon 
was a Mr. Troughton, a young man, a graduate 
in one of the univerfities. He feldom failed 
being in the prefence-chamber when the king 
dined, as, before his majefty retired to his cham- 
ber, he would ufually take feveral turns in the 
room, and pleafantly enter into a difputation with 
him, he being capable of arguing pretty well in 
defence of the tenets he held in oppofition to 
fome of the ceremonies of the church, and on 
the difcipline of the epifcopacy. On thefe occa- 
fions Mr. Troughton was generally very earned 
in maintaining his aflertions, which were never 
difcouraged by Charles, becaufe, as he was the 
better logician, and poffefled a fuperior know- 
ledge of hiftoric and controverfial points, his 
majefty always had the advantage, and thei* 
partings were confequently invariably amicable. 



Habits of the King. 83 

[But it occurred, on one occafion, during their 
difcourfe, when the young difputant was ftanding 
between a lieutenant of foot (who had his fword 
in his hand, intently liftening to their conver- 
fation) and a Mr. Duncomb, a gentleman well 
known to thofe who were prefent, that the king, 
in the heat of the moment, feized the fword fo 
unexpeftedly, as not only to aftonifh the officer 
but frighten the chaplain, who did not compre- 
hend the reafon, .until Mr. Duncomb falling 
upon his knee, his majefty laid the fword upon 
his flioulder, and thereby conferred the honour 
of knighthood, faying it was done in purfuance 
of a promife he had made to his relations. 

About the fame period, a Mr. Sedgwick, who 
had been a preacher in the Parliamentarian army, 
came to Carifbrook for the purpofe of difcourfing 
with the king on his fpiritual concerns, and pre- 
fenting a work he had written, entitled " Leaves 
of the Tree of Life," an explication of the 22nd 
chapter of the Revelation of St. John, in the 
belief that his majefty would derive much benefit 
as well as comfort, in his prefent pofition, from 
its perufal. He defired the governor's interceflion 
to procure him an audience of the king, as well 
as permiffion to addrefs him, a requeft to which 

G 2 



84 Habits of the King. 

Charles readily acceded, when he was informed 
that the applicant had journeyed from London 
with that efpecial defign. ^ 

Mr. Sedgwick offered his book in a refpedtful 
manner; but the king, after reading fome fmall 
portion, returned it with the remark, that by 
wh^t he had read, he thought the author ftood 
in need of fleep ; an obfervation the minifter 
received with much fatisfaflion, and departed. 

The next day there likewife arrived a Mr. 
Harrington, a gentleman of property, near Bath, 
upon the fame charitable errand. The king, 
however, having previoufly heard fomething 
concerning him, proffered his thanks for fuch 
good intentions, but faid he had then no defire 
to enter into a difputation on controverfial points ; 
whereupon Mr. Harrington wifhed the king 
much happinefs, and returned homewards. 

By the middle of the month of February, 
Fairfax completed his difpofitions for the future 
governance of the royal houfehold, and the 
minor arrangements were left to the difcretion 
of Hammond, who, by command of the Par- 
liament, iffued ftridt orders that no greater, 
number than thirty- perfons fhould be allowed 
within the walls of the caftle as fervants of the 



Hammond's Regulations. 85 

king, on any pretence whatever; whilfl: a 
fecond regulation provided for an unceafing 
furveillance on his majefty's movements, by the 
feledlion of four gentlemen to wait and watch by 
turns, two and two, at the door of his apart- 
ment by day, when he was within it, and at 
the entrance of his chamber by night, againft 
which their beds were to be fo clofely drawn as 
to prevent all means of ingrefs or egrefs, until 
removed in the morning, or by the wifh of the 
governor. Thofe felefted for this fervice, and 
approved by the committee at Derby Houfe 
and the Houfe cf Commons, were Mr. Thoma^ 
Herbert, Mr. Mildmay, Mr. Prefton, and Cap- 
tain Silas Titus. 

A biography of Captain Titus is rendered in 
the introduction to this work; and as, among the 
other perfons approved by the governor and the 
general, whofe names appear in the progrefs of 
it, Ofborn, Dowcett, and Firebrace, will be 
recognifed as the most prominent, it becomes 
neceffary here to obferve that Ofborn, by extrac- 
tion a gentleman, was oftenfibly recommended 
to Colonel Hammond by Lord Wharton, to be 
placed in fome near attendance about the king 
as a fpy, an introdudion which procured hini 



86 I'he King^s Attendants. 

the occupation of gentleman-ufher to his majefty ; 
Dowcett had been formerly in the fervice of the 
Earl of Holland ; and Firebrace, a former depen- 
dent of the king, on receiving an order foon after 
the coming of Charles to the Ifle of Wight, to 
haften to him with what intelligence he could 
procure, went to Carifbrook by permiffion of the 
fpeaker, was made one of the pages of his majefty's 
bedchamber, and for some time managed to 
efcape fufpicion, although continually engaged in 
furthering the king's clandeftine correfpondence. 
*' His firfl; endeavour," (he writes,) after his, 
arrival, was "to give his majefty an account 
of bufinefs, and to fafely put into his hands the 
letters he had for him — a difficult proceeding, as 
there were fpies perpetually upon him ;" but for 
his purpofq he found a very convenient and 
private place in the king's bedchamber, where 
he depofited the papers, and intimated their fecre- 
tion there to the king the fame night, by putting 
a note into his hand as lie was preparing to go tor 
bed ; whereupon the next morning, he found an 
anfwer in the appointed place, in which his 
majefty was pleafed to exprefs his fatisfaftion at 
what he had done, and direfted a continuance of 
the adopted njode of converfation, — an arrange- 



Correfpondence. 87 

ment which proved fo available for fome time, 
that Charles never wanted good intelligence from 
the queen, the prince, and many of his friends, 
feveral defpatches being every week so conveyed, 
not one of which mifcarried. 



CHAPTER IV. 

Condition of the King — Arrangements for the Tranfmiflion of 
his Correfpondence — Overtures and Services of Captain Titus 
and others — Firft attempted Efcape — Change of Lodging — 
And Arrangement for the Reception of Charles in the Quarters 
of the Chief OiEcer. i 



TTAD any effort been made by Hammond to 
confole the unfortunate monarch in his 
calamity, there would be honour due to his 
memory ; but it does not appear that any perfonal 
defire to alleviate the king's misfortunes was ever 
manifefted, as in all his communications with the 
committee at Derby Houfe, as well as with Fair- 
fax, Cromwell, Ireton, and others, he rather evinced 
a ftern, vindidtive fhow of fatisfaction at " the 
fpecial fervice" on which he was employed, than 
fuch confideration as majefty demanded, humbled 
as it was before him. The captivity of Charles 



Xhs King's Correfpondence'. 89 

is therefore a tale of unvaried forrow, for day 
glided away after day; and week fucceeded 
week, whilft his adverfaries were not only abufing 
their advantage over him, but at this very time 
meditating the terrible confummation of the 
artful game of their ambition, which fo foon 
followed. 

The furprifing fecret intercourfe which Charles 
kept up with his friends in his various capti- 
vities, is no ordinary evidence of the ftrong per- 
fonal attachments this unhappy prince, when 
deftitute of means to bribe the fordid, or to 
flatter the ambitious, infpired in many of his 
enemies. He was rarely deferted or betrayed, 
although it is certain that fome underlings took 
advantage of their knowledge of his clandeftine 
tranfaftions, as well as correfpondence. 

Witherings, of the Poft-ofEce, and one Lowe, 
a merchant, are fuppofed to have been of this 
defcription of agent during the king's imprifon- 
ment at Carifbrook, and the perfons alluded to 
by Lord Clarendon, as fome of the "many who 
did undertake to perform thefe offices, and did 
not make good what they promifed." 

Firebrace, in one of his notes to Charles, 
obferves, " You keep intelligence with fomebody 



90 ^he King's Correfpondence. 

that betrays you, for there is a letter of yours 
fent to the governor (Hammond) from Derby 
Houfe ;" to which the king's reply is, " Is' it 
poffible that the rogue Witherings hath dif- 
covered thofe I fuperfcribe to my wife, and 
hath fent one of my letters to the committee ? 
Enquire and fee if I have not guefled right. 
Do not fend that letter of mine to the poft- 
houfe, but either to Dr. Fraifer or my Lady 
Carlifle, with a caution not to truft the poft- 
mafters." 

In all accounts of the king's fojourn at 
Holmby, mention is made of a Major Bofville, 
as the perfon intruded with the tafk of condud:- 
ing his majefty's fecret correfpondence, and who 
feems to have effeded his purpofe by occa- 
fionally transforming himfelf into a variety of 
perfonages, fometimes a mariner, fometimes a 
(Sountryman or mendicant. 

For thefe treafonable manoeuvres, as they 
were termed, Bofville was feveral times com- 
mitted to prifon, but as he alfo excelled in the 
Angular art of efcaping from his keepers, he 
invariably foon recovered his liberty. 

Afhburnhafti, Berkeley, and Legg, on their 
ftimmary ejedtioh from the Ifle of Wight, had 



The King's Correfpondence. 9 1 

ftationed themfelves at Netley Caftle, near South-; 
ampton, which thenceforward became one of 
the principal rendezvous for thofe royalifts who 
enjoyed the more immediate confidence of the 
king. One of the moft prominent of thefe 
perfonages was Major Bofville, who here again, 
in conjundtion with Mrs. Wheeler, the royal 
laundrefs at Carifhrook, and her affiftant Mary, 
voluntarily undertook his old employment. 

This arrangement, however, foon came to the 
knowledge of the committee at Derby Houfe, and 
fuch fpeedy intimation of the important fatSb was 
tranfmitted to Hammond, that he was materially 
enabled to counterad the efficiency of their plans. 
A difcovery took place on one occafion, in con- 
fequence of the ftupidity of the meffenger dif- 
patched from Bofville's veffel to the caftle, where 
he himfelf was afraid to venture. This man, get- 
ting partly tipfy at Newport, {b far forgot his 
inftrudtions, that on reaching Carifbrook, inftead 
of afking for Mrs. Wheeler or her maid Mary, to 
either of whom he was authorifed to deliver his 
cliarge, remembered only that he was to fee a 
woman of the name of Mary ; and' although he 
was admitted within the walls, his condud was 
(b fufpicious that he was watched by the guard. 



92 T^he King's Correfpondence'. 

and seized on their obferving that he made 
direftly for the king's apartment, inftead of 
ftiaping his tourfe to the portion of the caftle 
allotted to the royal domeftics. In his pocket was 
found a packet addreffed to Captain Mildmay, a 
procedure adopted to efcape fufpicion ; and on 
admitting he was ordered to deliver it into the 
king's handsj he, as well as Mary the affiftant 
laundrefs, were committed to fafe-keeping, whilfl: 
Bofville, who quickly received intelligence of the 
mifcarriage of his truft, quietly eifedled his 
efcape. 

The packet, on being opened by Hammond, 
was found to contain two letters from one 
J. Darley, two from N. D., one from the 
queen, another from the princefs, and one from 
the Duke of York, who, with the Duke of 
Gloucefter and their filler the Princefs Eliza- 
beth, (then detained at York Houfe, under the 
care of the Duke of Northumberland,) had 
remained in ignorance of their parent's imprison- 
ment, until informed by a fervant of the duke 
that fuch was the cafe. On receiving permifllon 
from Northumberland to write to his filler the 
Princefs of Orange, the duke feized tlie fame op- 
portunity to indite a letter in cipher to tlie king. 



The King's Correfpondence. 93 

which was handed to Bofville by Mr. Oudart, 
but unluckily failed in delivery, from the caufe 
just mentioned. 

Thefe letters were of courfe immediately 
tranfmitted by Hammond to London, and the 
queen's epiftle was found to ftate, that during 
the fad condition he (Charles) was in, nothing 
could bring more comfort to her than hearing 
from him, and wondered that on the lafl: return 
of the defpatch ftie had heard nothing from him, 
but fuppofes the letters were intercepted. A 
confiderable portion then followed in cipher, 
and the conclufion implored the mercy of God 
for the prefervation of his majefty, and his 
power for the deftrudtion of his enemies. 

The princefs humbly reprefented her duty to 
her father, and craved fhe might be fo honoured 
by him, and made fo happy as to underftand by 
a line or two under his royal hand, the good 
news of his health, for which fhe daily prayed. 

A committee of the houfe was appointed 
to examine the duke,* who would acknow- 

* On the 21ft of the month of April following, the Duke of 
York effe6led his efcape by one of thofe romantic feries of ad- 
ventures which feem almoft allied to the name of Stuart. It was 
an adventure to which he was urged by the queen, with the ap- 
provaI;of the king. Confequently the opportunity for fecuring his 



94 '^^^ Duke of Tork's Letter^ 

Jedge nothing except he had written to his father 
to let him know the queen and his brothers 

freedom was eagerly fought for' by the prince, and an immediats 
advantage taken when the probability of a fuccefsfiil termination 
to his endeavours prcfented itfelf. By the report rendered to the 
Houfe of Commons, it appears the manner was in this wife : — 
" The duke, with his brother and lifter were, after their suppei*, 
playing in a room by themfelves, when he privately ftepped 
down ftairs without either coat, cloak, ftioes or ftockings, and by 
means of a door communicating from the garden to the park, 
whereof he had obtained a key, made his efcape from his im- 
prifonment." The Duke of Gloucefter with the Princefs Eliza- 
beth, however, ftiU remained prifoners, and were foon after con- 
figned to the care of the infamous Lady Carlifle at St. Jartes's, 
who had a grant of 3000/. per annum for their maintenance, with 
a ftrift injunftion that they were to be deprived of all princely dis- 
ftinftion. From St. James' .however, they were ultimately confignisd 
to the faddeft of ail fad places to them, the caftle of Carilbrook, the 
fcene of their father's cmeleft imprifonment, and from whence he 
was dragged to die. It is well known that the princefs died in this 
caftle on the 8th of September, 1650, of a fever brought on by 
anguifti and defpair, defpite of all the medicine and remedies tried 
by Sir Theodore Mayerne, her father's faithful phyfician, who, oh 
becoming aware of her proftrate condition, came to Cariftjrook 
to prefcribe for her. She is faid to have expired alone, whilft 
fitting in the apartment allotted to her, with her cheek reclining 
on her parent's laft gift-^his Bible. Her interment took place 
in the church of St. Thomas's, at Newport, on the z4th ,of the 
fame month, attended by the corporate authorities of Newport, 
■with fuch little fliow of ftate as was then permitted, Crawford 
fays flie was a lady of incomparable abilities and admirable vir- 
tues ; but being by order of the regicides fent to the tedious 
prifonof her royal father, and more fenfiblc of his murder than 
the lofs of her own liberty, ftie wasted away, and expired with 
the extremity of melancholy and grief, in the 15th year of her 
age. The Duke of Gloucefter remained at Cariflarook^ with no 



Situation of the ^een. '95 

and fifters were in good health, and that he 
had burnt the cipher; but on his becoming 
aware it was likely he would be committed to 
the Tower, he sent a letter of fubmiflion, in- 
clofing the cipher ; a refult which probably 
explains the medium through which the comr 
mittee were afterwards enabled to decipher much 
of the king's intercepted. correfpondence. 

Queen Henrietta Maria, who was moft unpo- 
pular with the principal among the Englifh cava- 
liers, was at this era refiding either at the Louvre, 
or St. Germains ; and although much calumny 
has been heaped upon her by moft hiftorians for 
her alleged negled of the king during his im- 
prifonment at Carifbrook, an impartial examina- 
tion of the facts goes very far to difpel fuch an 
opinion. Her own lituation was deplorable; 
and on the return of the fhip fhe had with great 
difficulty raifed the means to defpatch to South- 
ampton, fhe well knew the impolicy and danger 
of advifing Charles to betake himfelf to the 
French capital during the alarming juncture 
which then prevailed there. The troubles and 
deprivations of Henrietta Maria, in the year 

other flyle than "Mr. Hany," till 165a, when Cromwell per- 
mitted him to embark for HoUa&d. 



96 I'he Prince of Wales. 

1648, were, in truth, in some particulars more 
enduring than even thofe of the king, and as the 
fortunes of her royal confort grew darker and 
darker, her own lowered dark enough. 

The Prince of Wales, afterwards Charles the 
Second, was alforefident in Paris at the commence- 
ment of that year, engaged, until he departed to 
take the command of the Englifh fhips which had 
forfaken Cromwell and taken refuge at Helvoet- 
fluys, in devifing and counfelling meafures for 
the relief of his father. A touching memorial of 
the prince's folicitude being deducible from " the 
litany and prayers compiled by order of the 
prince for the king of Great Britain in his fad 
condition, and conftantly ufed in his highnefs's 
chapel, at eight in the morning and at five in 
the afternoon, daily."* 

" O moft gracious Lord God, the ruler of 
princes when they are on their thrones, and their 
proteftion when they are in peril, look down 
mercifully from Heaven, we moft humbly pray 
thee, upon the low eftate of thine anointed our 
king : comfort him in his troubles ; defend him 
in his dangers ; ftrengthen him in his good refo-- 
lution ; and command thine angels to pitch their 

•Printed at Paris, 1648. 



Public Reeling towards the King, 97 

tents round about him, that he may be defended 
from the hands of all thofe that defire his hurti 
and may fpeedily be re-eftablifhed in the juft 
rights of his throiie, through Jefus Chrift our 
Lord. Amen." 

Charles was now a king without a kingly 
power, but not without kingly influence ; for, as 
writes Difraeli,* the captive of Carifbrook Caftle 
was ftill awefully remembered by the people. 
He dwelt in their thoughts, and fometimes in 
their hearts. He had long ceafed to be an 
object of fear, and in their defpairs he had now 
become mingled with their laft hopes, becaufe, 
prefled by monthly contributions (on the i6th 
February the Ifle of Wight had been aflefled to 
a monthly contribution of 69/. yj. 6d. on ac- 
count of an ordinance for 20,000/. for the relief 
of Ireland) for the arrears of the foldiery, and 
vexed by taxations difguifed under forms and 
names unheard of, the fliip-money feemed but 
a light grievance. 

The labourers of the harveft found no glean- 
ings at the evening hour. The giddy multi- 
tude in the capital burft into a commotion, and 
called for "God and the king." The fpon- 

* Commentary. 

H 



98 Public Feeling towards the King. 

taneous cry was re-echoed by the populace of 
diftant cities. The royal ftandard was unfurled 
m Wales, the Kentifh men flocked to the trumpet 
of Goring, and the men of Eflex had the fad 
glory of fufFering the laft in the miferies of the 
civil war by the memorable fiege of Colchefter. 
The fleet revolted to the prince. The cloud of 
an army was gathered in the north, where the 
Englifli royalifts here and there were awaiting 
for the army of Scotland led by the Duke of 
Hamilton. The cavaliers appeared in almofl: 
every county in England, and all rofe in oppo- 
fite directions, but too difliant to communicate, 
too early to be joined by the tardy, and too late 
to unite with the difpersed. 

Thefe various actions had called away from 
their feat of power in Weftminfter the chief 
commanders of the army ; and in the abfence of 
their authority and their complicated intrigues, 
the Prefbyterian party gradually recovered their 
power of pre-eminence ; the late exiled mem- 
bers returned to their feats ; and Holies, the great 
orator of the Preflayterians, once more refumed 
his preponderance, whilfl: the Independents, with- 
out their chiefs, lurked in a minority. This was a 
fl:ate of things mofl: favourable to the vanquiflied 



Sympathies of Attendants. 99 

monarch, who, however, in the mean time was 
subjected to the moft rigid and defolate imprifon- 
ment: even the tone of the governor again changed 
to infolence and reprimand, though the perfons that 
had been placed about the king, and heretofore 
ftrangers, foon formed a deep perfonal attachment 
for him ; and thus gave rife to the extraordinary- 
incidents and guileiefs ftratagems which have ren- 
dered fo romantic all relations (imperfect as they 
are) of the captivity of Charles within the walls 
of Carifbrook, and the caftle itfelf a habitation 
of melancholy memories. At this time friends 
devoted to his fervice nightly hovered on the 
fea-fliores, watched about his dwelling, and held 
an invifible intercourfe with the lonely monarch,, 
who could not openly command a fingle mes- 
senger. Harrington, one of the perfons fent 
by the Parliament, and a zealbus republican,, 
became fo forcibly affected by the ability and 
dignity of the king as fx» be removed from 
his attendance. Ofborn, who had been fixed as 
a fpy near his perfon under the title of his gen- 
tleman-uftier, and whofe ofiiee was confequently 
to hold the king's glove during his dinner, foon 
Aid a note with an offer of his devoted fervices in 
the finger of it, which thus became the recep- 

H a 



ioo Firebr ace's Arrangements. 

tacle of an uninterrupted correfpondence between 
them, whilft Firebrace by Ingratiating himfelf 
into the favour of one of the king's confervators, 
fd far obtained his confidence as to be permitted 
to affume his duty of waiting at the door opening 
into the backftairs, wjiilft he abfented himfelf at 
fupper, and by fo doing, obtained a feries of 
uninterrupted interviews with the king, who 
invariably retired to his chamber after he had 
fupped ; but as danger might be apprehended 
during thefe ftealthy interviews from the intru- 
fion of the principal guardian, the expedient 
was adopted of perforating a chink in the wainf- 
coat behind the hangings, which, Firebrace 
writes, " ferved as well as the opening of the 
door; and was more fafe, for upon the leaft 
noife, by letting fall the hanging all was fafe ;" 
and by this means Charles received and deli- 
vered many an important defpatch, and devifed 
the arrangements for attempting his efcape 
from an imprifonment which was now tecome 
intolerable. 

So early as the 7 th of February in this year. 
Lord. Kent, on the part of the committee, wrote 
to Hammond informing him they have received 
fome intelligence from a very good hand which 



D^gnsfor the King's Efcape. loi 

has never failed, that there was then a defign in 
agitation through the medium of one Napier, 
and a fervant of David Murray (believed to be 
his majefty's tailor), to effect the enlargement of 
the king, by breaking the floor and ceiling of 
the room over the royal chamber, and drawing 
him up through the aperture fo formed, from 
whence he was to be conveyed from one apart- 
ment to another, until all the rooms were pafTed 
where there was a guard at either door or 
window.* 

On the 13th of March, the governor was 
again apprifed by the fame authority that two of 
thofe in attendance on the king were engaged in 
a fimilar enterprife, although they could not dif- 
cover their names, nor " the grounds they have 
to expect their fervice in it," but defired him to 
exercife increafed vigilance over the actions of 
his majefty's houfehold. 

So ingenious, however, were the artifices which 
were practifed by thofe engaged in thefe perilous 
undertakings, and fo multifarious the manoeuvres 
adopted to evade Hammond's precautions, that his 
determination and authority were equally at fault 
in difcovering and fupprefTmg the intrigues infti- 

* Letter to Hammond. 



102 Additional Reinforcements. 

tuted by the contrivers of this dreaded proceeding. 
Five hundred additional men were fent over and 
quartered throughout the ifland, " two pieces of 
fix-pound bullets, two fakers, and eight three- 
pounds brafs ordnance," were fent thither from 
Poole in Dorfetfhire, and planted about the out- 
works of the caftle, as well as two hundred 
demi-culverin fhot from Arundel Caftle;* and 
an aflfeflment on the ifland for three inonths was 
granted at the requeft of the governor for the 
payment of the foldiery there.f 

In the Appendix to the fecond volume of 
Clarendon's " State Papers," it is ftated that about 
this time (March, 1648) there was "a flying 
report" (Lord Clarendon, however, remarks, 
" which feems to me fomewhat improbable,") that 
Hammond came in to the king " fuddenly at two 
o'clock in the night, and the king fufpecting fome 
treachery [from his] coming at that unfeafonable 
hour, flipped on his clothes ; and Hammond went 
readily to his cabinet and fearched it, but found 
not fuch papers as he looked for, and then en- 
deavoured to fearch the king's pocket ; but his 
majefty refifted and gave him a box on the ear; 
and it is {aid he ftruck the king again. Upon 

* Rufhworth. f Hammond's Letter. 



Alleged Violence of Hammond. 1 03 

this violence ofFered, the king took the papers 
out of his pocket and thruft them into the fire, 
which Hammond attempted to pull out again; 
but the king fo well guarded them that they 
were all burned, though in this fcuffle it is faid 
the king got a hurt on his face by a knock 
againft the edge of the table." Mr. Secretary 
Nicholas adds as his opinion, that this ftatement 
is confirmed by other relations ; and that fome 
fuch belief was at the time generally entertained, 
is evidenced by Afhburnham's ftatement, as well 
as by reference to a pamphlet, publifhed (April 
1 2th) immediately after the implied aflault, and 
entitled " The Fatal Blow, or the moft impious 
and treafonable fact of Hammond in offering 
force unto and hurting his Sacred Majefty, dif- 
cufled;" wherein the writer fays, " notwithftand- 
ing gaoler Hammond's moft folemn proteftation 
unto his majefty to treat him well, promifeth this 
Parliament that he will obey all their commands, 
although never so contrary to his fenfe of ho- 
nour, id esty his former engagements to his ma- 
jesty, so abfolutely is he their creature. And to 
fhow us how true he is unto his laft engage- 
ment, in his majefty's late refiftance to him, in 
the search of fome papers, he hath mofi im- 



104 Reafonfor Hammond's Conduct. 

pioujly and traitoroujly wounded his moft Jacred 
majefty" 

Many furmifes might be entertained, and all 
with fome fhow of truthfulnefs, as to the con- 
tents of the papers the Parliament, by the aid 
of Hammond, (perhaps at the inftigation of 
Cromwell and Ireton, for if the remarkable cor- 
refpondence at this very time carried between 
thefe perfonages and Hammond had come to 
the knowledge of the two Houfes, it is more than 
probable a ftrange difclofure would have been 
the refult) were fo eager to obtain. As great 
aftonifhment was openly exprefled at the king's 
knowledge of the Votes of the Houfe of Com- 
mons, and other matters of a more extended 
import, no doubt fome anxiety would be ma- 
nifeflied to difcover the means whereby his 
information was obtained ; but the moft probable 
conjecture feems to be, that it was an endeavour 
to secure the record of the tranfactions between 
Charles and Tthe Scottifli commiflioners, which 
was reafonably, although erroneoufly, fuppofed to 
be ftill in the king's pofTeffion. Luckily, how- 
ever, on the departure of Afhburnham and 
Berkeley from the ifland, they had taken the 
precaution to induce his majefty to provide for 



Note to Fire brace. 105 

the fafe-keeping of fo important and dangerous 
a document, by allowing" them to encafe it in 
lead, and afterwards temporarily depofit it in a 
garden belonging to Sir Charles Berkley, 

In the meantime, the king appeared to fubmit 
with patience to the reftraints put upon his free- 
dom, and even affected an air of cheerfulnefs in 
order to difguise the defign for making his efcapey 
which he ftill cherifhed, and was now perfecting ; 
whilft the almoft daily written injunctions to Fire- 
brace, " if you can let me fpeak with you this 
night at the chink," intereftingly Ihow the generous 
devotion of thofe who were feeking to ferve him 
in this endeavour, perfons to whom when in the 
prefence he hardly dared to direct a filent look, or 
a meaning gefture, as in one of Firebrace's notes, 
he writes, " I hope this day at dinner you under- 
stood my looks, for the foldier I told you of, 
whofe looks I like, was then there in a white 
nightcap, and as I thought you took notice, I 
hope to find fomething from you when I come in 
from walking;" thus forcibly showing the prompt 
sagacity of the king, and the romantic courfe 
of that remarkable fecret correspondence which 
caused a general fufpicion to be excited, and every 
©bftacle adopted in the way of that perfonal 



io6 Sympathies of the Attendants 

deprivation which could be fafely devised to 
counteract its eiFect. " The fuperftition " of dw 
majefty of his " grey* difcrowned head,*' as 
Mr. Godwin exprefles it, was however gradually 
exciting the fympathies and receiving the truft of 
thofe who had teen placed about him as men of 
approved fidelity, but whofe judgments and 
affections, then of an oppofite character, were 
pow connected with, and eager inaffifling, fevoiai 
of the principal inhabitants of the iilaiKl, in fo- 
menting the ferment bjr which the exactions for 
the fupport of die military and other obnoxious 
impofls were agitating the entire mafs of the 
community there. 

Mr. Edward Worfley, connected with one of 
the mofl reputable families in the ifland, and 
Mr. John Newland, a member of the corpo- 
ration of Newport, ventured to intimate to 
Charles, through the agency of Firebrace and 
Captain Titus, their defire to aid in an attempt 
to reftore him to liberty; whilft others within 
the caflle, probably Burroughs and CrefTet, pro- 
feflxng themfelves true penitents, and anxious to 
redeem paft errors by prefent and future fervices, 
made a fimilar proffer through the fame me- 
dium, a procedure which gave rife to a portion 



Correfpondence •with Captain Titus. 107 

of that correfpondence with Captain Titus it 
is the intent of this volume to place before the 
public; a moft interefting and curious memento 
pf the memorable occurrences which immediately 
followed, in which Captain Titus became fb 
prominent a leader, and fo trufted a confidant of 
the king's. These letters are written on pieces 
of paper of various fizes and fliapes ; fome on 
the full fize of half a iheet of foolicap, others 
on merely fcraps of little more than an inch in 
breadth, and with the exception of the firft, in a 
feigned hand, having the moft important portions 
in cipher. 

This fecret is a valuable and authentic illus- 
tration of tlie very plans arranged for the 
efcape of the king by himfelf and his confe- 
derates, and renders it evident that the adherence 
of thefe parties to the fervice of his majefty 
foon imparted a new tone to the proceedings 
which had been before rather hopeleffly than 
hopefully arranged; whilft Charles haftened to 
convey his acceptance of their overtures in the 
foUoV/ing communication : — 



io3 Letter to Captain Titus. 

Number I, 

"Capt. Titus, 

" Let thofe officers, you told me of, know 
that as my neceffity is now greater than euer, 
fo what feruice lliall be done me now, muft haue 
the firft place in my thoughts, when euer I fhall 
be in a condition to requite my friends and pitty 
my Eennemies : I coinand you (when you can 
do it, without hazard either to yourfelfe or them) 
that you fend me, in particular, the names of 
thofe who you thus finde fenfible of their duty, 
and refolued to difcharge the parts of true 
Englifhmen ; laftly, afTeure euery one, that, with 
me, prefent feruices wipes out former falts ; so 
I reft, 

*' Your afTured friend, 

« Charles R." 

From this time the new partifans proceeded 
without diffimulation in any of the negotiations 
or dangerous endeavours their exertions for the 
king's welfare prompted them to undertake, and 
only earneftly fought to extricate him from his 
moft trying fituation ; whilft fo well was the fecret 
of the great change meditated by the king kept. 



Firehrace's Narrative. 109 

and fo difcreet and - fagacious was the propofed 
courfe of action, that it is more than probable 
if Charles had been lefs fanguine of the part 
he himfelf was to play in his defperate refolve, 
that the efcape firft contemplated, under the 
aufpices of Firebrace, Titus, and others, on 
the 20th March, 1648, would have been fuc- 
cefsful. 

Firebrace fays, " Amongfl: other ways I pro- 
pofed his coming out of his bedchamber win- 
dow, which he faid he could do, there being 
room enough. 

" I told him I fancied it was too narrow. He 
faid he had tryed with his head and he was fure, 
where that would pafs the body would follow : 
yet, ftill I doubted, and propofed a way to make 
it a little wider, by cutting the plate the cafe- 
ment fhut to at the bottom, which then might 
eafily have been put by. 

" He objected, that might make a difcovery, 
and commanded me to prepare all things elfe ; 
and that, he was confident, would not impede 
him. 

" I had made for this efcape Mr. Worfley 
(now Sir Edward Worfley), a very worthy gen- 
tleman now living in the ifland, Mr. Richard 



no Firehrace's Narrathe. 

Ofburn, a gentleman put in by the Parliament 
to attend the king, and Mr. John Newland * of 
Newport, who all proved very faithful: and 
thus we were to proceed : I fhould tofs fbme- 
thing againft the window, which was the fign to 
put himfelf out, and to let himfelf down by 3 
cord which I for that purpofe had given him. 

" Being down, and in the dark night, I was 
to conduct him acrofs the court (no fentinel 
being in the way) to the great wall of the caftle, 
where I was to have let him down by a long 
cord, a ftick being fattened acrofs the end for 
him to fit on. 

" Beyond this wall was the counterfcarp, which 
was low: beyond that, and quite out of the 
caftle, waited Mr. Worfley and Mr. Oft)urn on 
horfeback, with a good horfe, faddle, piftols, 
boots, &c., for the king. They were to help 
his majefty from the counterfcarp, which they 
could eafily do from their horfes. 
' " At the fea-fide, in a convenient place, was 

* On reference to the corporate books of the Borough of 
Newport, for the year 164.8-9, it is found as a corroborative 
and Angular coincidence, that although generally moft punctual 
in his attendance at the meetings of the corporation, Mr. New- 
land was abfent during the whole of the time the king's affairs 
engaged his attention. 



Firehrace's Narrative. 1 1 1 

Mr. John Newland with a lufty boat, which 
might have carried his majsfty to what part he 
had thought fit : all things were thus prepared, 
and every one well inftructed in his part. The 
king, as he walked, had been often fhewed the 
place by me where he was to be let down, and 
where he was to get over the counterfcarp, which 
his majefty well approved of. 

" In the middle of thefe hopes, I gave the fign 
at the appointed time ; his majefty put himfelf 
forward, but then too late found himfelf mif- 
taken, he fticking faft between his breaft and 
fhoUlders, and not able to get forward or back- 
Ward, but that, at the inftant before he endea- 
voured to come out, he miftrufted and tied a 
piece of his cord to a bar of the window within, 
by means whereof he forced himfelf back. 

" Whilft he ftuck I heard him groan, but 
could not come to help him, which (you may 
imagine) was no small affliction to me. So foon 
as he was in again, to let me fee (as I had to 
my grief heard) the defign was broken, he fet a 
candle 1 in the window. If this unfortunate im- 
pediment had not happened, his majefty had 
certainly then made a good efcape. 

" Now I was in pain how to give notice to 



112 The King^s Note to Firebrace. 

thofe without ; which I could find no better way" 
to do, than by flinging ftones from the high 
wall, where I fhould have let down the king 
to the place where they flaid, which proved 
fo eiFectual, that they went off, and never any 
difcovery was made of this."* 

In a note, pafled by the chink; from the 
king to Firebrace, immediately after this unfor^ 
tunate failure, he fays : *' The narrownefs of the 
window was the only impediment of my efcape, 
and therefore some inflrument muft be had to 
remove that bar, which I believe is not hard to 
get : for I have feen many, and fo portable, that 
a man might put them in his ppcket. I think 
it is called the endlefs fcrew, or the great force, 
I have now made a perfect trial, and find it im- 
poffible to be done, for my body is much too thick 
for the breadth of the window, fo that unlefs the 
middle bar be taken away I cannot get through. 
It is abfolutely impoffible to do anything to- 
morrow night, but I command you, heartily and 
particularly, to thank in my name, A. {Crejfet), 
C. {Col. Legge), F. (Dowcett), Z. {Mr. Worf 
ley), and him who ftaid for me beyond the 

* Letter written by Mr. Henry Firebrace to Sir George Lane, 
Knt., Secretary to the Duke of Ormond, July zift, 1675. 



Secrecy of Attempted Efcape. 113 

Works (Mr. Newland)y for their hearty and in- 
duftrious endeavours in this my fervice ; the 
which I fhall always remember, being likewife con- 
fident that they will not fail in fo good a work." 

Lord Clarendon, in his " Hiftory of the Re- 
bellion," relates, this incident as if it were only a 
tale which the " idle jade. Rumour," had fpread 
abroad, and exprefTes it as his opinion that it was 
a mere fidtion, a conjecture which perhaps fhould 
not create much furprife when one of the prin- 
cipal inftigators and aftors in the aifair is found, 
after a lapfe of nearly thirty years, ftating it as his 
belief, "that never any difcovery was made of it ;" 
and that Mr. Afhburnham, to whom the refult 
was immediately communicated, alfo writes in 
his Narrative, " Hee got back again without anie 
certaine notice taken by anie man but by him 
(Firebrace) who waited to have ferved him 
when he had come downe," 

Thefe fuppofitions, however, by reference to 
a letter addrefled to Hammond by Cromwell, on 
the 6th of April following, are feen to have been 
tnoft fallacious,^ although it may be aflumed as 
a matter of certainty, that until the receipt of 
this epiftle, the authorities at Carilbrook were 
as equally ignorant of the near consummation of 

I 



114 Information from Cronnwell. 

the king's defign, as of the untoward refult 
which had attended his, friends' endeavours. 

Cromwell fays, *' Intelligence came to the 
hands of a very confiderable perfbn, that the king 
attempted to get out of his window, and that he 
had a cord of filk with him, whereby to flip 
down ; biit his breaft was fo big, the bar would 
not give him paflkge. This was done in one of 
the dark nights about a fortnight ago. A gen- 
tleman with you led him the way and flipped 
down. The guard that night had fome quantity i 
of wine with them. The fame party afliires that 
there is aquafortis gone down from London to 
remove that obftacle which hindered, and that 
the fame defign is to be put in execution in the 
next dark nights. 

" He faith that Captain Titus and fome others 
about the king are not to be trufted. He is a 
very confiderable perfon of the parliament, who 
gave this intelligence, and defired it fhould be 
speded to you. The gentleman that came out 
of the window was Mafter Firebrace ; the gen- 
tlemen doubted are Crefl*et, Burroughs, and 
Titus : the time when this attempt at efcape 
was .... the 20th of March." 

From this time, Firebrace intimates in his 



Fir ebr ace's Narrative. 1 1 5 

Narrative, ''there ensued a general suspicion, but 
they could point at nobody. Hammond fet his 
engines at work, and did pump me ; fo I heard 
he did others : but at laft he took me into exa- 
mination, and when he could make no difcovery 
he told me the reafon. 

" I acquainted the king with all paflages, at 
which he was much troubled, and told me, if 
they had a fufpicion of me, they would never 
leave till they had ruined me ; and would have 
had me gone with his letters to the prince his 
fon (now our fovereign lord and mafter), but I 
told his majefty I was confident they could prove 
nothing againft me, and therefore begged I 
might ftay to fee the ifTue ; and that if the worft 
happened, they could but put me away, and then 
I did not doubt but that I fhould be able some 
way or other to ferve his majefty. 

" After this Hammond sent for me again, and 
told me he had received other letters, and that 
he muft difmifs me as he fhould do others, but 
that I might ftay, if I would, three or four 
days. This I looked upon as a trap ; however, 
I accepted of it, but carried myfelf cautioufly^ 
I acquainted the king, and fettled fuch a way . 
of correlpondence that his majefty did not want 

I a 



Ii6 ^ Difmijfal of Titus , 

conftant intelligence from his friends, as before, 
and had his defpatches brought carefully to me, 
and fent them away with the like good fuccefs aS 
formerly, during the whole time I was from 
him." 

On or about the 21 ft of April, as announced 
in the " Every Day Journal " of the 27th of that 
month. Captain Titus, Burroughs, and Creflet 
were fent from the caftle by order of the gover- 
nor, under the authority he had received from 
the Derby Houfe committee on the i8th of 
February, wherein he was empowered " to place 
and difplace fuch perfons as were to attend the 
king as he Ihould fee occafion;" although, if 
any credibility can be attached to the report 
which reached the committee, thefe perfonages 
had conceived the idea " of fetting fire to the 
caftle by firing a great heap of charcoal that 
lies near the king's lodging, and upon that 
tumult he to make his efcape"* before they left. 

The royal lodging, from the firft coming of 
the king to Carift)rook until the month of 
May, 1648, confifted of the moft lofty por- 
tion of the governor's refidence ; an elevation, as 
will have been perceived in the progrefs of this 

• Letter to Hammond, 1 5th April. 



Change of Lodging. 117 

narrativcj of three rooms : a presence-chamber, 
a retiring apartment on the firft floor, and 
above both of these the room in which the 
floor was to have been broken through, as fpoken 
of in the relation of the defigned efcape by 
Napier and others, at page 10 1 ; a detail which 
enables the identity of their pofition to be mofl: 
fatisfactorily determined. 

In the accompanying plan of the caftle of 
Cariftjrook, prepared after a recent inveftigation, 
carefully made for the purpofes of this work, 
and in accordance with the remaining frag- 
mental evidences of its internal adaptation at 
the period of the king's imprifonment there, 
the site of thefe rooms — the Saliftjury Tower 
— is eafily diftinguiflied by the dotted line 
drawn from it indicative of the route intended 
to have been taken by Charles and Firebrace, 
had they succeeded in regaining his antici- 
pated freedom ; but on Hammond's becom- 
ing aware of the circumftances appertaining to 
this abortive attempt, he refolved at once to 
remove the king from thefe apartments to a 
suite of rooms appended to the quarters of the 
chief ofiicer, then a building compofed of a 
feries of gable frontages of the era of Elizabeth^ 



1 1 8 Cajile of Carijbrook. 

placed on the left fide of the firft court of the 
caftle after pafling the great gate-way, and 
direftly oppofite the chapel ; as he deemed the 
pofition to be one entirely free from many 
of the facilities the king and his counsellors 
had hitherto been enabled to avail themfelves 
of. 

The caftle of Carifbrook marks the fituation 
of one of thofe rude and almoft primeval for- 
trefles confifting of a raifed earthen ballium and 
fofle ftill to be ftudied in many parts of the 
kingdom ; afterwards occupied by the Romans, 
and, on their retirement, fucceffively by the 
Saxons and Danes, as their varied fuccefles 
gave them pofTeflion of the ifland. With the 
coming of the Normans, however, dates that firft 
permanent ftone ereftion, which, after being 
more than once re-modelled in accordance with 
the faftiion of the age in which the improve- 
ments were effected, eventually afliimed the ele- 
vation which, grey and time-worn, has defcended 
to our day. Amidft all these re-edifications, the 
priftine. earth-work, as the fubftructure of its 
more important fuccefl*or, ftill remained intaft, 
a formation which caufed the entire outline of 
the area within the caftle at the bafe of the walls 



Arrmi^ement of Rooms. 119 

to iH-efent an almoft precipitous bank of earth, 
which defcended to the natural level, whilft on 
its fummit was upreared the fabric which has 
long refted within the embrace of the terrific 
conqueror of all things, but even amidft the ruin 
and depofit of centuries is vaft and venerably 
grand. The retention of the work of the 
olden time would of courfe materially diminifh 
the fize of the chambers on the ground floor of 
thofe buildings approximating to it, although 
the rooms immediately over, by embracing the 
additional fpace the formation of the earthwork 
confumed, were well-proportioned and convenient. 
The apartments now to be occupied by the king 
were on the upper floor of a building to which 
fuch a defcription is incident, aind confifl;ed of a 
prefence and bed-chamber, having communica- 
tion by a paflage that diredlly conneded them; 
whilfl; to the principal door of the prefence- 
chamber there was appended a ftaircafe, which 
defcended to the court-yard through the dwel- 
ling of the chief ofiicer. 

In the year 1 7 1 9, as appears by a rude Iketch 
fl:ill extant, this divifion of the fortrefs was even 
then in a ftate of great dilapidation, if not of 
abfolute ruin ; a decay principally attributable to 



120 'Pojition of the Window. 

the fact that but little coft had been incurred 
in reparation from the time of the Reftoratlon, 
as, when the office of the governor of the ifland 
tapidly merged into a finecure, the expendi- 
ture was naturally limited to his own habitation. 
For a long feries of years, therefore, the thiftle 
has bloomed amidft their defolation, and the 
winds have moaned over the ruined walls, little 
heeding the fad review which an inspeftion of 
the precind: conjures up. The fite of the king's 
prefence-chamber is ftil-1 eafily diftinguifhable, as 
to it appertained the window which has been 
■long looked on with a feeling of curiofity from 
the allufions made to it in all narratives of the 
king's projected efcapes. It has thereby been 
made memorable; but incorreftly fo, as the 
fir ft attempt was made, as already fliown, from 
the refidence appropriated to the governor, and 
as will be hereafter perceived, the fucceeding 
efibrt was again defigned through the window 
of his majefty's bedroom, an aperture blocked 
up in after-alterations, but neverthelefs eafily 
recognisable on the exterior of the wall, as it 
nearly adjoins the only buttrefs on this fide of 
the caftk. 

From the peculiarity of the pofition of the 



tietter to Titus, 121 

fortrefs a confiderable fall in the level of the 
ancient earthwork, nearly eight feet, is found in 
the fpace which intervenes between thefe win- 
dows. The floor of the prefence-chamber refted 
on the ballium itfelf, whilfl; that of the retir- 
ing-chamber was confiderably above it, a dif- 
pofition which obliged Hammond materially to 
Vary the additional precautions he deemed neces- 
fary to take for preventing all fears of the king's 
fafe incarceration in his new abode. The win- 
dow of the prefence-chamber, which had hereto- 
fore contained but one Iron bar between the 
flone mullions, a fpace of fixteen inches, re- 
ceived a fecond ; and beneath that of the bed- 
room a platform was thrown up, where a fentinel 
was ftationed, and ordnance placed, — alterations 
which caufed the little delay in the king's 
removal, which he intimated in his note to 
Captain Titus. 

Number II. 
King Charles to Captain Titus. 
"W. 

" This trufly bearer will eafe my paynes 

by telling you why yett I have not yet changed 
my lodging; and alfo defyre your advice con- 
cerning remouing of obflrudtions ; so that thi$ 



122 Letter to Titus. 

being but to ^ye you an occafion to wryte to 
mee, I need fay no more, but that I am 
" Your moft real friend, 

«J." 
"I pray you ccanmend me verry hartely to 
688." 

This note is written in a feigned hand, and 
■without date, but evidently about the 24th 
April, 1648. In the cipher ufed by the king 
at this time, the letter W exprefled Captain 
Titus, and J, the king, the trufty bearer having 
in all probability been Firebrace, who received 
his difmiflal within a few days from that of Titus 
himfelf. 

It muft not, however, be fuppofed that the 
fittings of thefe apartments were merely limited 
to the rude military appointments of the day, for 
by a reference to the appraifement of the furniture 
and plate within the caftle after the king's execu- 
tion, it is evident that regal fplendour prevailed 
therein, for the appraifement is fo minute in its 
defcriptive detail, that a moft vivid idea may be 
readily conceived, and more than imaginative 
picture drawn of the " Royal Portraiture, in his 
folitudes and fufferings," and whilft living in the 



Inventory of Furniture. 123 

cuftody of his enemies, as from this time he is 
found fubjedled to a rigid and defolate imprifon- 
ment, and injury and infult became familiar ±0 
him. 

An inventory of goods in Cariibrook Caftle, 
appraifedthe 17th October, 1650:* 

Imprimis, one (landing bedftead, covered with £ s. d, 
crimfon velvet, trimmed with gold and filver 
lace, and fringed, with all the furniture there- 
unto belonging, fuitable, and the cheft . 120 o o 
Sold Mr. Houghton and Mr. Bafs, the 8th October, 

1651, for ditto. 
One fuftian down bed and bolfter, one fuftian quilt, 
one holland quilt, two cloth blankets, and a 
fuftian blanket . . . . 1 1 o q 

Sold Mr. Houghton, ditto for 11/. o o 
One crimfon damafk window curtain, of feven 

breadths, lined with perpetuana , ,700 

Sold to ditto, for ditto. 
Two fmall window curtains, of crimfon damalk, 

lined as aforefaid . . . 3 10 o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One 10 qr. feather bed and bolfter, two woollen 

blankets, and a red rug . . .500 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One watchet velvet neceffary ftool . . i 10 o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One foot carpet . . . . . 4 10 o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
Two fmall Turkey carpets . . . 12 o o 

Sold Mr. Houghton and Mr. Bafs for ditto. 

• Harleian MS. 4898, 



124 Inventory of Furniture. 

£ s. d. 
Eight pieces of Arras hangings . . , 210 o o 

Sold Mr, Mildmay, 19th Auguft, 1653, for ditto. 
Eight pieces of Turkey hangings of the Roman 

Emperors . . . . 90 o o 

Sold Mr. Houghton the 8th October, 1651, ditto. 
Two pieces of tapeftry of imagery, marked O. J. iz 10 o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
Twelve folding ftooles of green velvet, trimmed 

with gold 3nd filver fringe . . . 800 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
Two green velvet chairs, two culhions, and a foot- 

ftool ... .700 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
Two high chairs, of yellow-wrought fatin, and 
two high ftools, two cufhions, and two foot- 
ftools suitable . . . .600 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One high chair df crimfon velvet, two high ftools, , 

and a footftool of tlie fame . . . 3 1 <s 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
Two fmall carpets, of Perfian making . . 300 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One Turkey carpet .. . . .2100 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One neceflary ftool, of crimfon velvet . , i 10 p 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One window curtain, of crimfon and yellow damafk 300 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One fmall carpet . . . . .080 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One 1 1 qr. feather bed and bolfter, two blankets . 500 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One counterpane of tapesftiy , . .200 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 

Two large curtains of brocatillo . . .900 

,Sold to ditto for ditto. 



Inventory of Furniture ,. 125 

£ s. d. 
One '," featherbed and bolfter, 2 woollen blankets, 

and a red rug . . . .600 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One fmall carpet . . . . .Sop 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One ftanding bedftead, covered with green velvet, 
laced and fringed with gold and filver, with 
all the furniture thereunto belonging fuitable, 
valued at , . , . , 130 o o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One large down bed and bolfter, one fuftian quilt, 

one holland quilt, and one blanket . . 1000 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
Two window curtains, of blue and white damaik j o o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. ■ 
One fmall Turkey carpet . . . .080 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One fmall chair of crimfon velvet, which was 

Queen Elizabeth's . . . , o 10 o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One V" bed and bolfter, two cloth blankets, and a 

tapeftry counterpane . . . .070 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One Turkey carpet . . . . ,300 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
Three fmall carpets . . . . i 4. o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One large Turkey carpet . . . 500 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One other Turkey carpet . . .200 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 
One other Turkey carpet . • . a 10 o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 

Three bed cafes , . . . o 10 o 

Sold to ditto for ditto. 



126 Inventory of Furniture. 



£ s. d. 



Plate. — Two bafons and ewers, six candlefticks* 
forty-four trencher plates, fix fruit difhes, fix 
platters, fix diflies, fix fauceis, one chamber- 
pot, two chargers, one warming-pan, and ten 
fpoons, two chafers with covers, one ladle, 
one long fpoon, two plates with fnuffers, and 
two caudle cups with covers, two porringers, 
one drinking-cup, one tankard, two fugar- 
boxes, three falts, and a little bafon and ewer, 
one chamber-pot, two piece bafons, and one 
chafing-difti, all weighing 197 lbs. 8 oz. troy, 
at 4J. 11^. peroz. . . . • 5^5 3 o 

Sold Mr. Houghton and Mr. Bafs, the 8th 
October, 1651, for ditto. 

This document probably alfo includes articles fent for the ufe 
of the Duke of Gloucefter and Princefe Elizabeth, but it is of 
courfe impofiible to difcriminate between them. 



CHAPTER V. 

Sir John Bowring's Narrative — Preparations for Second Attempt 
to Efcape — Letters to Captain Titus — Discovery and Frus- 
tration of the Attempt — Accufation againft Major Rolph — 
Curious proceedings consequent thereon — Trial and Acquittal 
of Rolph at the Affixes at Winchefter. 

tN the year 1703, there was publifhed amongft 
a collection of papers purported to have 
been found in the ftudy of a nobleman lately 
deceafed, a garrulous narrative written by a 
Sir John Bowring to Charles the Second, for 
the purpose of recommending himself of " many 
moft occult confiderable concerns and secret 
tranfactions relating to England's royal proto- 
martyr." Certainly a remarkable relation, if cre- 
dence can be placed in it, but of this great 
doubt may be reafonably entertained, "as the 
Angular political forefight of the knight, in 



128 Bowring's Narrative. 

every event which he records, is so wonderful, 
that he is to be fufpected as having been one of 
thofe great predictors, who enjoy the advant- 
ages of prophecy after the events have been 
realized." 

According to Sir John Bowring's account, 
Hammond was greatly influenced by the counfels 
of Mr. Lifle, a native of the Ifle of Wight, and 
whose name is fo well known as the regicide, 
afterwards alTaflinated at Laufanne in Switzer- 
land. With Lifle Bowring was alfo intimate, and 
telling the king, in one of his interviews, (?) that 
he had been known to him from childhood, he 
received from Charles a fpecial charge to keep 
his interefl; and friendfliip with him. " It con- 
cerns me very much," faid his majefty, and you 
may perchance do me greater service, and be 
better able to perform it than any friend what- 
foever, so that from the time his majefl:y came 
to the Ifle of Wight, he employed me to ma- 
nage and tranfact his private and particular 
affairs, relying upon me in all things principally 
of care and hazard to himself, and which was 
not in the power at that time of any other perfon 
living to do his majefty any good except they 
had a fecret intereft with Lifle; and this the king 



Bonvring's Narratwe. 129 

■underftood very well, becaufe his majefty knew 
that Hammond received his orders from Lifle in 
all things, by reason Hammond was otherwise a 
ftranger in the ifland." 

In this notable fervice, a Dr. Cade is ftated to 
have been the coadjutor of Bowring, and the 
perfon who conduced a fecret correfpondence 
between him and the king ; but it is rather An- 
gular, although their fhare in the momentous 
events now tranfpiring was, on their own Show- 
ing, of a moft prominent charadter, that not the 
flightefl: allufion is made to either of thefe perfon- 
ages by other reputable chroniclers of the fame 
paffages, or by the king himfelf. They may 
have been men of fidelity, and have fecured 
the attachment and confidence of Charles ; 
but the entire abfence of mention of them by 
other authentic writers of the memoirs of their 
own employments, implies a ftrong queftion 
as to the veracity of their perfonal ftatements, 
and undeniably cafts a fufpicion over their care- 
fully paraded ingenuity, more efpecially as, in 
many inftances, the narrative to which allufion 
is made is only an enlargement of that by Sir 
John Berkeley, and confirmatory of it. 

In this ftrange condition of bereavement and 

K 



130 Endeavours of the King's Friends. 

imprifonmentj the fufFering monarch feemed more 
abandoned by fortune than his friends, whofe 
attachment now exhibited a perfedt unity of 
condudt and decifion of purpofe. At this cri- 
tical moment, thefe energetic charafters were 
fternly ftriving, as it were, with the fate they 
could not conquer : one of the moft ardent being 
a Mrs. Whorwood, a lady who is often men- 
tioned with great expreffions of confidence and 
refpeft by the king. Intelligence of the failure 
of the firft attempt at efcape by Charles, was 
immediately forwarded to her by Firebrace, 
with injundions to tranfmit to the ifland a fupply 
of files and aquafortis " to make the pafTage more 
eafy, and to help in other defigns he pro- 
pofed* ;" but in accordance with the prevailing 
fuperftition of the times, fhe firft enlifted the 
fervices of the celebrated aftrologer, William 
Lilly, who procured G. Farmer, an ingenious 
lockfmith in Bow-lane, London, to make a faw 
to cut the iron bars afunder, as well as to fur- 
nifh a quantity of aquafortis in furtherance of 
the fame purpofe. 

So perfed, however, were the arrangements of 
the fpies in the employment of the Derby Houfe 

* Firebrace's Narrative. 



Infiruments conveyed to the King. 131 

committee, that this procedure was at once 
known to them, and information fent to Ham- 
mond* that although the aquafortis had been 
fpilt by means of an accident, there was a fat 
plain man employed to carry the king a hacker, 
an inftrument which had been made in Lon- 
don to convert two knives, which the king had 
by him, into faws. 

The man thus despatched from London 
was ordered to proceed only to Portfmouth, 
and thence to fend his charge by fome fifher- 
men to Newport, where, as Firebrace had left 
the caftle, they were to be met by either Dow- 
cett or Harrington, on the part of the king. 
By thefe meflengers, Charles was alfo " to write 
back divers letters," which were to be brought to 
Portfmouth for conveyance to London. " If, 
therefore," said the committee to Hammond, 
" you cannot intercept thefe letters in the Ifle 
of Wight, if you can fend a faithful man, 
confident and difcreet, to Portfmouth, who may 
be there on Sunday night, and diligently obferve 
and enquire for fuch a man, who hath a horfe 
under him worth thirty or forty pounds (the 
colour we know not), and continue there till 

* Letters to Hammond, April 2ifl: and zznd. 

K 2 



132 Failure of Difpatches . 

Thurfday, he will certainly find fuch a man 
coming out of the town with all the king's let- 
ters, whom he is to apprehend, and you are to 
fend up the faid letters hither with all fecurity," 

Notwithftanding this accurate intelligence, 
"the hacker" was fafely delivered; and, in fpite 
of Hammond's vigilance, the meflenger fuc- 
ceeded in conveying the letters to Dr. Frazer, 
at Windfor, although, from fome information 
he received at Portfmouth, his retreat from 
thence was fo precipitate that his piftols and 
fword were left behind him. 

At this particular jundure oi his affairs^ 
Charles was continually bafHed in a perfedtly 
fecret tranfmiffion of his difpatches • as, in ano-j 
ther communication, it is faid " there came lately 
fifteen or fixteen letters from the king, and thofe 
about him, four or five whereof were read by an 
honeft (?) man ;" and on Mr. Mildmay's being 
fent to London "with fome letters from the 
governor concerning fomething to be pro- 
pounded," he was there feen and interrogated by 
Captain Titus, as to the caufe of his difmiflal 
from Carifbrook. Mildmay urged the contents 
of fome of the king's letters as condemnatory 
evidence of his participation in the proceedings 



Letter to Captain Titus. 133 

which had been devifed for efFedting the king's 
efcape; whereupon Titus would feem to have 
immediately accufed his majefty of indifcretion 
in his correfpondence, as a firm denial to fuch a 
charge is contained in the fucceedimg letter : — 

Number IIL 

King Charles the Firft to Captain TituSi 

April 26 th, 1648. 

" I cannot be fatisfied unlefs you doe 
truft to my Difcretion as well as Honefty : 
wherfor I aflure you that I never wrote any fuch 
thing as Mr. Myldmay hath informed you of; 
for there is an uter impoffibility in nature, that 
it could be in any of my difpatches, but in that 
of the 17th of this month; for it was but the 
day before that I did fo much as fufpedt that 
eather you or D.. {Firehrace) fliould be difmift ; 
and fince, noe letters of myne hath gone to Lon- 
don. Now for that difpatch ; firft, I rhuft fay, 
that it is ill lucke that my wyfes letters Ihould 
only mifcary,- for I have had anfwers to all the 
others, which went by that meflenger; but 
indeed it might be betrayed at the Poft Houfe ; 
wherfor now, I muft defire you to believe (foE 



134 Letter to Captain Titus, 

this long time I durft keepe no copies) my 

memory, which I hope in fo ihort a tyme will not 

deceave me ; nor would I (according to my owen 

ruels) be very confident of a negative but that 

I can prove it by an affirmative ; that is to fay, 

I could not be very fure that I wrote nothing 

concerning 251 : 686 {my efcape), if I did not 

remember the fubjed of that letter, for it was 

concerning a bufinefs wherein my wyfe defyred 

my opinion ; nor will I fay but there might be a 

claufe in it to this efFedt, that, albeit there were 

two confidents of myne, difcharged my fervice, 

yet I could ftill convey Letters to her ; but on 

my Credit, it was all in Cypher, and I am fure 

I did not name F. (Dowcett), nor made the leaft 

mention concerning any Defyne of ours. Now, 

you may judge (for upon my faith I have tould 

you the worft of my cafe) whether it be not more 

likely, that all this ftory, of my Letter, is fained 

(to try your countenances, & to make the fairer 

pretence of difmiffing you) than that they have 

found any of your names in my letter ; w"'' to 

doe, they muft decypher my letter; but, as they 

tell it, I will take my oath, it is a lye : and fo, 

I leave this, and come to my Bufinefs, w"'' is, 

only, to know how foone you will^ and where 



Letter to Captain Titus. 135 

you intend to lay horfes for me ; for though I 
cannot put you in any certaine hope that very 
ihortly I fhall ufe them, yet it were a pity to 
loofe an oportunity heere for want of preparation 
beyond the water ; and we are hammering upon 
a way (as D. {Firebrace) will more particularly 
informe you) w"'' if it hit, we Ihall be fooner 
ready, than, it may be, you can imagine. I have 
now no more to fay but to defyre you to let me 
hear from you as foon as you may, how you are 
fatisfied with the firft part of this Letter, and 
how foone you can comply with the later : fo I 
reft. 

" Your moft afTured conftant friend, 

"J." 
" You had this letter enclofed 
before now, but you were gone 
before it could come to you ; it came 
to me from London amongft my letters." 

Confident as is the king's expreflion on the 
impoffibility of his having committed this over- 
fight, it is queftionable if fome fuch obferva- 
tion was not contained in one of the letters read 
by the " honeft man," as in the intimation from 
the committee to Hammond on the fubjedt. 



136 Arrangements for Efcape. 

they fay-j " the king writes that, although Fire- 
brace and Titus be difcovered, yet Dowcett is 
true to him, and will do the deed." 

The failure of the firft attempt at efcape, from 
his majefty's perfonal reliance of fuccefs in the 
part he himfelf had to perform, caufed his adhe- 
rents carefully to fcrutinize the various expe- 
dients adopted for overcoming the additional 
impediments they would have to encounter in 
the renewed endeavour, and devife a courfe of 
united aftion commenfurate with the obftacles to 
be furmounted. 

With the acquiefcence of Captain Titus, Fire- 
brace, and Mrs. Whorwoody in London, Mr. 
Worfley and Mr. Newland in the Ifle of Wight, 
and Ofborn and Dowcett within the walls of the 
caftle, the preliminaries were defigned as fol- 
lows. His majefty, fuppofing him fafely emerged 
from his chamber window, defcribed as the height 
of a flight of flairs from the ground (by mea- 
furement it proves to be ten feet) was to proceed 
acrofs the bowling-green to the counterfcarp of 
the caftle, which he was to defcend, and be 
then received by Mr. Worfley and Ofljorn, as 
under the former arrangements. Mr. Newland 
was to be again in waiting with the boat, which. 



The Chief Officer". i 37 

having reached, they were at once to crofs the 
channel to the coaft of Hampfhire, where horfes 
were intended to be in readinefs, with relays to 
convey him to the refidence of Sir Edward 
Alford, near Arundel, in Suflex. From Arundel 
he was again to journey on horfeback to Queen- 
borough, in Suffolk, where a fhip was prepared 
to tranfport him to Holland as the mofl; favour- 
able temporary place of fafety. 

The opinions of Charles refpedting his perfonal 
movements, in the uncertain refolve before him, 
were, however, ftill unfettled; for in fuch a 
pofition, trivial incidents became worthy the 
moft weighty confideration, and his former want 
of fuccefs naturally urged him to balance in his 
mind every oppofite influence that attached itfelf 
to the fcheme, in the hope of being enabled to 
rejedt fuch propofitions as offered the fmallefl; 
chance of fatally affedting the confummation of 
the plan.. 

The king was now lodged in the houfe of the 
chief officer, and the opinion formed by Ham- 
mond of the additional fecurity afforded by fuch 
a procedure was corredtly eflimated; for the 
image of fallen majefty excited neither generous 
emotion nor any defire to alleviate his condition 



138 Letter to Captain Titus. 

in the eyes of this unfcnipulous Parliamentarian, 
as, in addition to other obfervances, he alfo 
affumed the office of fentinel over the royal 
perfon, a fadt of which fpeedy intimation was 
conveyed by Charles to Captain Titus. 

Number IV. 
"W. 

" Since the chiefe officer alwais fits at 
the prefence-door, you have reafon to differ with 
me in opinion as you doe. 

" I pray you remember to leave verry plaine 
and full informations with L. {OJhorn), and 
F. (JDowcett), and particularly how to keepe 
intelligence with our friends at London. * 

"J." 

This perfonage, the chief officer, was subor- 
dinate to Hammond, but he looked with an eye 
of jealousy on his pofition. Originally a fhoe- 
maker in Weftminfter, he was now a major in the 
Parliamentarian army, recently promoted from 
a captaincy, and of the name of Rolph. Lord 
Clarendon Hates, he was placed at Carifbrook by 
Cromwell ''as a prime confidant: a fellow of 

* This letter, although not in its proper order, is here intro- 
duced as corroborative of the foregoing remark. 



Frogrefs of Preparations. 139 

low extraftion and very ordinary parts, who, 
from a common foldier, had been' intrufted in all 
the intrigues of the army, and was one of the 
agitators infpired by Cromwell to put anything 
into the foldiers' minds, upon whom he had a 
wonderful influence, and could not contain him- 
felf from fpeaking malicioufly and wickedly 
againfl the king, when diffimulation was at the 
higheft among the officers." .Confequently 
every precaution which military difcipline could 
exercife, or the antagoniflic malevolence of his 
dark and fubtle mind imagine, was quickly 
enlifted by him in the hope of his being enabled 
to render abortive the contrivances for the king's 
efcape, which it was well known were being 
vigoroufly difpofed preparatory to the advent of 
a fuitable opportunity for making them available. 
Still every preparation went bravely and con- 
fidingly on, and both the king and his friends 
implicitly believed in the impoffibility of a failure 
in the meafures they were daily perfedling — 
fruitlefs expeftation ! vain reliance ! for all their 
hopes were deftined to be again reverfed, and 
the monarch for whom they were ftriving, 
reduced to the loweft ebb of his fortunes. At 
this moment repeated communications from 



f4<^ Information from the Committee. 

Derby Houfe difclofed a perfeft knowledge of 
the projefts which were gradually approaching 
maturity, and Hammond neceflarily held the 
game in his own hands.- 

At the latter end of the month of April, the 
committee wrote,. " The time affigned is May- 
day, at nighty for the king's efcape ; but it may 
be fooner if opportunity ferves." And on the 
4th of May,. " there is an intention to get the 
king away to-morrow night or Thurfday morn ; 
for Sunday a fhip is fallen down from hence to 
Queenborough, whereabout fhe rides to waft him 
to Holland. Mrs^ Whorwood is aboard the 
fhip, a tall, well-fafhioned, and well-languaged 
gentlewoman, with a round vifage, and pock- 
holes in her face; fhe ftays to wait upon the 
king. A merchant is gone from this town laft 
night, or early this morning, to acquaint the 
king that all things are ready ; four horfes lie in 
or near Portfmouth, to carry the king by or 
near Arundel, and from thence to Queenborough.< 
A Parliament man, or one that was one, who 
liveth near Arundel, is to be the king's guide? 
The man is fuppofed to be Sir Edward Alford.- 
The merchant that is come down to the king is 
a lean, fpare young man. The place by which 



Dangers of the King's Friends. 141 

the king is to efcape, is a low room, through a 
window that is but flightly made up. He hath 
one or two about him that are falfe. Have a 
fpecial care of the king's bowling, which is the 
next plot, If this be prevented, they will then 
have a ladder fet up to the wall againft the 
bowling-alley, and horfes and a boat ready, and 
try that way, 

" The party that gives this intelligence faw 
lately a letter of the king's own hand, wherein 
he extreamly bemoans his condition, and re- 
folves to attempt by all means to free himfelf 
from it," 

By this extrad it will be comprehenfively 
feen how infurmountable were the obftacles 
oppofed to a fatisfaftory termination of the in- 
genious exertions and genuine devotion of thofe 
who, notwithftanding the perils which attended 
all their movements, were feeking to ferve the 
royal captive. Perfonal dangers were unthought 
of and unheeded ; and Firebrace even went fur- 
reptitioufly to the Ifle of Wight, for the purpofe 
of efFedling a renewed interchange of corref- 
pondence with the king, maturing the difpo- 
fitions already made, and tranfmitting to Titus 
full intelligence of his proceedings^ 



142 Offer of the Porter of the Eackjiairs. 

In this moft difficult aiid dangerous pofition of 
Firebrace, and during his fhort ftay, his endea- 
vours to eiFed the fuccefs of his miffion without 
detedion were of a deep and trying nature, as 
he did not omit availing himfelf of the flighteft 
chance that the bounds of probability prefented 
for accelerating the confummation of his defires. 
Whilft he fojourned in the ifland, a propofal, 
which apparently then offered itfelf, was fub- 
mitted to the king for adopting another means 
of gaining his freedom ; and on referring to the 
infallible authority, the miffives from Derby 
Houfe, it is found that " the fellow of the back- 
ftairs," mentioned by Charles, was the porter, 
"who ufeth to carry up coals for the king's 
chamber, prefently after dinner and fupper : he is 
to carry the king a difguife, which he is to put 
on, and alfo the porter's frock, and to lock the 
porter into his chamber, and come down himfelf 
whilft the fervants are at fupper, and fo pafs 
away." 

A flight difference of opinion feems to have 
pervaded the counfels of the king's friends 
refpeding his ultimate deftination ; and in th& 
mind of Titus a fufpicion arofe refpedting the 
integrity of fomp perfon or perfons cQgnifant of 



, Sufpicion of Correfpondents. 143 

their intentions. The objedions he raifed were 
refuted by Charles, although by a letter to Fire- 
brace it feems the king perfonally entertained 
a doubt of the probity of Lowe the merchant. 
" If any does betray me, it muft be O, {Lowe) ; 
yet he bragged to me in his laft letter, that he 
furnifhed the Duke of York with a hundred and 
fifty pounds for his journey; but the truth is, 
that N. {Mrs. IVhorwood), for whofe fidelity I 
will anfwer, doth fufpedt him, and in the laft 
packet hath given me warning of him : do not 
diftiearten him ; get what money you can of him, 
but do not truft him, 

. " It was not I that acquainted him with the 
greater bufinefs {the contemplated efcape), for I 
found his name at the joint-letter you fent me 
before ever I imagined he knew any fuch thing. 
I never wrote anything of moment to him, but 
only made ufe of him for the conveyance of 
letters, and fending me news." Similar is the 
admonition to Titus : " I do not defire that A. 
{Crejfet), orO. {Lowe), fhould anymore meddle 
in it, though I believe they mean well." 

On the perufal of thefe remarks, the firft im- 
pulfe of thought naturally suggefts Lowe as 
having been the arch-traitor by whom the Derby 



144 Captain ^itus at Southampton. 

Houfe committee were furniflied with their tod 
truthful intelligence; but other confiderations, 
efpecially the language of the committee them- 
felves, when alluding to him, render it evident 
that although he may have been guilty of indif- 
cretion, he cannot be charged with the treafonable 
and difcreditable condudl for which the I^ady 
Carlifle was probably alone anfwerable. 

At the commencement of the month of May, 
Firebrace being entrufted with fome other im- 
portant fervice, Titus betook himfelf to South- 
ampton, where he refided in the houfe of a Mrs. 
Pitt, and on the 1 6th of that month was vifited 
by Mr. Worfley,* in order that they might con- 
fult on the points which at this junfture feemed 
moft to concern his majefty, " where he fliould 
take boat, where land, and the importance of a 
pafTword." Mr. Worfley received from the king 
the additional care of conveying a letter to 
Titus, f which it is not improbable was that 
numbered XI. in this feries, or that the others 
which immediately follow were afterwards tranf- 
mitted to him through the fame medium. 



* The king's letter to Worfley. 
f Worfley's " Hiftory of the Ifle of Wight ' 



Letters to Captain Titus. 14^ 

Number V. 

King Charles to Captain Titus. 
Without date. 



(C 



W. 



" I will fend you my cheefe inftrument by 
D. (Firei>race)y and I defyre you to make good 
tryals and giue me good inftrudlions, for I know 
not how fyling can be, without much noife and 
tyme ; but if you can cleare this doute, I abfo- 
lutely conceaue this to be the beft way : yet 
D.'s (^Firebrace) new way is not to be rejedled ; 
and may be tryed (as I iuppofe) without much 
danger, that is to fay : make this fellow of the 
Backftaires try how he can condudt his friends 
in & out at that tyme of night, without ftrid: 
examination of the Cards : in a word : you that 
walk abroad freely can much better judge of 
the fefibilitie of this, then I : wherefor, feri- 
ousely I remitt myfelf to your judjement herein : 
only with this opinion ; that the eafie or difficult 
remouing of the barr will caft the fcales, in my 
judjement, betwixt the two wayfe, 

" Now concerning the place Whether ? I 
know you fay true that many of my frends 
thinke London the fitteft place & particularly 



146 Letters to Captain Titus. 

A. {Crejfet), and Q. (Lowe), but I am clearely 
of your mynde ; wherfore I earneftly & parti- 
cularly recomend the prouyding of a Ship, to 
your care; for really (upon the joynt Letter 
you fent me from London) I haue difcharged 
the corefpondent, I tould you that I had, beyond 
the Water. 

*' If your Difmiffion flood upon me, it ftiould 
not be in hafte; but in earneft, it would be well 
if you might ftay till Monday or Teufday, for 
ajufting all things the better. 

"No Cipher of myne hath mifcaried, for I 
fent but one fince I came hither & that I am 
fure was receaued, 

" I have now no more to fay, but I pray you 
haue more afleurance then bare confidence for 
hauing a. fhip readdy : 



Number VL 

King Charles to Captain Titus. 
Without date. 

«W. 

" before I anfwer yours I mufl defyre 
you to let me know to whom you have lent your 



Letters to Captain Titus. 147 

Cypher ; for if you have not, a Copie of it hath 
bine ftolne from you, as by theafe inclofed Notes 
you will fynde : Now to anfwer yours in your 
owen order. 

" As for 7 1 5 {Mrs. Whorwood) I beliue you 
are not miftaken ; for I am confident fhe will not 
deceaue your trufl: : I think 457 {Lady Carlijle) 
wifhes now well to me but I beliue fhe loves 546, 
493 aboue all things: for 714 (Dr. Fraizer) I 
hope he is honneft but I have not had much expe- 
rience of him: for L. {Ofborne) I [fully concur 
with you both for thofe things that are to 
be left & how to comunicat bufinefs to him; 
wherfor I will impart nothing of theafe things to 
him, untill you fend him to me about them, or 
that you be gone. As for W. {Titus himfelf) 
I afTure you that I am moft confident in his 
faithfullnefs, circumfpeftion and diligence : you 
bid 715 {Mrs. Whorwood) be confident, that I 
am no wais difgufted with anything that I heard 
concerning her. Be confident if an underhand 
Treaty be ofFerd me, I fliall make no other ufe 
of it, but fuch as my frends fhall be glad on : 
and cheefly to the end you mention. As for 
Mr. Myldmays information concerning what I 
fliould fay of my Childrens intertainment, my 

L 2 



148 Letters to Captain Titus. 

Anfwer is " Cujus Contrarium verum eft :" & 
a Gods name fay it in my name : for the other, 
I am confident that no Sonday fince I came 
heere (except the laft) I read on any fuch Booke 
as Argenis,* so that certainly the information 
was then falfe. 

" Since D. (Fire^race) muft be gone, will it 
not be neceflarie that F. (Dowcett^ be particularly 
acquainted with all things? for I afleure you 
that I will communicat it to none but thofe 
whom you thinke fitt. I haue now no more to 
say : but I pray you ajuft particulars as foone as 
you can : and give me an account of it as foon 
as you may : 



" Comend me hartily to 4.^ j (Lady Carlijle) 
with as many other ciuilities or thanks as you 
fliall thinke fitt. 

" I pray you decypher this inclofed Note, for 
I would not doe it though I begun it, becaufe I 
thinke it a Rogery : I fend you all that came 
with it." 

* This was a work which went through several editions in 
Latin, and was afterwards (1636) tranflated into Englifh ; it was 
entitled " Barclay, his Argenis, or the Loves of Polyarchus and 
Argenis," 



Letters to Captain Titus. 149 

Number VII. 
King Charles to Captain Titus, 
■Without date. 
«W. 

'* Since your ftay is fo fhort heere you 
muft excufe me though I importune you with 
papers hauing little to fay : Amongft other par- 
ticulars I pray you thinke ■w"'' way I fhall re- 
moue the Bar out of my Window without noife 
and unperceauedj and what tyme it will take me 
to doe it. 

" I am glad that you will acquaint F. (Dow- 
cett) with particulars ; for fince D. {Firebrace) 
muft depart I think it abfolutly neceflary : but 
I doe not defyre that A. or O. ( Crejfet or 
Lowe) fhould any more medle in it: though 
I beliue they meane well, yet let us not loofe 
theire correfpondence. If you hit in this new 
way, confider if the tyme of night would not be 
alterd ; for I beliue you will now fynde that I 
muft firft goe to Bed, before I offer to goe away : 
but I refer it to your judjement. 

"J." 
" Trye what you may doe to 
ftay till Monday : & forgett 
not to giue me an account of 
your meeting as foone as you can." 



150 Letters to Captain Titus. 

Number VIII. 
King Charles to Captain Titus. 
.Without date. 
"W. 

" I haue been confidering the Bar of my 
Window & fynde that I muft cut it in two 
places ; for that place where I muft cut it aboue^ 
I can hyde it with the leade that tyes the Glaffe ; 
but there is nothing that can hyde the lower part: 
wherfor, I conceaue it cannot but be difcouered, 
if I leaue it off, when I have once begune it : 
and how to make but one labour of it, I cannot 
yet conceaue: but if I had a forcer, I could 
make my way well anufe; or if you could 
teache me how to make the fyre-fhouell & 
tongues fupply that place, w"^ I beliue not 
impoffible. 

" Of this (I meane how to remoue the Bar) I 
defyre to be refolued before you goe ; wherefor I 
pray you giue me an anfwer to this as foone as 
you can, for I beliue our maine Bulinefs depends 
much upon it. 

"J." 

" I pray you 577 : 359 : 117: 343 : 
279: 20: ;^^6: {to be sure of a/hip)." 



Letters to Captain Titus, 151 

Number IX, 
King Charles to Captain Titus. 
Without date. 
" W. 

" The difficultie of remouing the Bar, 
hath made my thoughts runne much upon the 
later Deligne : it is this : fince for my goeing 
out at Window, it is neceflary that an Officer or 
two fhould be gained, will not they as willingly 
& may they not more eafily, helpe me out at 
the Dores ? 

" And truly in my judgement there can be 
nothing of lefle hazard then this laft Defygne, if 
any one Officer can be ingaged in it ; for then 
my Difgyfe will make me pafle fafly through 
all the Guards, wherefore I pray you thinke well 
upon it, for I am moft confident that I am in 
the right, yet for Gods fake make your objec- 
tions freely to what I haue faid ; or, if you do 
not underftand me tell me in what, & I hope 
that I ftiall fatisfie you ; howeuer I pray you lett 
me haue your Opinion of this, as foone as you 
may, whether it be Pro or Con : if this Defygne 
be refolued on, we need not ftay for Dark 
Nights. "J." : 

" I am extreamly wel fatisfied 
with the later part of your Paper." 



152 J^etters to Captain Titus. 

.Number X. 
.King Charles to Captain Titus. 
Without date. 
«W. 

>'This being a Bufinefs of Aftion & 
not of words, I will be verrie brife, & I were 
much too blame, if I were otherwais ; for really 
(to my judgement) it is fo well layed, that I 
haue but one particular to make a Quere upon 
(after thryce reading over your paper) w"** is, 
whether I fhall haue tyme anufe after I haue 
Supt & before I goe to Bed, to remoue the 
Bar : for if I had a Forecer, I would make no 
queftion of it ; but hauing nothing but fyles I 
much dout that my time be- too fcant ; where- 
fore I defyre to be well inftrudted in it: w"** 
being ajufted I know nothing to be mended in 
your Paper. But you know, there muft be 
^' Terminus ad quem," as well as " Terminus 
a quo ; " therfore I defyre to know, whether 
you intend that I fhouid goe after I am ouer the 
Water ? 

"J." 

" I desyre you to Anlwer this Paper 
as foon as you can. 

"Hencefoorth I will goe early to Bed." 



Letters to Captain 'Titus. 153 

Number XL 

King Charles to Captain Titus- 

()()C^ : 6j7 : 643 : 279 : 672 : ( Sunday \^h of 

May).. 

«W. 

^'Yefterday I receaued fower letters 
from yora with a great number of others from 
diuers of my friends as 634:169:251:680: 
(>2,(i: 169:457: {one from my wife and from 
Lady Car life) as many from 715 {Mrs. Whor- 
wood) : the lyke nomber from both A. and O. 
{Crejfet and Lowe) befydes a great bundle from 
714 and 708 (Dr. Fraizer and Col. Legge), 
alfo fower from D. {Firebrace') and one from T : 
this I giue you an account of because not hauing 
tyme now to write to any of theafe my friends 
I defyre you make my excufe to them, & lett 
tliem know that I have receaued all theire let- 
ters : now as to your Anfwer : all that I have to 
fay to yours of the firfl: of this Month, is, that 
as I fee that you are well fatisfied with me, fo I 
am with you, (for thofe two of the I2thj that 
w""* is out of Cypher I know not what you meane 
by it ; but I thanke you for the Aduice you giue 
me in the other. 739:209:165:363:284: 



1 54 Letters to Captain Titus. 

478: ( 104:359:361 :302:) 263: 117: 106: 
78:91:313:67: {though Ifinde that our dejign 
\as to this place"] muft be alltered"). Now as to 
that of the 9th, my Anfwer is, that 158 : 251 : 
60 : 108 : 210 : 302 : 420 : 263 : 20 : 7 : 10 : 212 : 
78 : 210 : 230 : 411 : 420 : 108 : Z : 263 : 79: 
144 : 250 : 404 : 209 : 349 : 80 : 21 : 41 : 92 : 705 : 
{for my landing place you muft apoint it, likewije 
You and Worfley muft tell me where I /hall take 
boate). I can write no more concerning 25 1 : 
686 : {my ejcape) untill I haue confulted with L : 
{OJborne) : in the mean tyme I muft tell you that 
now I can afleure you that no letter of myne 
hath mifcarried, for I haue had an Anfwer of that 
from 251 : 680 : {my wife) w"''' Ifufpected, there 
being no other in poffibiletie of doeing harme. 
660 : 639 : 643 :* before this morning I could 
not fpeak with L. {Ofborne), vf'^ hath giuen me 
tyme to write theafe two inclofed; that fuper- 
fcribed in french is to 251 : 680 : {my wife) the 
other to 715: {Mrs. Whorwood); this laft I 
thought fitt to write to encourage and thanke 
1 87 {her), becaufe I fynde that 63 : 14 : 91 : 90 : 

* Blanks are oftentimes inferted by the king for the purpofe 
of rendering Ithe deciphering ftill more difficult by thofe unac- 
quainted with the cipher. 



Letters to Captain Titus. 155 

194:437: 143:420:212:571:216:360:356: 
(Jhe hath affifted you in providing the Jhip). Now 
as for 284 : 1 84 : 453 : 200 : 209 : 479 : 420 : 
359: 117:38:212 : 2S9 : 53 : 20 : 210: 158: 
250: 281 : 659 : 274: 108 : 335 : 112: 151 : 46 : 
275 : 79 : 158 : 22 : 65 1 : 359 : 39 : 92 : 360 : 50 : 
29 : 117 : 131 1634 : 275 : 80 : 253 : 164 : 108 : 
102 : 289 : 14 : 210 : 202 :2io:ii7:2i6:35: 
10: 78 : 15 : 608 : 637 : 108 : 483 : 11 : 382: 
3S9 '• 340 : 279 : 643 : ZS9 '• 42o: {our great 
bujine/s, I dejire you to begin to waite for me 
on Monday next and Jo after, every night for 
a weeke together, becauje one night may faill 
and accomplifh it, and it being both trouble- 
some and dangerous to send off word to you); 
and for the 371 : 203 : 420 : 263 : 226 : 2^3 : 
210: 211 : 251 : 96 : 16 : 103 : 36 : 93 : 51 : 392 : 
135 : 1 18 : 405 : 209 : 263 : 137 : 340 : 360: 289 : 
1 17 : 216 : 335 : 54 : 23 : 97 : 16 : 143 : 2^2 ■ 210 : 
126 : 270 : 117 : 98 : 31 : 78 : 404 : 158 : 209: 

263:631: 177:359:35:143:335:363:251 : 
371 : 279 : 128 : 216 : 169 : 251 : 99 : 15 : 103 : 
36:94:52:399 :ii7 : 115 : 644: 105:275: 
78 : 200 : {time here, you muft know that it is 
my chamber window on which I m'uji defcend, 
the other being Jo wached that it cannot be cut. 



156 Letters to Captain Titus. 

wherjor I muft firft to bed so that my time of 
coming from my chamber may be about eleven at 
night') : for the reft 420,: 401 : Z: 263 : 128 : 
296 : 91 : 89 : 16 : 282 : 344 : 209 : 126 : 117 : 
401 : 420 : (^you with Worjley muft compute how 
soone I can be with you). This is as much as for 
the prefent I can fay concerning 251 : 686 : {my 
efcape), and I hope fuch as will giue you reafon- 
able good fatisfadion : bxit I defyre you to fend 
me fpeedie word if any thing that I have writen 
be obfcure, or not full to what you defyre to 
know; alfo 404 : 209 : 349 : 78 : 23 : 41 : 705 : 
108 :404: 531 : 200: 230:411 1420: 263: 182,: 
250 : 20 : 2 : 53 : 280 : 67 : 2^2 '■ ^09 • '^S3 
226 : 251 : 174 : 6^ '• 212 : 360 : 141 : 42 : 92 
{wher£ I fliall take boate and when lande, like^ 
wife you muft give me a fajfe word that I may 
know my friends in the darke). And now I have 
no more to fay but what I cannot fay according 
to my mynde, W'' is to exprefs my fatisfadbion 
& thankes to you^ for what you haue done for 
me in this Bufinefs ; only this, you fhall fynde 
me really, 

" Your moft afTeured conftant frend, 

"J." 



Letters to Captain Titus. 157 

" You muft remember to 231 : 198 : 

64 : 33S '• 3^3 • 209 : ^53 = 264 : 269 : 
65 : 80 : 21 : 46 : 117 : 78 : 54: 212 : 
251 : 531 : 216 : 108 : 315 :35 : 280 ; 
1 1 : 33 : 40 : 1 6 : 24 : (leave horjes Jo 
that I may have no Jlay between my 
landing and ^eenhorough')." 

Number XII. 

King Charles to Captain Titus. 

659 : 647 : 635 : 672 : {Monday ttJbenty-two 

May). 
«W. 

" Yefterday & not before I receaued 
three of your letters, in Anfwer to which firft I 
afleure you that 367 : 21 1 : 269 : 338 : 377 : 104 : 
109 : 375 : 1 17 : 78 : 53 : 91 : 94 : 71 : 92 : 689 : 
108 : 250: 280: 109: 377 : 230 : 210: 200: 108: 
209 : 399 : 389 : 93 : 50 : 251 : 232 : 213 : 209 : 
193: 20:656:363:360: 136: 133: 127:96: 
94: 51 : 72 : 216 : 541 : 97 : 281 : 108 : 251 : 
680 : 21 1 : 21 : i : 67 : 103 : 73 : 113 : 228 : 91 : 
158 : 106 : 187 : 532 : 63 : 359 : 250 : [there is no 
Juch thing as any tiff between him and me or anything 
like it, and I will offer my life ifl had a chance that 



158 Letters to Captain Titus. 

the dijcourfe concerning Con* and my wife is a 
damned lye, for all he fays to me) ever fince I 
came hither 397 : 218 : 359 : 360 : 127 : 79 : 52 : 
22 : 50 r 46 : 2 : 65 : 152 : 201 : 108 : (was jufi 
to the contrary paffe, and) I defyre you to aflure 
all my frends in my name that all this is punc- 
tually true, & in particular to 457 (Lady Car- 
lijle) : & that if (as you haue faid) 367 : 349 
117 : 109 : 564: 254: 91 : 250 : 118 : 360 : 512 
298 : 209 : 399 ; 281 : 22S -.264. : 382 : 92 : 279 
210: 212 : 557 : 359 : 251 : 686 : (there fhall be 
any Treaty made me by the Parliament party 
I would only have ufe of it in order to my efcapey^ 
alfo take notice in my name to 457 : 279 : 360 : 
181 : 599: 546:493 : 140: 250:212:360: 505: 
(Lady Carlifle of the good fervice done me in the 
affair), & excufe me to 187 (her) that now I doe 
not write my felfe, for indeed I haue no tyme. 

"As you have aduifed, 662 : 274 : 399 : 1 17 : 
360:631 : 275:80:363:209:349:430:359: 
686 : 90 : (Wednefday next may be the night I 
fhall endeavour to efcape) ; but I defyre you (if it 

* Con was a Scotchman who was afterwards fucceeded by 
Rofetti, an Italian. He refided openly in London, and fre- 
quented the Court as vefted with a commiffion from the Pope. 
The queen's zeal, and her authority with her huftand, was the 
caufe for a time of this imprudence so offenfive to the nation. 



Letters to Captain Titus. 159. 

be poffible) 117 : 158 : ^2i '• 3^4 '• ZS9 '• ^°4 
343 : 250 : 7,(^1 '• 420 : Z99 : 1 17 : 50 : 143 : 67 
47 : 118 \ze2 : 275 : 78 : 108 : 340 : 250 : 3 
23 : 4 : 55 : 280 : 68 : {before then to ajjeure me 
that you will be reddy on that night, and fend me 
afaffe word) w"'' yet you have not done. I have 
now no more to fay, but that I hope you will 
remember 359 : 557 : 377 : S^ : 33S ■ 3^3 • 209 : 
349 : 264 : 269:64 : 78 : 10: 7 : 381 : 80 : 215 : 
209 : 128 : 359 : 360 : 356 : (to order things Jo 
that I fhall need no flop until I go to the fhip), fo 
I reft, 

" Your moft afleured conftant frend, 

"I thought it neceffary to wryte this 
to 715 : 3^2 : 209 : 63 : 78 : 20 : 46 : 
270: 158 : 260: ^c^S: {Mrs. Whor- 
wood, that 1 flay not for thefhif), there- 
for I pray you fend it fpeedily to 187 
{her)." 



1 6o Letters to Captain Titus. 

Number XIII. 

King Charles to Captain Titus. 

662 : 647 : 638 : 672 : {JVedneJday twenty-four 
May.) 

"W. 

" Yours of yefterdayes Date I have re- 
ceaued this afternoone, v/'^, though fhort, gaue 
me much fatisfadtion ; & to w"'' my Anfwer is, 
that 118: 360 : 185 : 279 : 176 : 209 :349 : 376 : 
359: 686 : 383 : 281 : 66^ : 275 :78 : 274: 200 : 
(l>y the help of fate Ifhall try to efcafe upon Sunday 
night next). The caufe why 391 : 132 : 270 : 
135 : 91 : aio : 361 : 275 : 79 : 211 : 117 : 131 : 
360 : 133 : 279 : 360 : 38 : 31 : 107 : 67 : 63 : 
107 : 106 : 80:92:50:67: 158 : 284:255: 193 : 
210 : 427 : 335 : 2^3 : 367 •• V^ = 32 : 51 : 71 : 93 : 
128 -.S^: 116 : 281 : 665 : 275 : 79 : 274: 201 : 

271 ••359:360: 149 •3(>3 ■ 715:253 : 53: 20: 
210 : 158 : 250 : 401 : 104 : 257 : (we could not 
doe it this night is, hecaufe thecourje of the guards 
are altered, for our men have it fettled, fo that 
their turn comes but on Sunday night next ; and to 
the end that Mrs. Whorwood may wait for me 
with as much) patience, 104:209:226:420: 
399:209:379:80: 210: 159:359:413 -{^^I 



CharaBer of Charles. i6i 

know you would, I thought it fit to write) this 
enclofed, w"'' I pray you fend fpeedely to 187: 
202 (^her hand.') So I reft, 

" Your moft afleured conftant frend, 

"J." 

"I defyre, for my fatisfaftion 
and encouragement, that you will 
fend me word that you have 
receaued this as foone as you 
can." 

Charles has moralized on his own hiftory; 
and he who has read the illuftration, will eafily 
comprehend the charafter of the "captive of 
Carifbrook," as it has been expreffed by his 
commentator, " a charadler only changed by 
new acquirements, or modified by protracted 
adverfities and contemplative experience;" but 
he who perufes the foregoing letters, and 
in meditating over them reflefts likewife on 
the critical fituation of the unfortunate writer, 
will not only eafily perceive how adverfity had 
foftened the feverity of his manners, but will 
alfo forget the errors of his calamitous reign in 
the felf-drawn pidure of the humiliative doubts 
and fears of the fubdued and chaftened monarch. 

M 



1 62 Artifice of Job Weak 

Many. afFefting circumftances arifing out of the 
peculiarity of his diftrefles, reveal the man of 
forrows ; whilft the prompt fagacity of the king, 
and the perfpicuity of ftyle in a correfpondence 
which muft have been written in fecrecy and 
hafte, are no mean proofs of the mental ability 
of Charles; an ability, fays Difraeli, that has 
been always greatly undervalued. 

But whilft this correfpondence was being 
carried on with Angular and undaunted perfe- 
verance, both by the king and his friends, and 
the perilous enterprife it was its purpofe to 
advance ftill further facilitated^ there were alfo 
many humble expedients and artifices to hold in- 
tercourfe with Charles, adopted by lefs confpi- 
cuous perfonages than his more energetic con- 
fidants. 

On the 2 and May, Hammond informed the 
committee of Lords and Commons " that laft 
night there came hither one Job Weale, a phy- 
fician, as he calls himfelf, living at Kingfton- 
upon- Thames. He came hither upon poft- 
horfes, pretending to come in great hafte from 
my lord-general, employed by him to me upon 
bufinefs of higheft concernment. He counter- 
feited himfelf at firft in a fainting fit, by reafoii 



Ariifice of Job Weal. 163 

of hard riding to me, and that he could not 
declare his bufinefs until he had drank fome hot 
waters to recover his fpirits : which preamble 
being ill managed to his bufinefs, made me fuf- 
petft him to be a knave, as I afterwards more 
plainly found him. 

" So foon as he feigned to come to himfelf he 
began to tell me that his bufinefs imported the 
fafety of my life, and that which was dearer to 
me, the great charge in my hands, the fecurity 
of the perfon of the king ; and to that end I 
fhould immediately remove the king to Portf- 
mouth, to Major Lobb, to whom he had direc- 
tions to receive him. That otherwife the king 
would be violently taken hence the next morn- 
ing by four o'clock, and myfelf a dead man. 
For to his knowledge the defign was in hand, 
and it was thus — that there was a fleet of fliips 
at fea near this coaft that were to come in 
between the ifland and the lee-fliore that evening, 
who were to land in the night, and that great 
numbers were to come out of the mainland, 
pretending occafion at a fair which was to be 
kept at Newport on the morrow, who fhould 
aflift them, and at the fame time all the beacons 
in the ifland-were to be fet on fire, and to raife 

M 1 



164 Artifice of Job Weal. 

the country for the king : and if not, to amaze 
them with fear, that fo they might the better 
carry on their defign, which there was no way to 
avoid but as he had given me diredlion; When 
he had concluded his tale, I enquired of him 
whether he had anything in writing to confirm 
it. He told me that his inftrudtions to me were 
entrufted to him to communicate only by word 
of mouth; but he had inftrudtions in writing 
quilted up in his waiftcoat for Major Lobb. I 
defired him to let me fee them. He told me 
his order was only to communicate them to 
Major Lobb. I told him I muft fee them. He 
refufing, I told him I apprehended he had other 
bufinefs here, and if he would not immediately 
let me know it, I muft take another courfe with 
him. Whereupon I caufed him to be ftriftly 
fearched, and found only thefe papers about 
him. That letter from him without fuperfcrip- 
tion or direftjon he faith was to my Lord Dover.* 
The reft, petitions, and fome notes of inftrudtions 
of his own. When he found his idle plot would 

* The letter to Lord Dover concluded thus : — " Your lord- 
Ihip's friend and fervant to command for my country's good^ 
And the word is an anagram of my name, ' Obey Lawe.' 

"Job Weale." 



Artifice of Job Weal. 1 6 5 

not take, and that he was difcovered, he told me 
he would deal ingenuoufly with me, and would 
tell me truly his bufinefs was principally by this 
means to gain an intereft with me, that he might 
fpeak with the king to procure leave from him 
that the county of Surrey (from whom he was 
fent for that purpofe) might have his majefty's 
approbation to choofe a commander-in-chief 
under whom to put their county in a pofture of 
defenge. Upon his way he flopped a poft 
goirg from Portfmouth to London with this 
enclofed packet, which, if your lordihip pleafe, 
may be fpeedily delivered, being about vidtual 
for the navy." 

The urgency of the prefent moment rendered 
all concerned anxious to conclude without delay 
the difficult proceeding which it was hoped would 
once more give Charles freedom and fafety ; and 
as the feledtion of time and opportunity now 
refted folely with the king, his adherents re- 
mained with unftirinking patience, in nightly 
expectation of favourable circumftances enabling 
him to acft on the well-arranged plan. 

Confequently, as nights as dark as the feafon 
of the year would allow had again fet in, it 
was decided by his majefty, every preparation 



1 6 6 Failure of projeSied Efcape. 

being fully perfedted, that the attempt fliould be 
made on Sunday, the 28th of May, On the 
evening of that day he therefore betook himfelf 
early to his chamber, and in the ftillnefs of mid- 
night, having already ftealthily cut the former 
fatal impediment to his flight, determined to 
pafs through the window; but noticing more 
perfons under it than he expeded to be in waiting, 
and perceiving the abfence of him on whom 
he principally depended, his fufpicions became 
excited, and, in the belief that his intentions 
were difcovered, he clofed the cafement and 
retired. 

Fate had arrayed itfelf againfl: him, and his 
brief ray of hope was again doomed to difap- 
pointment. 

What the eiFed would have been, had a con- 
trary refult enfued, none but the Seer of all hearts 
can tell. There might have fucceeded years of 
peace and ufefulnefs, or of even flill greater 
terror and fatal retrofpedlion than thofe which 
followed. That there were faults in the govern- 
ment of Charles, and that injuflice at one time 
ftained the royal caufe, none can deny. The 
demerits of the man are, however, forgotten in 
his adverfity, and it is therefore equally felt that 



Hammond's Letter. 167 

much poifon was mixed in his cup of Hfe, and 
that his lot was caft in an evil time. 

On the and of June a letter was received from 
Hammond by the Speakers of both Houfes of 
Parliament, containing full details of the king's 
intent, as well as a relation of the fteps 
which had been adopted to thwart the defign. 
Having been entered in the journals of the 
Houfe of Lords, this communication is fortu- 
nately ftill preferved. The governor wrote as 
follows : — 

" To the Right Hon. the Earl of Manchefter, 
Speaker of the Houfe of Peers, pro. tern., this 
prefent. 

" My Lords, 

" As an account of the great truft your 
lordfhips have been pleafed to repofe in me, I 
take the boldnefs to acquaint your lordfhips of 
a defign cunningly laid, and carried on almoft to 
perfection, for the king's efcape from this place, 
which was the laft night (being the fet time for 
putting it in adb), by the blefling and goodnefs 
of God prevented. It was thus : Through the 
corruption and naughtinefs of two gentlemen 
attending the king, Mr. Osborn arid Mr. 



1 68 Hammond's Letter. 

Dowcett, three foldiers were fuborned and dealt 
with, to affift in this efcape, who were to be on 
duty at the king's window at the time appointed. 
Mr. Dowcett, who was to be accommodated 
with cords, to convey him down the caftle wall, 
and then the outline, after he had let himfelf 
down through his window to the prepared fen- 
tinels, was to be his guide to his horfes, which 
were ready provided, and laid at a convenient 
place within mufket-fhot of the works ; and Mr. 
OJborn and one Mr. Worsley, of Gatcomby a 
young gentleman of this ifland, who were to 
condud: him to a creek, where alfo at the fame 
time lay ready a boat to tranfport them to the 
mainland, to a place where (as is confefled by 
one whom I have apprehended) there were horfes 
to convey the king whither he pleafed. This 
defign hath been long in hand, but kept from 
me until yefterday, when two of the foldiers 
who had been dealt with came to me, and 
acquainted me with the whole bufinefs (which 1 
am confident, though I had had no knowledge 
of it, they would have found fome difficulty in 
eiFefting). I fufFered and advifed them to carry 
it on, as if I had not known it, that fo I might 
the better difcover the whole bufinefs with the 



Hammond* s Letter. 169 

lefs pretence of excufe to thofe unworthy men 
who were to affift the king in this efcape. But 
being over-curious in fecuring all places in more 
exadt manner than formerly, Mr. Dowcett, by 
happening upon an unufual guard, who at the 
firft apprehended them to be of his own party, 
but upon examination finding other anfwer than 
he expeded, made a difcovery : which, fo foon 
as I underftood, immediately I fecured Dowcett 
and a foldier who was the chief inftrument in this 
defign. Then I fent after Ofborn and Worfley, 
to apprehend them ; but they, finding they were 
difcovered, fled in great hafte to the waterfide, 
where their boat lay ready to receive them; 
" whither they were purfued ; but they, it feems, 
being in hafte, quitted their horfes and turned 
them loofe upon the fhore, and themfelves efcaped 
in the boat. I have fince apprehended one John 
Newland, of Newport, whofe part it was in the 
defign to ad: the bufinefs concerning the boats. 
This morning I find the window-bar of the 
king's bedchamber, looking to the fentinels 
appointed, to be cut in two in the middle with 
aquafortis. By this your lordfhips may pleafe 
to fee not only the dangers paft, but may alfo 
expedt that nothing will be unattempted that the 



170 Reward offered by the Commons. 

art of man can find out to perfed the king's 
efcape," &c. &c. 

"Robert Hammond. 
" Carifbrook Caftlcj 

May 29th, 1648." 

After this letter had been read in the Houfe 
of Commons, it was ordered that tool, fhould 
be fent to Hammond, " to difpofe of fuch part 
thereof as he fhall think fit to fuch perfons as 
made the difcovery of the defign for the king's 
efcape, for their good fervice therein, and the 
reft to fuch other perfons as ftiall hereafter do 
the like good fervice ;*" whilft Dowcett and the 
other two perfons under reftraint " for contriving 
and defigning the king's efcape," were defired to 
be fent to London in fafe cuftody. 

The conjedlure that Oft)orn and Worfley had 
efcaped to the boat was, however, erroneous; 
as, by a ftiort MS. account drawn up by Mr. 
Worfley himfelf, it appears that, in riding bflf 
from the caftle, they received unhurt the fire of 
a party of muflceteers, fuppofed to have been 
placed in ambufli by Hammond, and. fucceeded 
in reaching the boat which was to have conveyed 

* " Commons' Journals," 1648. 



Public Excitement. 171 

the king; but the matter refufed to let them 
embark, they having come without him. On 
this they were compelled to conceal themfelves 
in the adjacent woods for feveral days, and pro- 
cure fuftenance in the night by the affiftance 
of a kinfman of Mr. Worfley, who eventually 
provided a vefTel to take them off from the 
south fide of the ifland. 

Intenfe excitement was created by this unto- 
ward mifchance, in confequence of the reports 
currently circulated that treachery had been 
praftifed by "fome officers who profeffed fin- 
cerity" to the king's friends, and had, therefore, 
to a certain extent, been made truftingly aware 
of the contrivances they afterwards exercifed 
their guilty knowledge to counteradt. 

Thefe rumours were principally direcfted 
againft Major Rolph, the chief officer, who, 
fome little time previoufly, had greatly attached 
himfelf to Ofborn in the fuppofition that, 
from the perfon by whom he came recom- 
mended, he would be well inclined to anything 
which might advance his own interefts. He 
told him, " according to his cuftom of reviling 
the king, he wifhed he were out of the world, 
for they fhould never make any fettlement 



172 Ralph's Overtures to OJborn. 

while he were alive ; that he was fure the army 
wifhed him dead, and that Hammond had 
received many letters from the army to take 
him away by poifon, or any other way, but that 
he faw it would never be done in that place, and 
therefore, if he would join with him, they could 
get him from thence, and the work be eafily 
done. Ofborn afked him how It could be pof- 
fible to remove him from thence without Ham- 
mond's or the king's own confent. Rolph 
anfwered that the king might be decoyed from 
thence as he was from Hampton Court, by 
letters from his friends, intimating that danger 
threatened him, when he would doubtlefs be 
willing to make an efcape, and be eafily def- 
patched." 

Ofborn, however, found a fpeedy opportunity 
to inform the king of Rolph's intentions, who 
neverthelefs bade him continue his familiarity 
with him, and engage to affift in the contrivance 
for effeding his removal, as he thought by this 
means he might make Rolph's villany fubfer- 
vient to his own defires. 

Such is Lord Clarendon's verfion of this 
affair, who adds, that a common foldier was alfo 
recommended to Ofborn by Rolph, to be em- 



Ralph's Defign, 173 

ployed with Dowcett, whom the king had before 
known ; and that this foldier wrought upon one 
or two of his companions who ufed to keep 
guard at the place where the king was to get 
out; but Ofborne, not Implicitly confiding in his 
new ally, thought fit to conceal from him many 
important matters. By the aid of one of the 
foldiers, Rolph became aware of this fact, and 
judging his motives were thereby fufpedted, he, 
on the night agreed on, diredled the foldier to 
ftand fentry in the place to which he had been 
appointed, whilft he and fome others, he trufted, 
would be at hand, armed with piftols, in order 
to fhoot the king as he defcended. 

Of this arrangement, Hammond is faid to 
have been aware ; * and it is afTumed to be that 
which caufed the king to relinquifh his attempt. 

That the common foldiers had been tampered 
with, and that a fimilar endeavour was propofed 
to fome of the officers, the king's letter to 
Captain Titus exprefsly declares, whilft the in- 
cident of his betrayal by thefe men is equally 
certain. 

In a MS. volume of topographical notes, 
coUedbed in the year 17 19, principally relating 

• Worfley's « Hiftoryof the Ifle of Wight." 



174 Betrayal of the King. 

to the Ifle of Wight, the writer traditionally 
says, " that as the king was getting out, a fen- 
tinel unluckily efpied him, and fired, and waked 
the watch, and fo he was prevented; but the 
fentinel that fired was afterwards accidentally 
fliot, no perfon can tell how." 

This is a romantic explanation, but ftill one 
that contains the germs of truth, as not many 
years fince there was a ftone near the fouth porch 
of Cariflbrook Church which marked the place of 
fepulture of one of thefe very men, and ftated 
that he was named Floyd, and fo {hot " by New- 
port." This ftone has been removed of late, 
but is ftill well remembered. 

Prior to the efcape of Oftjorne from the 
ifland, he managed to indite and forward a letter 
to his former patron. Lord Wharton, wherein 
he detailed thefe circumftances, and boldly 
charged Rolph with aiming at the deftrudlion of 
the king. " The intelligence I speak of con- 
cerning this defign," he wrote, " I received from 
Captain Rolph, a perfon very intimate with the 
governor, privy to all his counfells, and one that 
is very high in the efteem of the army. He, 
my lord, informed me tha.t to his knowledge the 
governor had received feveral letters, from the 



OJborn's Letter to Lord Wharton. 175 

army, intimating that they defired the king 
might by any means be removed out of the way 
either by poifon or otherwife; and that another 
time the fame perfon perfuaded me to join with 
him in a defign to remove the king out of that 
caftle to a place of more fecrecy, proffering to 
take an oath with me, and to do it without the 
governor's privity, who, he faid, would not 
confent to lofe the allowance of the Houfe. His 
pretence to this attempt was, that the king was 
in too public a place, from whence he might be 
refcued ; but if he might be conveyed into fome 
place of fecrecy, he faid, we might difpofe of his 
perfon upon all occafions as we thought fit, and 
this he was confident we could eifedt without the 
governor's privity. My lord, confidering all 
thefe pregnant circumftances, I think it will ap- 
pear that there were, if there are not fuch inten- 
tions concerning his majefty's perfon, as may 
well juftify any endeavours that have been made 
for his remove from fo much danger; and for 
my own part, my lord, I muft be fo plain as to 
declare concerning my own adtings in relation to 
this bufinefs, that had I done lefs (having fuch 
grounds), I muft believe I had then verified all 
thofe afperfions of difloyalty and breach of truft 



176 -E/^f/ on the Parliament. 

which I am contented to fufFer from thofe whofe 
intereft is perchance oppofed to my endeavours, 
to prevent fuch damnable defigns." 

Lord Wharton kept this communication fome 
days in his pofleffion, and then fent it to Ham- 
mond, as the fitteft perfon to examine into the 
truth of the accufation; but, on the 15 th of 
June, Osborn, rather confirmed than difcouraged 
in his determination by this negledt of Lord 
Wharton, followed up the appeal by calling the 
attention of both Houfes of Parliament to his 
allegation. He offered to verify it upon oath, 
and be confirmed therein by Worfley and Dow- 
cett. He acquainted the Speakers that he had 
previoufly placed before Lord Wharton the flate- 
ment he enclofed to them, that he was unaware 
what reafon his lordfhip could have for con- 
cealing a bufinefs of that nature, unlefs it was to 
give thofe who were concerned in it better time 
to think of fome ftratagem to evade the dif- 
covery, and prayed that freedom and fecurity 
which ought to be afforded to any gentleman 
and Chriflian in witnefTmg a truth. 

In the Commons this information was tempo- 
rarily flighted and laid afide ; but in the Houfe 
of Peers it made a greater imprefTion, accelerated 



Proceedings in Parliament. 177 

perhaps by the condud: of Col. Hutchinfon, 
which occurred almoft cotemporaneoufly, as well 
as by a growing jealoufy of the increafing power 
of the Lower Houfe. Their lordlhips fent with 
more than ordinary earneftnefs to the Commons, 
a demand that Rolph fhould be fummoned from 
the Ifle of Wight, and afked their concurrence in 
an ordinance for according forty days to Ofborn, 
to come forward and make good his aflertions. 

To this requifition, fupported as it was by the 
clamour of the populace, on whom the intelli- 
gence of the difclofure had a furprifing efFedt,: — 
an influence the pamphleteering fcribes of the 
day lofl: no time in fomenting* — tlie Com- 
mons, after fome difcufllon, agreed ; and as there 
was no place mentioned in the letter whereby it 
could be difcovered where Ofborne was refident, 
a declaration containing copies of the charges 
and the letters, was ordered to be publifhed and 

* The " Parrottittg Mercury,''' of the 26th June, afteir defcrib- 
ing the circumftance, adds : — 

" Oh, curfed traitors and damned hypocrites 
Doe kill the king, mix poifon in his meat. 
Or let a red-hot iron do the feat j 
Soufe him in malmfey,bore his royal head, 
Or cramp his vitals in a feather-bed ; 
Yet know his fon doth live though he be gone. 
To fink your fouls into perdition."" 

N 



178 Letter from Hammond. 

pofted at Weftminfter, Pauls, and the two Ex- 
changes, fignifying that he might, within forty 
days from the date thereof, "come with fafety 
to his perfon, to make good, the accufations men- 
tioned in the faid letter, fo long as he may ftay 
here for the examination and proof of the bufi- 
nefs, and likewife have free liberty to depart, 
without moleftation, let, or hindrance." 

In the meantime, (on the 23 rd,) Rolph him- 
felf appeared before the Houfe of Commons, 
with a long and: laboured teftimonial from Col. 
Hammond, in which he. not only vouched his 
belief in Rolph's integrity, and recounted the 
many good offices he had done the ftate; but 
at the fame time denied the reports which had 
been circulated refpeding his own " inhu- 
mane abufing the perfon of the king," and 
afked a relief from "this intolerable burdenj 
(which God only, and a good confcience only, 
fupported a poor weak man to undergo,) either 
ijy a removal of his majefty's perfon from thence, 
or that fome other perfon might relieve him from 
the care of the king ;" and ftated, as a poftfcript, 
" that fince he had ended his letter, he had 
examined the three foldiers who were dealt with 
to have been aiffifting. in the king's, efcape, but 



Appearance of Ralph. 179 

that they all affirmed, and were ready to make 
good upon oath, that neither Ofborne, Dowcett, 
nor any other, told them that the king's life was 
in danger, it being evidently a device to inflame 
the people." 

After this communication had been read to 
the houfe by the Speaker's command, Rolph was 
called in, and acquainted with the heads of the 
charges urged againft him. He was told, that 
" what he was to fpeak, was to be spoken in 
an high court of juflice, and therefore required 
and exhorted to fpeak the truth, as he would 
anfwer the fame at the dreadful day of judgment." 
Rolph abfolutely denied that he ever had any 
difcourfe with Ofborn, the governor, or other 
perfon, to the purpofe mentioned; and it was 
therefore determined that Mr. Wheeler fhould 
go to the Houfe of Lords, and defire their con- 
currence in a committee to unite with the Com- 
mons for the purpofe of examining him forth- 
with upon oath, and taking the evidence of other 
pdrfons that would come in and teftify any know- 
ledge of the accufation. 

On the 27th of the fame month, Ofborn pre- 
ferited himfelf at the bar of the Houfe of Lords, 
and ftated he was come to make good what he 

N 2 



1 8o Avoivat of Ojborn. 

had written, but that he greatly relied on Dow- 
cett's corroboration to verify what he had ad- 
vanced. 

He was then exprefsly alked, whether he 
would avow the letter and juftify the matter;* 
and on anfwering yes, and defiring Mr. Worfley 
and Mr. Dowcett, as his witnefles, it was ordered 
by the Houfe, that Major Rolph fhould ftand 
committed to the Gatehoufe at Weftminfter, as 
he was accufed of high treafon before the lords 
in Parliament; that Mr. Worfley (who, how- 
ever, does not appear to have come forward at 
any time in aid of his compeers), fhould receive 
protedlion ; and that Ofborn fhould be bailed in 
the fum of 5000/. (" Richardus Ofborn recog- 
novit fe debere D'no Regi in 5000/.") to appear 
from time to time to make good this charge. 

Major Rolph, at firfl, declined to fubmit to 
the authority of the Houfe, and addrefTed a 
letter to their lordfhips from his refidence in 
Bifhopfgate-flreet, in which he not only totally 
repudiated the imputation, but by the oath of 
his chirurgeons, Thomas Farrar and Barth. La- 
vandar, declared " that he was not able to 
come abroad without manifefh danger to his 

* Lords' " Journals." 



Examination of Dowcetf. 1 8 1 

health, and that it would be a month before 
he was competent to do fo." 

On the 3rd July, Dowcett, in the cuftody of 
the keeper of Peter Houfe, where he had been 
committed on his arrival iti London on the 21ft 
of June, was brought before the committee, and 
queftioned by Lord Hunfdon, as to his know- 
ledge of Rolph's defign, but as he urged his 
inability to addrefs them in sufficient lan- 
guage, not being an Engliihman,* he was per- 
mitted to deliver the following evidence in 
writing :-^- 



" My Lords, 

" I am ready to make oath, that Mr, 
Richard Ofborn told me the king's perfon was 
in great danger, and that the faid Rolph had a 
defign on foot for the conveying his majefty's 
perfon to fome place of fecrecy, where only 
three f fhould go with him, and where they 
might difpofe of his perfon as they fhould think 
fit; which information from Mr. Ofborn, and 
the afTurance I had of his majefby's intention 

* Dowcett was an Italian, 
f Rolph, Ofljorn, and another Parliamentarian officer. 



1 82 Examination of Doivcett. 

forthwith to come to this Parliament, was the 
caufe of my engagement in this bufinefs. 

"2. I am ready likewife to depofe that the 
faid Rolph came to me when I was a prifoner 
in the caftle, and in a jeering manner alked me, 
' why the king came not down according to his 
appointment ?' and then with great indignation 
and fury faid, he waited almoft three hours 
under the new platform, with a good piftol 
charged to receive him if he had come.* 

"Ab. Dowcett." 

This document was fworn by Dowcett, at the 
bar of the Houfe of Peers, and the effect of fo 
clear a corroboration of Ofborn's teftimony was, 
notwithftanding the written denial which had 
been received from Rolph, that Serjeant Fynch 
and Sir Thomas Bedingfield, aided by Ofborn, 
were inftrudted to draw up an impeachment of 
high treafon againft him ; and Mr. Thane, the 
gentleman-uflier, was ordered to take him into 
cuftody and secure him ; but to firft employ a 
furgeon to view and see what condition he was 
in, and report. 

On the following day, it was declared to the 

• Lords' " Journals." 



Committal of Ralph . 183 

Houfe, that Rolph, although weak of an ague, 
might be removed without danger of his life, 
whereupon, in purfuance of the former order, 
he was direded to be sent clofe prifoner to the 
Gatehoufe; and their lordfhips further deter- 
mined, "that in case an indidtment fhould be 
found in Hants, the judge (Mr. Juftice God- 
bold) was to fufpend proceedings, as it was the 
refolution of the Houfe, that the indiftment 
fhould be removed hy certiorari into the Court 
of King's Bench, "that there might be a legal 
procedure therein." * If the obvious wifh of the 
Houfe of Commons had been heeded, no addi- 
tional inquiry would have been made into this 
myfterious accufation ; but if even the Lords 
had been lefs ftrenuous in their oppofition, the 
popular opinion was too loudly exprefled to 
allow of fuch an impolitic courfe. 

Several fruitlefs endeavours were made on the 
part of Rolph, to procure the acquiefcence of the 
peers in a fimilar ordinance to that by which 
Ofborn had been protefted, in order that he 
might be releafed from cuftody ; and in confe- 
quence of their determined refufal, a petition 
was prefented to the Houfe of Commons, by 

* Lords' " Journals." 



184 Petition of Alice Rolph. 

I 

Alice Rolph, on behalf of her hufband, whereiri 
flie endeavoured to fhow that, " almoft to the 
hazard of his life, both in refpedt of his bodily/ 
diftempers and the fury of the multitude, he was 
violently hurried to the Gatehoufe prifon at I 
Weftminfter, being never fo much as examined, 
or carried before a legal magiftrate, as by law he 
ought, it being an adb abhorred even by Paul's 
heathen judges, viz., to condemn any man 
before he is heard, and he and his accuser be 
brought face to face. And to heighten their 
cruelty, the lords have fince pafTed a fentence of 
close imprifonment upon your petitioner's huf- 
band ; denying him the benefit and afliftance of 
his friends, which your petitioner conceiveth to 
be contrary to all law or reafon, and the very 
height of tyranny, that a man fhall ftand accufed 
(nay, without, and contrary to law condemned,) 
for fuch a heinous crime as treafon. And being 
fick of body, almoft to death, fhould be locked 
up and threatened to be laid in irons, and de- 
barred all ways, either to know what is in par- 
ticular laid to his charge, or to make his lawful 
defence." 

She concluded, by praying the interference of 
the Houfe in her hufband's behalf. 



Wild's Speech. 185 

This ftatement fo far operated on the Com- 
mons, that a conference was demanded on the 
fubject with the Lords for the 1 2th of Auguft, 
when Serjeant Wild was deputed to requeft 
their lordfhips' concurrence in a meafure for 
bailing Major Rolph, " an act he confidered not 
more of favour than juftice." 

In his fpeech he ftrongly urged that, " even 
if Ofborn and Dowcett's tale were true, that 
the perfon he defired to murder was no king, 
the plot having been contrived whilft the votes 
for non-addrefles were in force ; that if a 
king was excommunicate, he was no longer a 
king, and therefore it was lawful to take him 
away. He that was an unprofitable king hath 
been for juft caufes (of which we are the fole 
judges) di veiled of all power ; therefore I fay 
he is no king, but we conjointly are king of 
England. 

" How elfe could we have trufled up Burley 
(not the leaft of my fervices), who would have 
refcued the king from Carifbrook ? 

" Befides, my lords, againft this gentleman 
there is a bare accufation or impeachment, and 
that only by two prifoners, whofe teftimonies in 
all the circumftances agree not ; for I am fure 



i86 Wild's Speech. 

there is a great difference in their handwriting, 
(a point worthy your lordfliips' confideration) ; 
but fuppofe they agreed, both in circumftance 
and fubftance, fhall the teftimony of two fuch 
men condemn fo well-deferving a man for a 
few foolilh fuppofed treafonable words or inten- 
tions, and but againft a titular king ? for we 
are king in effecft — we judges of the law, he our 
prifoner. 

" Nay, my lords, I will go further and affirm 
that if a jury of 12 men ftiould condemn 
him, yet, in point of difcretion and reafon of 
ftate, we may, and ought, not only to bail this 
virtuous gentleman, but alfo to releafe and fet 
him free." 

Such was a portion of the learned ferjeant's 
argument in favour of the Commons' propofi- 
tion ; but as, with all its ingenious fophiftry, their 
lordfliips were not convinced that Rolph was fo 
worthy a gentleman or fo great a martyr as 
Wild's ftrangely eloquent remonftrance, rather 
than appeal, would have had them believe, 
the Lower Houfe voted, on their own refpon- 
fibility, that the keeper of the Gatehoufe fliould, 
be direcfted to accommodate him " with fuffi-, 
cient lodging as a prifoner, and that his friends, , 



" The Cafe of Major Rolph." 1 87 

phyficians, and furgeons fhould be permitted to 
refort unto him." 

The lords ultimately withdrew their ordi- 
nance refpedting his intended trial, and agreed 
that it fhould be profecuted at the coming affize 
at Winchefter. 

On the 28th of Auguft, Rolph procured the 
publication of a broadfide addrefs, under the 
title of " The cafe of Major Edmund Rolph 
truly ftated," a paper which contains fo intereft- 
ing an allufion to the part he acknowledged to 
have played in counteracting the king's efcape, 
as well as important teftimony of the ftate of 
the public feeling at the time, that much of it 
feems worthy of being tranfcribed to thefe 
pages. 

(Extraft from the Cafe of Major Rolph.) 

" Mafter Ofborne being gentleman-ufher to 
the king, and Mafter Dowcett, clerk of the 
kitchen, with others, had entered into a con- 
fpiracy to betray the perfon of the king out of 
the proteftion of Parliament, and to that end 
had corrupted feveral foldiers, which was dis- 
covered to me on the 28th of May, 1648, which 



1 88 " The Cafe of Major Ralph." 

I immediately told to the governor the night 
following, the time when the faid defign fhould 
have been execufed. In order to which, Ofborne 
was gone out of the caftle to provide horfes for 
to convey the king from the place of his refi- 
dence by the authority of Parliament, and receiv- 
ing the alarum of the difcovery (being near the 
caftle-wall, waiting for the king's coming down)^ 
immediately fled and hid himfelf in fome fecret 
corner for the fpace of 3 days after ; only 
Dowcett was taken prifoner that night in the 
caflle ; and Floyd, one of the foldiers, who, upon 
examination, confefTed the truth of every parti- 
cular touching the faid defign before difcovered 
by three other foldiers that were engaged alfo, 
but never mentioned the leaft word that ever 
Ofborne or Dowcett had fo much as pretended 
that the king's perfon was in danger ; but fome 
days after that the difcovery was made, the faid 
Olborne fent a letter to the Lord Wharton, 
wherein he did charge me with fpeaking words 
to this efFeft, viz., that I ftiould fay, that to my 
knowledge the governor had received letters from 
the army, intimating that they defired the king 
might be removed out of the way, by poifon or other- 



" The Cafe of Major Rolph" 189 

wife, &c., which letter the Lord Wharton fent 
unto Col. Hammond, the governor of the Ifle of 
Wight. 

" The governor having examined Dowcett 
and feveral other foldiers that were parties in the 
defign, (Dowcett having affirmed, in the pre- 
fence of many, as will be proved,) that he knew 
of no fuch defign, though the very rope by 
which the king was to go down, was found in 
his chamber, fent them to London, where being 
brought by a guard, and by the way hearing of 
Ofborne's pamphlet, and the charge contained 
therein, profefled openly that he was confident 
that there was no fuch thing as that the king's 
life was in danger, neither did he know anything 
concerning me ; and that he did believe Ofborne 
would never appear to make good his charge ; or 
if he did appear, yet he would never be fo wicked 
as to forfwear himfelf. 

" But Olborne appearing, having firft capitu- 
lated with the Houfes for a protection from the 
laws for his traitorous pradtices as aforefaid, the 
faid Dowcett, clean contrary to his former aver- 
ments, gave under his hand a paper, wherein he 
declared that Ofborne had told him that the 
king's life was in danger, &c., and that when he 



190 " The Cafe of Major Rolph" 

was in prifon I had in a jeering manner aiked 
him why the king came not down according to 
appointment, and that I fhould fay that I flood 
under the new platform with a piftol in my hand 
to receive him, although it will be eafily proved 
that I was all that while in my chamber, until 
the very time the governor gave me order to 
apprehend the faid Dowcett. 

" Ofborne's letter coming to the Ifle of Wight 
on Wednefday, 2ift of June, I immediately, that 
night, though I had been fick a week before, by 
reafon of an impoftumation of my lower parts, 
took my journey toward London, and came to 
the Houfe of Commons on Friday 23, 1648, 
where, at the open bar, I declared what I knew, 
in every particular; from which time 1 attended 
upon the Houfe of Lords until Tuefday after, 
when, by reafon of that bodily diftemper then 
upon me, increafed by my journey, I was neceffi- 
tated to keep my chatnber and forbear any 
further attendance, only leaving notes of the 
place of my abode with feveral perforis attending 
the Houfes, in cafe I fhould be inquired for, as 
was affirmed by the Speaker of the honourable 
the Houfe of Commons; 

"Upon Tuefday, June ayth^ the lords, upon 



" The Caje of Major Ralph. " 191 

thefe falfe informations, made an order for my 
attachment and commitment to the Gatehoufe, 
Weftminfter, not fo much as ever calling me 
before themfelves, or fending me before any- 
legal magiftrate, as by law they ought. 

" The day following being the faft-day, though 
I had received information of their proceedings, 
yet I could not receive fatisfadbion concerning the 
truth thereof, the houfe not fitting until Thurfday, 
being the a 9th June, 1648, on which day I fent 
to know the truth thereof: the faid warrant not 
yet being executed upon me, (as I conceive to 
give me time to run away,) hoping that I might 
prove fo cowardly as not to ftand to it, having 
fuch great men as the lords to deal withal, and 
such a heinous crime as treafon laid to my charge. 
But, contrary to their expedtation, on Friday, 
being June the 30, I fent a letter to the lords, 
certifying unto them my condition and place of 
abode, which I am confident they knew well 
ehoughj though they would take no notice 
thereof; and my two chirurgeons alfo, to the end 
they might atteft (as they afterwards did) that it 
was indeed a bodily diftemper which occasioned my 
non-attendance, and nothing elfe. Yet, notwith- 
ftanding this clear evidence of my integrity, the 



192 " "the Cafe of Major Ralph. " 

lords perfifted, and their ofEcers, in the execution 
of their firft and fecond warrants, exercifed fuch 
cruelty as hath not been manifefted to the king- 
dom's greateft enemies, neither taking notice of 
the weaknefs of my condition, attefted by my 
chirurgeons, being not able to turn myfelf in 
bed, nor the invalidity of the charge brought 
againft me by criminal perfons, there being no 
crime in law laid to my charge, nor one legal 
accufer, infomuch that my life was, by my unfea- 
fonable removal, not only by my ficknefs, but 
alfo by the violence of an inconfiderate multi- 
tude, to whofe rage I was expofed, and from 
whofe fury I was with great difficulty by Provi- 
dence preferved. 

" Being thus cruelly hurried to the Gatehoufe, 
I was as tyrannically ufed there, having a fentence 
of clofe imprifonment pafled upon me, by reafon 
of which my wife, friends, and chirurgeons, 
were kept from me to the hazard of my utter 
ruin, where, had not the honourable Houfe of 
Commons timely interpofed, I had certainly 
perifhed. 

" Two months I have remained a prifoner 
without either legal warrant, legal crime, or 
legal accufer. And now, in order to the further 



Ralph's Petition to the Commons. 19^ 

profecution of their defign, not only to ruin me, 
but to blaft the repute of the army and all othe^ 
■well-affe6led perfons, they "have framed an 
indidtment upon . the faid fcandalous informa- 
tions, and have ordered the fame to be tranf- 
mitted to the next affixes held for the county of 
Southampton." - . ^ 

Having thus effayed the way for another 
appeal to the Commons, a petition was prefented 
from him to that Houfe on the 3rd of September. 
He pleaded that an indidment had been pre- 
pared by the Lords, and tranfmitted to Win- 
chefter, whilft he was kept a clofe prifoner in 
the Gatehoufe ; and that Ofborn and Dowcett 
had been fent thither on the 28 th of Auguft to 
give evidence to the grand jury on the faid 
jndidment. " That notwithftanding the faid 
indidtment confifted of four feveral heads of 
treafon, wherein the whole army was accufed, 
yet the faid Ofborn and Dowcett gave nothing 
material in evidence whereon an indidlment 
could be grounded : fo that upon the examina- 
tion of the whole matters the grand jury returned 
an ignoramus upon the faid bill of indiftment, as 
by a certification from the clerk of the affize 
more plainly appeared. 

o 



194 Rofp^-s Petition to the Commons. 

" That your petkionerj notwithftanding he is 
clear in the eye of the law, and in the con- 
fciences of all honeffe men, yet he is ftill a pri- 
foner to the will of the Lords, and left without 
a poffibility of legal reparation both for his 
illegal imprifonment, befides his great charges 
and damages in his eftate and cfedit fuftained, 
being left without all poffibility of vindieation 
or reparation, unlefs this Honourable House be 
pleafed (as in like cafes heretofore) to take 
him into confideration, and as a manifeftation of 
the juft fenfe of their own and the army's 
honour, and your petitioner's unparalleled fuf- 
ferings, find fome expedient both for the 
enlargement, vindication, and reparation of your 
petitioner^ the judges being both corrupt, and 
fo nearly concerned, the Lords fo powerful, 
and Ofborn and Dowcett fo beggarly, that it is 
impoffible your petitioner fhould ever be repaired 
in his eftate or credit without your juftice be 
exercifed in the obtaining thereof. 

" And forafmuch as the judges are appointed 
to fit with the Lords as their affiftants in point of 
laWj and ought to inform them by what rule 
they ought to proceed, being fworn thereunto^ 
and yet have, contrary to law and their oaths. 



Rolph's Petition to the Commons. 195 

connived at the apparent fubverfion of the fun- 
damental laws of this nation, by fufFering fuch 
illegal warrants to pafs from time to time from 
the Lords upon fuch illegal accufations, that 
therefore this Houfe would be pleafed to call the 
faid judges to an account for thofe tlieir undue 
proceedings; and out of their eftates (who 
ought to have prevented your petitioner's fufFer- 
ings and damages) to allow him fuch legal 
reparations as your honours fhall deein meet 
and convenient." 

By this extradty it will be perceived that 
Rolph had been virtually tried and acquitted 
under a coiurfe of adion, which would certainly 
feem by his ftatement, to evince either an extra- 
ordinary emanation of malevolence towards him 
by the Houfe of Peers, or their firm convidtion 
of his guilt; whilft his detention would appa- 
rently fhow that it was their intention to take 
fome ulterior meafures of procedure againft 
him. 

The charge of corruption and oppreffion on 
the part of the judges is not, however, fo well 
founded; becaufe the fame agency which had 
fo fuccefsfuUy procured the condemnation of 
Burley, had been again enlifted to devife the 

o 2 



196 'Trial of Ralph. 

acquittal of Rolph. On the death of Mr. Juf- 
tice Godbold, Serjeant Wild was ordered to pre- 
fide at the trial, which, as ftated in Rolph's 
petition, was held at Winchefter, on the 28 th of 
Auguft, 1648. 

At the time of trial, Ofbprn 'and Dowcett, by 
command of the Houfe of Peers, proceeded to 
Winchefter, where likewife Mrs. Rolph was 
found ** taking care for the difperfing of feveral 
papers in her hufband's vindication, and pofting 
them up in the moft eminent places in the Hall 
where he was to receive his trial." * 

The indidtment was framed under the pro- 
vifions of the fame aft of Parliament which had 
been urged againft Burley, the 25th of Edward 
the Third, fupported by the teftimony of Ofborn 
and Dowcett, who, however, were denied the 
ufe of counfel, although, — as was written at 
the time, — "confidering the zeal of Wild, 
(whose great ruff was the only confpicuous 
monument of authority on the Bench,) and 
Mr, Lifle who sat with him, who might have 
been advocates as well as judges, and saved 
Rolph the charge of a counfellor," two perfons 
of the names of Maynard and NichoUs appeared 

* Probably " The Case of Major Rolph," as already Quoted. 



Trial of Ralph. 197 

on his behalf, Maynard having been a promi- 
nent charad:er at the trial of Strafford. 

The jury confifted of ^Humphrey Ofey, of 
Wherwell, gent. ; William Woolgar, of Havant, 
gent.; Thomas Domer, of Chicknel, gent.; 
Benediftus Barnham, of Northwarnboropgh, 
gent. ; Arthur Lipfcomb, of Alresford, gent. ; 
Bartholomew Stileman, of Mattingley, gent. ; 
John Hunt, of Altpn, gent, ; Robert Cooper, of 
Barton Stacey, gent. ; John Yeardley, of Prefton 
Candover, gent. ; William Soper, of Domer, 
gent. ; William Harward, of Charlcot, gent. ; Jo. 
Hornwood, of Church Okeley, gent. ; Robert 
Powlfon, of Hawkley, gent. ; William Demalk, 
of Everfeley, gent. ; Robert Bunney, of Ibdrop, 
gent. ; Jo. Waterman, of Tangley, gent. ; and 
Thomas Haflcer, of Bromley, gent. 

Wild firft addrefled himfelf to the jury, by 
reading them a letter from Cromwell, in which 
he announced his northern vidtory, telling them 
he did fo for the purpofe of enlifting their 
reverence for Oliver, and good opinion for 
Rolph; and, fecondly, the letter which had been 
conveyed by Rolph to the Houfe of Commons 
as his vindication, by Hammond. 

Dowcett defired to deliver his examination in 



19^ OJhorn's Evidence. 

writing, alleging that the lords had allowed 
him a fimilar liberty at their bar, but was refufed 
his requeft by Wild, 

Ofborn ftated, *' That he, this examinat, being 
in the place of gentleman-ufher to the king, at 
and in the caftle at Carifbrook, in the Ifle of 
Wight, in the county of Southampton, his 
majefty, about a week after the beginning of the 
montli of May laft paft, as near as this examinat 
can now call the time to mind, complained to 
this examinat of the harflinefs of his ufage in 
the faid caftle, expreffmg that he was defirous 
to efcape from thence, and moved this examinat 
to affift him to that purpofe, and to think of 
the means how it might be done. And his 
majefly then faid, that it would be the moft 
expeditious way to procure a peace, if he could 
efcape ; or ufed words to that effedt. Howbeit 
this examinat did not then exprefs any confent 
to the faid motion ; but, at a time afterwards, 
this examinat being of familiar acquaintance 
with Captain Edmund Rolph, now Major 
Rolph, who had a refidence in the faid caftle 
wherein he [the king] lodged, this examftiat 
went into the faid refidence to vifit him. And 
this examinat enquiring of him what news there 



Oportis Efuideme. I99 

was, the faid Rolph told this examlnat that the 
governor of the faid ifland had received feveral 
letters from the army, to make away with the 
king, by poifon or otherwife; at which news this 
examinat feeming to ftart, the faid Rolph paufed 
awhile, and fell off from that difcourfe. 

" Yet, before they parted, the faid Rolph pro- 
pounded another defign, wherein he moved this 
examinat to join with him, proffering to take an 
oath with the examinat concerning the fame; 
which other defign was to remove the king, who 
was then at and in Cariftrook Caftle aforefaid, 
out of, and from that place, unto fome odier 
place of more fecrecy; pretending that at Carif- 
brook, his majefty was in too public a place 
from whence he might be refcued ; but the faid 
Rolph faid, that if we carried him to a place of 
more fecrecy, we might difpofe of his perfon as 
we thought fit. 

*' Whereupon, this examinat enquiring of 
Rolph, whether the faid governor would agree 
thereunto, the faid Rolph anfwered, he feared he 
would not, for diat he was a covetous man, and 
would not agree thereunto, for fear of lofing the 
allowance from the Houfe. 

** This examinat then obJ6<%ed, how this could 



200 OJhqr'n's 'Evidence". 

be effefted againft the king's will ; to which the 
faid Rolph anfweredj he would deceive him by 
letters, pretending they came from his majefty's 
own friends. 

*' Then this examinat further objedled: It is to 
be fuppofed the king hath ciphers which he the 
faid Rolph could not counterfeit; to which the 
faid Rolph anfwered, it is true; but Glemham, 
or thofe that are far off, and have not lately 
been with his majefty, have no ciphers. And 
then the faid Rolph told this examinat, that' he 
had letters ready written to the purpofe afore- 
faid. 

"This examinat faid, it were very fit they 
fhould acquaint the committee at Derby Houfe, 
for their approbation to be had before they 
fhould endeavour to remove the king. And 
this examinat offered himfelf to come up to 
London to that purpofe; but the faid Rolph 
declared, that he utterly difliked that courfe, 
faying he could effed the faid defign without 
the governor's privity. 

" This examinat further faith, that the very 
fame day, or the next day after, being the firft 
opportunity that this examinat could get to 
fpeak of it to the king, he told his majefty all 



Ojborn's Evidence. 201 

that the faid Rolph had faid unto him. And 
his majefty therefore faid, that he had lately 
received a letter from fome or one of his friends, 
purporting that there was an intention to remove 
his majefty not only from thence, but from the 
knowledge of all mankind, if poffible. And 
fhortly afterwards, his majefty having spoken 
again to this examinat, to think of fome way 
how his majefty might efcape, this examinat did 
confent to ufe his beft endeavour to help his 
majefty to efcape. 

" And this examinat further faith, that he did 
ihortly after acquaint Mr. Abraham Dowcett 
(who waited then as clerk of the kitchen to his 
majefty) with his majefty's defire to efcape, 
moving him to be an affiftant therein, who faid 
it might be a dangerous bufinefs, or to that 
efFeft ; but within a few days after this examinat 
went again to the faid Dowcett, and acquainted 
him with all that which the faid Rolph had 
formerly told this examinat, concerning the faid 
Rolph's defign for the removal of his majefty 
to a place of fecrecy as aforefaid, and moved 
the faid Dowcett again to join with this examinat 
to help his majefty's efcape. 
, " The faid Dowcett feem'ed then to make doubt 



202 OJb^rn's Evidence. 

of his majefty's decree in that behalf, requiring 
to be fatisfied with the fight of fomewhat for it 
under his majefty's hand, which this examlnat 
fpeedily procured; but then the faid Dowcett 
demanded whither the king would go if he 
could efcape. This examinat told the faid Dow- 
cett, that his majefty's purpofe was to go to his 
Parliament ; and then the faid Dowcett faid to 
this examinat, that he would be afliftant towards 
the helping of his majefty to efcape, or ufed 
words to that effed:. 

" And upon Sunday, the eight and twentieth 
day of May laft paft, about twelve of the clock 
at night, this examinat, with the privity and 
afliftance of the faid Dowcett, and of one Mr. 
Edward Worfley, and of four foldiers, whofe 
furnames, as he taketh it, were Floyd, and Til^ 
ling, and Wenfcall, and Featherftone, thought 
to have effedled the fame by fuch means as was 
in that behalf agreed upon. And this examinat 
for his part, was thereby to attain the efFedting 
thereof, at the time and place in that behalf to 
him appointed; this examinat being by agree^ 
ment to attend with a boat to receive his ma- 
jefty at a convenient place to that purpofe 
aifigned ; to which place the faid other parties. 



Wild*s Addrefs to the Jury. 203 

or fome of thenij fliould in the night-time have 
conveyed his majefty ; but this examinat finding 
by the relation of the faid Mr. Worfley, who 
came towards the faid place without the king, 
that their defign for his majefty's efcape was 
difcovered, he did, by the advice and help of 
the faid Mr. Worfley, who was an inhabitant of 
the faid ifland, conceal himfelf in the faid ifland, 
by the fpace of three days then next follow- 
ing or thereabouts; and then he and the faid 
Mr. Worfley, in the night-time, pafled over by 
boat from the faid ifland, into the county of 
Suflex." 

This examination having been taken upon 
oath and backed by the evidence of Dowcett, 
the ftatements of the foldiers as received by 
Hammond, were read, and Wild proceeded to 
addrefs himfelf to the jury. 

" Gentlemen," faid he, " this is a bufinefs of 
great importance; take heed how you move in 
it ; the Houfe of Commons refent it very much : 
for this Major Rolph is a gallant man, and 
hath done great fervice for the fl:ate. Now in a 
bufinefs of this nature, there muft not be only 



204 Wild's Addrefs to the Jury. 

probable but provable evidence, evidence, * luce 
clariora,' which this is not. There was a time, 
indeed, when intentions and words were treafon, 
but, gentlemen, God forbid it fliould be fo now. 
Confider likewife the invalidity of the witnefles, 
more guilty than he for aught I fee, for it was a 
crime to endeavour to remove the king from 
thence. For we are all miftaken. The king is 
not in prifon; we only keep him fafe to fave 
bloodfhed, and the better to make addreffes to 
him, which thefe men would have hindered. 
How do you know, but that thefe men would 
have made away with the king, and Rolph 
charged his piftol to fecure him ? Take notice, 
gentlemen, of the word 'receive.' He might lie 
there to protect the king from the violence of 
other perfons ; and had the king mifcarried, 
thefe men would have been guilty of his blood. 
They indeed deferve to be indidted, for, their 
defign failing, they accufe him out of ill-will; 
and fo, ye gentlemen of the jury, I leave his 
innocence to your judgment and difcretion." 
But immediately bethinking himfelf, he again 
addrefled them on the importance of the word 
receive," which he faid meant, that Rolph 
" remained three hours with a good piftol ready 



(( 



Acquittal ofRolph. 205 

charged to have received the king had he come 
down." To this Ofborn replied, " that in the 
language of a foldier, it fignified as much as 
' I will kill fuch a man.'" 

Wild however filenced the interruption by 
faying, ** It might fo ; but God forbid he fhould 
proceed againft any man for words or expref- 
fions." The jury thereupon retired, and as they 
fpeedily returned with an ignoramus, the anti- 
cipations of the judge and the wifhes of the 
Commons were fully realized,* 

The effeft of this trial, aided by the receipt 
of the petition already cited, was a refolution by 
the Commons, that the body of Major Rolph 
fhould be brought by the keeper of the Gate- 
houfe to the bar of the Houfe on the fucceeding 
Monday at nine o'clock. In purfuance of this 
order he was prefented, and received his dif- 
charge from cuftody ; and on the 9th of Septem- 



* "The Second Centurie of ParliamentMen,"4to.,i648,fays: 
" Sergeant Wilde, Jujiiciarius itinerans, anglici, ' Journeyman 
judge,' had, after the hanging of Captain Burley, looo/. out of 
the Privy Purfe of Derby Houfe ; 'tis thought he afforded a 
great pennyworth in his fervice, which another would not have 
done for 100,000/., and it is affirmed he had 1000/, more upon 
the acquittal of Major Rolfe, fo it is all one to him whether he 
hangs or hangs not." 



2o6 Credibility of OporrCs AJfertion. 

ber, 1 50/. were voted him as fome compenfatlon 
for his fuppofed wrongs. 

To this ordinance, the Lords however refufed 
their affent, and with the re-committal of Dow- 
cett to Peter Houfe, and the return of Rolph to 
his duties at Carilbrook, this Angular and myt 
terious propofition, or, otherwife, ingenious but 
monftrous expedient, terminated. 

With whatever care the circumjftances detailed 
in the foregoing narrative may be fcrutinifed, 
the detection of the betrayer or the betrayed is 
of Gourfe now an utter impoffibility. The 
plaufible ftatements of Ofborn at firft fight for- 
cibly arreft the fympathies of the reader, and 
thereby attach more than a probability of cre- 
dence to the charges he propounded. The tale 
is well conneded, and in many points capable of 
corroboration by cotemporary authorities, whilfl: 
the propofition is one to which many perfons of 
note attached to the army were known to be 
favourable. But then arifes the queftion, if all 
this was known to the king, why did he allow 
his communications to Titus and his other cor- 
refpondents to pafs without fome allufion to fo 
extraordinary and defirable a propofition. In 
thefe letters, he is found the rather urging them 



CharaSier ofOjborn. 207 

to endeavour to gain over fome of the offi- 
cers, which was certainly, tinder thefe cifcum- 
ftances, quite an unneceflary danger, as the men 
whofe fervices he believed he had fecured, are 
fhown to have belonged to Rolph's own com- 
pany; and he by Ofborn's examination and 
letters, was fuppofed to be interefted in the king's 
attempted efcape, although prompted by nefa-» 
rious motives, 

A letter from Carifbrook, of the 24th July, 
1648, defcribes Ofborn in the following terms : — 
"His carriage and language faintlike when he 
was in the company of religious men, but when 
affociated with vain perfons he was as vain and 
foolifh as they, fpending his precious time in 
tippling, finging, and unprofitable difcourfes. 
The day before he Ihould have aded his vil- 
lany, hearing a fermon wherein thefe or the 
like words were delivered, ' that the heathen 
philofopherSj if they were now livings would abhor 
thofe men that are falje to their principles and 
undertakings ^ and afterwards feemed to blefs 
God for fo feafonable a difcourfe, and to be 
deeply affeded therewith;" yet (notwithftand- 
ing) he was the moft forward man in the defign 
of conveying away the king the night following. 



2o8 ChdraBer oJ^Ojborn: 

" No man inveighed more againft the' king's 
aftings and interefts than he, infomuch that he 
was blamed by fome, and fufpefted by others 
(well afFefted) upon this ground, as conceiving 
that a man may be fa.ithful to his truft, and 
confcientioufly difcharge his duty, without fuch 
bitter refledbions upon the adverfe party. 
- " His expreffion in the praife and commen-^ 
dation of the army (under the condud of Lord 
Fairfax) and their late adtirigs and proceedings 
were hyperbolical, as if he had been one of their 
greateft friends ; whereas, it appears he was one 
of their moft malicious adverfaries." 

This is the charafter drawn of Ofborn by an 
adversary, for the natural tendency of whofe 
ppinion fome allowance muft be made ; but even 
with this admiffion, enough will remain to con- 
vict him of having greatly overafted his part, 
and prove that much hypocrify exifted in him. 
He would therefore appear not altogether inca- 
pable of devifing fuch a fcheme, perhaps with 
the hope, that after the publication of so for- 
cible and damning an accufation, the Parliament 
would be either obligated to remove the king's 
perfon to fome other place of keeping, where 
lefs formidable obftacles would be likely to 



Letter to Captain Titus. 209 

intervene for preventing his efcape, or that men 
lefs energetic than Hammond and Rolph might 
be appointed to the command at Carifbrook, 
and thereby further the fame refult. This fup- 
pofition is only ftated as a poflible incentive for 
the concodlion of the device, if device it were ; 
and in furtherance of the conjefturcj the rea- 
der's attention is requefted to a very remarkable 
obfervation by the king himfelf, in the follow- 
ing letter ; one of the feries addreffed to Captain 
Titus. 



Number XIV. 
Monday, 10 July, 1648. 



« 



W. 



" Yours of the 5th of this month I 
receaued upon Saturday laft : being glad to know 
where to fynde you, I will anfwer your Newes 
(for w""* I thank you), with Newes, leaft our 
doeings heere fhould be mifreported to you : I 
haue been tould by fuch as I know will not 
deceaue me, that, of late, this Gouernor thought 
witjk cunning to have fcrewed out an exami- 
nation from the king concerning his pretended 
efcape ; for by way of freedom, fliowing him a 
letter of Mr. Ofburne tuching that bufinefs, the 

p 



210 Letter to Captain Titus. 

fayd Gouernor defyred to know of the king, if 
he had heard Major Rolph fay any fuch thing 
whereof Ofburne accufed him, but all the 
Anfwer that the king would give him was: If 
he knew nothing, he could tell him nothing: 
becaufe his maxime is neuer to cleare one man to 
the prejudice of another, or of his owen fervice : 
and be confident, this is all in fubftance, that the 
Gouernor could gett from the king, concerning 
this bufinefs: but upon occafion of Difcourfe 
before fome ladies, I heard the king fay, that 
the Gouernor never oiFerd any Perfonall inci- 
uility to him (hoping they belieued that he 
would never endure it fo long as his hands were 
free) nor did he euer fufpect hurt from him by 
way of Treachery : afleuring you this, in fub- 
ftance, is all that the king fpoke for the Gouer- 
nor's juftification : and now, I have no more to 
fay, but to recomend to your care the delivery 
of theafe two inclofed letters, and to fend newes 
as often as you can, 

*' Your moft afleured reall frend, 

"J." 

209 : 263 : 563 : 228 : 226 : 360 : 468 : 
279:493:509 : 63 : 429: 117: 158: 
209 : 126 : 179: 189: 109:463 : 



Letter to Captain tit us. 2 1 r 

(I muji certainly know the contents of Rogers' 
Papers before I can get him any answer). 

"^ Since writing of this, I have receaued yours 
of the 3rd of this month, whereby I finde that 
you have written me two letters w""* I have not 
receaued. 

"One of thefe is to 457 {Lady Carlifle), and 
the other to 715 {^Mrs. Whorwood)." 

On the other hand, it is requifite that due 
attention fhould be paid to Rolph's known con- 
nexion with the moft violent party in the army, 
and his exprefled defire for fuch a refult as 
Ofborn's allegation foreboded, whilft it cannot 
be fuppofed that the Houfe of Lords would 
have purfued fo firm a refolve, or the Houfe of 
Commons fo great a laxity of regardful con- 
fideration for fo grave a charge, if there had not 
been ftrong reafons to believe, in the one cafe, 
that the accufation refted on a truthful foun- 
dation, and that in the other there was a fimilar 
convidion, but that it received the fympathies, 
rather than the indignation of the majority of 
the members. 

It is alfo worthy of remark, that at the time 
of trial, the true bill was ignored by the jury 

p 2 



212 The King's Recogn^f ion of OJborn. 

becaufe the indiftment was qply fupported by 
a fingle witnefs; and that probabilities feem 
to render refutation as impoffible as would be 
the endeavour to arrive at a fatisfaftory con- 
clufion of the guilt or innocence of the parties 
whofe names occur in the relation of this myf- 
terious tranfa6tion, on both fides. 

Whether Ofborn was the injured or the in- 
jurer, the king was not however unmindful of 
his fervices, as in a letter written to the Prince 
of Wales, from Newport, on the 6th November 
following, he fays : — 

" P.S. If Qlborne (who has been in trouble 
for me about Major Rolph's bufinefs) come to 
you, ufe him well for my fake." 



CHAPTER VI. 



State of the Kingdom at large — Renewal of Correfpondence 
with Captain Titus — A Treaty Propofed by the Parliament, 
and Accepted by the King — Preparations for the Treaty — 
The Treaty of Newport. 



■pOR the purpofe of elucidating this narrative, 
■*■ it now becomes neceffary that a brief 
retrofpeft fliould be rendered of the tranfaftions 
which agitated the kingdom at large during the 
interval in which the thrilling occurrences that 
have been related in connexion with the per- 
fonal hiftory of Charles, were being enadted. 

It has been already ftated, that foon after the 
paffing of the vote of non-addrefles, the king 
appealed to the good fenfe of the people through 
the agency of the prefs ; and in the ftate of the 
public mind which thereupon enfued, every eye 



214 Proceedings of the Scots. 

was turned towards Scotland ; but the return of 
the Scottifh commiffioners having difpelled the 
hopes which had been entertained of the king's 
acceflion to the Covenant, the Scottifh Parlia- 
ment was intimidated by the vehemence of the 
populace. The Duke of Hamilton, the avowed 
leader of the royalifts and prefbyterians, whofe 
defign it was to reftore the king, thereupon be- 
came neceflitated to conceal his purpofe under 
the pretence of fuppreffing herefy and fchifm; 
and in the meantime the Earl of Argyle, his 
chief opponent, promoted fo ftrong an oppofi- 
tion by heading the Covenanters, that of the 
levy of 30,000 foot, and 6000 horfe voted to 
ferve under the duke, there could only be raifed 
10,000 foot and 600 horfe, nor even thefe until 
the month of July. 

Infurreftionary movements on the part of 
the royalifts were neverthelefs becoming general 
throughout England; as on the 9th of April, 
the initiative had been afforded by a mob of 
apprentices and other young people, who ftoned 
a captain of trainbands in Moorfields, and then 
marched in diforderly array to Weftminfter, with 
the cry of King Charles ! King Charles ! 

As might have been expedled, they were 



The State of the Kingdom. 2 1 5 

quickly dilpeffed by a troop of horfe, which 
fallied from the Mews ; but on their retreating 
into the city, they filled it with diforder and 
fears, plundered houfes of arms, and forced the 
lord mayor to efcape privately, and feek refuge 
in the Tower. 

This example was quickly followed by fimilar 
difturbances in Norwich, Thetford, Exeter^ 
Canterbury, and other towns, which were in- 
deed fupprefled by the exertions of Fairfax and 
the county committees ; but the attitude affumed 
by the multitude, forcibly fliowed that a very 
ftrong current of feeling favourable to the royal 
caufe was again {etting in. 

The Prefbyterians having united with the 
concealed royalifts, apparently acquired a ma- 
jority in the Houfe of Commons, as on the 24th 
of April they fucceeded in carrying a vote vett- 
ing the military polls and defences of the City 
of London in- the Common Council ; four days 
after, that the government of the kingdom 
fhould continue to be by King, Lords, and 
Commons; and they then fubmitted a propofi- 
tion, notwithftanding the vote of non-addrefles, 
for a treaty to be opened with the king, whilft 
petitions from various public bodies poured into 



21 6 Declaration of the Fleet. 

the two HoufeSj all reiterating the fame prayer, 
viz., that the army fliould be difbanded, and the 
king brought back to his capital. 

The inhabitaqjts of Surrey and Eflex felt dif- 
fatisfied with the anfwers returned to their 
petitions, and joined with thofe of Kent in their 
repeated aflemblages for confidering their caufes 
of complaint, and of devifing a means of redrefs. 
As the refult of their deliberations, they formed 
affociations, coUedted arms, and at an appointed 
time arranged a general rifing, in which the 
town of Deal fhowed fo great a fpirit of loyalty 
and determination, that preparations were made 
by Admiral Rainfborough to chaftife their pre- 
fumption, as it was termed. He left orders for 
the fleet to follow him, and proceeded in his 
barge towards the town ; but as his men were 
moftly refidents at that port, where their wives 
and families then were, murmurs arofe ; and on 
its being propofed by one Tindale, a boatfwain 
in the admiral's fhip, that they alfo fliould 
declare for the king, the inftigation was adopted, 
and the officers arrefted, whilft the crews of the 
other fliips followed their example, in defiance of 
the remonftrances of their commanders. 

This fleet confifted of fix fliips of war fully 



"Defeat of Goring. 217 

equipped for fummer fervice; and after thus 
declaring themfelves, they immediately failed 
under the royal colours to Helvoetfluys, in 
Holland, in fearch of the Duke of York, whom 
they chofe as their commander-in-chief.* 

The men of Kent, after having threatened the 
Parliament for fome time, marched boldly upon 
London ; and as the Parliament had no armed 
power at hand to fupport its authority — the 
royalifts numerous, and the Common Council 
difafFected, this was a movement fraught with 
the moft important confequences. Conceffion, 
however, prevailed; and Fairfax having encoun- 
tered the Kentifh forces on Blackheath with 
feven regiments (aided by the terror infpired by 
the recent defeat at Maidftone), drove them back 
to Rochefter, where Lord Goring again made 
head, and proceeded to Gravefend, whilfl: other 
bodies of the fame party took poffeffion of Can- 
terbury, and endeavoured to furprife Dover; 
but being there defeated in his plan. Goring was 
obliged to crofs the Thames, and raife his 
ftandard in Eflex. Here he was joined by Lord 
Capel with the royalifts from Hertfordfhire, and 

* Lingard. 



2 1 8 Rifings in Wales. 

by Sir Charles Lucas with a body of horfe from 
Chelmsford, and he ultimately fixed his head- 
quarters at Colchefter, which was foon after in- 
vefted by Fairfax, and, although only furrounded 
by a low rampart of earth, fuccefsfuUy defended, 
until the Scottifli invafion ftiowed the inutility 
of any longer prolonging the miferies endured 
by the befieged. 

Simultaneoufly with thefe movements, rifings 
had alfo taken place in Wales, where the royalifts 
fecured Pembroke Caftlej and it may be truly 
faid, that fcarcely any portion of the kingdom 
was quiet, the whole north of England being 
likewife in a commotion, and a Scottish army 
preparing to crofs the border in favour of the 
king ; whilft a new tone had been imparted to 
the proceedings in Parliament, in confequence of 
the abfence of the officers of the army, and the 
reftoration of the excluded members. The 
lords, however, with a great profeffion of liber- 
ality, ftill refufed their aflent to the propofed 
treaty, unlefs it was voted without any condition 
being impofed upon his majeftyj and the Com- 
mon Council offered an afTurance that if the 
king were fuffered to come to London, the city 



Advance of the Scots ^ 219 

would guarantee both the royal perion and the 
two Houfes free from danger. 

The royalifts in the northern counties, in 
anticipation of the advance of the Duke of 
Hamilton, had reduced Berwick and Carlifle; 
and early in the month of July, the Duke 
redeemed his promife by croffing the borders at 
the head of his army, leaving Munroe to follow 
with reinforcements in his rear. Hamilton was 
immediately joined by Sir Marmaduke Langdale 
with 4000 cavaliers, who had flaked their lives 
on the refult; but thefe men being principally 
prelatifts and papifts, they unfortunately gave 
great offence, and created confiderable diffenfion 
in the Scottiih hoft ; and as the Parliamentarian 
army in the north was too weak to rifk an 
encounter, it at firft retired before Hamilton and 
Langdale, whofe force, had it been commanded 
by a man of talent and enterprife, would doubt- 
lefs foon have effected its purpofe of replacing 
the king upon the throne. 

Unluckily the interefts of the fervice and 
emergency of the occafion were facrificed to 
jealoufies and feuds; and Cromwell having 
recovered Pembroke, and finifhed his occupa- 
tion in Wales, at . once haftened to fuccour 



220 Surrender of Hamilton. 

Lilburn and Lambert. He made an energetic 
attack upon Langdale, and drove him back 
upon the main army near Prefton, which was 
alfo the next day fo completely routed, that but 
few of the Scots returned to their native country, 
and Baillie, their general, furrendered at War- 
rington. 

Langdale, in this extremity, ordered the in- 
fantry to difperfe,,and, accompanied by Hamilton, 
who had refufed to abandon the Englilh cava- 
liers, fwam the river Ribble and reached Ut- 
toxeter, where the royalifts having difbanded 
themfelves by command of their leaders, the 
duke was compelled to yield himfelf a prifoner 
to Lambert and Lord Grey of Groby. Lang- 
dale made his way to Nottingham, but was 
there recognifed and taken in the difguife of 
a female; he afterwards effedled his efcape by 
the aid of Lady Saville, who, by bribing the 
keepers, and procuring a clergyman's caflbck, 
enabled him to proceed to London, where he 
remained in fafety for fome time as an Irifti 
minifter driven from his cure by the Irifh 
Catholics.* 

During this time the royalifts had likewife 

* Lingard. 



Proceedings of the "Earl of Holland. 221 

been ftirring in the fouth, as the Earl of Holland, 
who had ferved and deferted every party, once 
more veered round to the king's affiftance, 
obtained a commiffion from the Prince of Wales 
to raife forces, and engaged to co-operate with 
the Duke of Hamilton, by efFeding a rifing in 
London at the juncture of his entering into 
England. 

On the 5th of July, at the head of 500 horfe, 
he fixed his quarters at Kingfton-upon-Thames, 
and calling upon the citizens to join him, fent 
meflages to the Common Council and the Par- 
liament, urging them to purfue a fimilar courfe 
of aftion, and thus put an end to the calamities 
inflidted upon the nation. 

As the citizens had fufFered feverely in the 
recent riot, this call was but little heeded ; and 
on the fecond day, being furprifed by Sir Michael 
Livefey, he was, after a fhort conflict, neceffi- 
tated to flee with only a few attendants to St. 
Neots, where, after a renewed encounter with 
Colonel Scrope, he furrendered to his purfuers. 

Although the reverfes of Holland created but 
little fympathy, much compaflion was excited at 
the fate of the Lord Francis Villiers, a young 
nobleman who had been perfuaded to join him. 



222 Surrender of Colchejier. 

in company with his brother, the Duke of Buck- 
ingham ; the former of whom was flain at King- 
fton, and the latter, after many hair-breadth: 
efcapes, fucceeded in reaching the continent. 

Thefe difcomfitures were fpeedUy followed 
by the fall of Colchefter, the laft hope of 
the royalifts, which, after a memorable liege of 
upwards of two months, furrendered at difcre- 
tion on the 27 th of Auguft. Fairfax refufed 
other terms, as the officers had been declared 
traitors by the Parliament, and fuUied his tri- 
umph by the deaths of Sir Charles Lucas and 
Sir George Lifle. Goring, Capel, and Haftings 
were referred for the judgment of Parliament, 
and committed to fafe keeping in Windfor 
Caftle, where, with the inefficient Hamilton, 
they had the opportunity of lamenting together 
the ufelefs efforts of ill-concerted plans and pre- 
cipitated engagements. 

During the operation of thefe eventful occur- 
rences, the king had been engaged in the vain 
endeavours to efFed his efcape from the oblivion 
of the imprifonment to which hefeemed doomed 
—an imprifonment in which he was ftill dreaded 
by his oppreffors, and only fuftained by the 
attachment of his followers. 



Regulations hy Hammond. 223 

After the difcovery of the laft thwarted at- 
tempt, Hammond's firft care was to iflue the 
following regulations to Major Rolph, Captain 
Bowerman, Mr. Herbert, Mr. Mildmay, and Mr. 
Leigh, "in cafe he fhould be detained by acci- 
dent from doing his duty in accordance with his 
orders," 

" By reafon of any accident that may befal 
me in detaining me from the exercife of my 
duty, according to the truft repofed in me by 
the Parliament, my occafions and duty alfo 
calling me abroad into the ifland, I have thought 
fit to appoint, and hereby do appoint, Captain 
Boreman and Major Rolph jointly, or, in the 
abfence of any one of them, the other fingly, to 
a(5t all things in relation to the fecurity of his 
majefty's perfon, and this caftle, according to 
the inftrudions given to that purpofe, in as full 
and ample manner as if myfelf were prefent ; 
and in cafe of fuch my abfence, I alfo appoint 
Mr. Herbert, Mr. Mildmay, Mr. Leigh, trea- 
furer, or any two of them, to take like care, and 
provide for the family in fuch way as formerly 
by myfelf. And the faid Captain Boreman and 
Major Rolph for the foldiers, and Mr. Herbert, 
Mr. Mildmay, and Mr. Leigh for the family. 



224 Pofition of Hammond. 

are hereby farther defired by me fo to aft until 
the Parliament fhall pleafe otherwife to deter- 
mine the matter. In witnefs whereunto I do 
hereto put my hand at Carifbrook Caftle this 
and of June, 1648. 

"Ro. Hammond." 

By the apprehenfion and detention of Major 
Rolph, who, although poflefled with the fpirit 
of envy, and ftriving for the reverfion of his 
appointment, was Hammond's principal advifer 
and confidant, the difficulty of the governor's 
pofition was materially increafed. 

He even requefted the Houfes of Parliament 
" to relieve him of the great burthen impofed 
upon him ;" but negledted to communicate this 
defire to either his fupporters in the army, or 
the committee at Derby Houfe, becaufe he was 
influenced rather by the promptings of the vice 
paramount in him, than the caufe affigned. It 
was remarked by Rolph, in his aflumed inter- 
view with Ofborn, that " the governor was a 
covetous man ;" and here the caufe of his dif- 
fatisfaction arofe; for rewards were conveyed 
through him to requite the fervices of men who 
favoured and ferved the Parliament, whilft his 



CharaSler of Hammond. 225 

own annuity remained unpaid. His meaning 
was therefore well underftood by the Commons, 
where the matter was at once ordered to be 
confidered, and asj- in a fecond letter, he reite- 
rated .the fame remark, but with the pregnant 
addition " that when he is thoroughly confidered 
they fhall find none more faithful to them, and 
none more obfervant of their commands, than 
he," a fatisfadtory ordinance was at once made, 
and no more complaints were received of the 
burthens impofed on Colonel Hammond. 

Difraeli corredtly fays that, during thefe 
rapid events, *' Hammond had become a more 
important perfonage than his real character 
would have made him ;" but the aflertion that 
from his clofe connexion with Cromwell and 
Ireton the Parliament fufpedted his integrity, is 
one of more queftionable authority. There are 
no data for fuch a conclufion; for the votes and 
debates in the Houfe of Commons rather evidence 
a contrary feeling towards him ; and quite as 
difficult is it to difcover what favours Hammond 
had heretofore received from the king, or which 
of his aftions in connexion with the furveil- 
lance of his majefly conflituted him a man of 
honour. 

Q 



■ 2 2-6 , CharaBer of Hammond. 

He procured the imprifonment of his own 
uncle, the king's favourite chaplain ; and with 
the ready afliftance of Rolph and Bowerman, 
after the firft fix weeks of Charles's refidence at 
Carifbrook, took an ungenerous advantj.ge by 
treating him not only with contumely and negled:, 
but unneceflary rigour and infblence. 

The motives for (o doing were buried with 
him, but his anions remain on record againft 
him. His endeavours clearly were to accord 
with both the army and the Parliament for his 
own ultimate advantage; but by the army he 
was afterwards imprifoned and neglefted, and 
the Parliament only rewarded him with a coni- 
miffionerfhip in Ireland, where he died on the 
a4th of October, 1654. 

The Ifle of Wight had, by the month of 
June, 1648, gradually become one vaft garrifon, 
as continued demands were made by Hammond 
for reinforcements, and as conftantly acceded to 
. by the committee. On the ajrd of this month 
500 men were fent thither from the general's 
army, which was ordered to recruit for a like 
number, whilft the fame day the governor is 
found again applying to the authorities for. a 
ftill greater number, and urging as his reafon 



Fears of Invafion. 227 

the intelligence he had received of its being the 
intention of the revolted fhips to bring over 
men to invade the ifland, "which, if it fo occur," 
he fays, " the iflandersj not being able to defend 
themfelves (he fhould have written, not willing), 
would be obligated to join with them, by which 
means they would be able to keep ofF any forces 
of the Parliament that might be fent to relieve 
the caftle." By the fame poft he likewife impor- 
tuned Fairfax, and alked that a reinforcement of 
300 horfe and 1500 foot at leaft might be 
fpeedily fent to him, "sure men" for, if other- 
wife, " it would be much in their power to undo 
him [Hammond], and the kingdom alfo, as he 
was In danger to have found by late experience." 
This alarm feems alfo to have pervaded the 
committee at Derby Houfe ; for on the 30th of 
June they intimated to the governor, on credit- 
able information, " that the fleet had received a 
reinforcement of 1000 landfmen under the com- 
mand of Lord Willoughby of Parham, prepa- 
ratory to an attack on the ifland; that the 
Lotd Rich* who had received a pafs from the 

* Lord Rich was the eldeft fon of the Earl of Warwick, 
"(lord high admiral under the Long Parliament,) whom he sue 
ceeded in his title and eftates in 1658. His only fon, Robert, 

Q 2 



2 2 S , Fears of Invqfion . 

Commons to proceed to the king under the 
pretence of being touched for the evil, was, in 
truth, only defirous of treating with him relpect- 
ing the Earl of Holland, who at this time was 
heading the royalifts in Surrey, and that they 
believed the forces which had been collected by 
Holland were intended to proceed to the ifland 
—information they apprized him of, to the intent 
he might put himfelf into a pofition to prevent 
their landing, which, as there were but few 
places where fuch a procedure was feafible, they 
fuppofed he would find no difficulty in doing, 
and efpecially admonifhed him to prevent all 
boats leaving the ifland during the time thefe 
rumours were abroad." 

For thefe apprehenfions there were, however, 
legitimate caufes of concernmentj as the Prince 
of Wales (fuppofing we have reached the 20th 
of July, 1648) had been more than fix weeks 
in the Downs with a good fleet — the Englifli 
flaips which had deferted and feveral others he 
had procured in Holland, — in all nineteen fail. 
Men naturally imagined the fon's firft care 
would have been the liberation of his father 

married Frances, youngeft daughter of the Proteflor, but died 
before his father. 



Pqfition of the Prince. ±2g 

from Carifbrook, and there is little doubt, if 
he had appeared before the Ifle of Wight, 
but that Charles would have recovered his 
freedom. 

The council, with the prince, unfortunately- 
decided it was more to the royal intereft to fail 
to the mouth of the river Thames, and there 
endeavour to enlift the wavering difpofition of 
the city and the Parliament. While the Scottifh 
forces were advancing, this feemed a favourable 
determination ; but their deftrudion extinguifhed 
every hope. The king, by a private meflage, 
fuggefted that, before their departure from the 
coaft, they {hould free him from his captivity ;* 
and Lord Clarendon plainly fays, that, as no 
attempt was made to accomplifh his liberation. 
It is certain the perfpn of the haplefs monarch 
was little cared for. This, however, was not fo. 
The mariners were aftually matters of the fleet ; 
and in the defire to engage the hoftile force 
under the command of Warwick, they forgot 
all other claims on their pofition. This engage- 
ment he ftudioufly avoided, and, by different 
manoeuvres, eluded their purfuit until the prince 

• Lingard, 



230 Fueling tfljlanders> 

was compelled, by a want of fupplies, to fteef 
for the coaft of Holland. 

The feeling of the majority of the iflanders, 
both from principle and prefent fituation, 
opprefled as they were by the numerous military 
exaiflions levied on them, was now fo diametri- 
cally oppofed to the interefts . of the army, that 
the prince would have been joyfully feconded 
by them, if the attempt which appeared fo pro- 
bable, and fo incumbent on him to endeavour, 
had been made. The fummer throughout was 
wet and boifterous, provifions grew remark- 
ably dear, and in common with the kingdom at 
large their . fenfibilities were becoming confider- 
ably agitated on behalf of a fovereign degraded 
a,nd languifhing within fight of their very 
homes. 

To counterpoife thefe unfavourable fymptoms, 
Hammond ufed every exertion and adopted 
every available meafure of preparation antici- 
patory of a collifion. Cowes, Yarmouth, and 
Sandown forts were well fupplied with provi- 
fions and ammunition ; the friends of the Par- 
liament were allowed to arm and prepare horfe 
for defence, and the minifters from their pulpits 
were ordered to be forward and ferviceable in 



Condition, of the King. 23 1 

mftilling into their hearers a confideration of the 
danger they would be expofed to " if the com- 
mon adverfary fhould prevail." 

The deliverance of the king's perfon having 
failed from the caufes affigned, the great per- 
fecutions and petty malignity he endured with 
inherent dignity, again become matter for con- 
fideration ; efpecially, as their notoriety is con- 
firmed by almoft endlefs cotemporary teftimoniesj 
fpme of them, certainly, uncharitably embel- 
liihed by the inventive fancy of the propagators, 
but the greater portion perfedlly free from the 
reach of fuch fufpicion. 

His condition, for a time, was defolate in the 
extreme, as the arrangements for communication 
with his friends, by the lafl mifchance, had been 
completely difarranged and fruftrated. His. 
exiftence, in truth, was become one dull mono- 
tonous return of day and night; and as the 
grated window rendered little that could engage 
his attention, refignation to his books offered 
the only fubftitute for more invigorating avo- 
cations. In this unvaried interval of forrow and 
quiet, Mr. Herbert was the only one of his: 
faithful fervants permitted to remain in attend- 
ance on him, and his. care has preferved fome, 



232 The King's Purfuits, 

interefting reminifcences of the employments of 
Charles at this very junfture. 

Writing of the king's purfuits, he remarks, 
" His majefty gave Mr. Herbert the charge of 
his books, of which the king had a catalogue, 
and, from time to time, had brought unto him 
fuch as he was pleafed to call for. 

" The Sacred Scriptures was the book he moft 
delighted in; and often read in Bifhop An- 
drews' Sermons, Hooker's Ecclefiaftical Polity, 
Dr. Hammond's Works, Villalpandus upon 
Ezekiel, &c., Laud's Paraphrafe upon King 
David's Pfalms, Herbert's Divine Poems ; and 
alfo Godfrey of BuUoigne, writ in Italian by 
Torquato Taflb, and done into Englifh Heroic 
Verfe by Mr. Fairfax, a poein his majefty 
much commended, as he did alfo Ariofto, by 
Sir John Harrington, a facetious poet, much 
efteemed of by the Prince Henry his matter, 
Spencer's Faery Queen, and the like, for alle- 
viating his fpirits after ferious ftudies. And at 
this tirne, it was (as is prefumed) he compofed 
his book called " Sufpiria Regalia," publiftied 
foon after his death, and entitled " The King's 
Portraiture in his Solitudes and Sufferings," 
which MSS. Mr, Herbert found among thofe 



The King's Purpuits. 233 

books his majefty was pleafed to give him, thofe 
excepted which he bequeathed to his children ; 
in regard Mr. Herbert, though he did not fee 
the king write that book, his majefty being 
always private when he writ, and thofe his fer- 
vants never coming into his bedchamber when 
the king was private until called; yet, com- 
paring it with his handwriting in other things, 
found it fo very like, as induces his belief that it 
was his own handwriting, having feen much of 
the king's writing before. 

" In many of his books, he delighted himfelf 
with the motto, Dum Spiro Spero, which he 
wrote frequently as the emblem of his hopes, as 
well as endeavours for a happy agreement with 
his Parliament. 

" In one of his books he wrote this diftich : — 

" Rebus in adverfis facile eft contemnere vitam ; 
Fortiter ille facit qui mifer eAe poteft." 

And out of another poet, againft the levelling 
and anti-monarchic fpirit which predominated 
at the time — 

" Fallitur egregio quifquis fub Principe credit 
Servitum ; nunquam Libertas gratior extat 
Quam fub Rege pio," 

Claudian. 



234 'The King's Pursuits, 

with many others which are memorable, and 
exprefs his delight in learning. For he under- 
ftood authors in their originals, whether Greek, 
Latin, French, Spanifh, or Italian, which three 
laft he fpoke perfedly, and none better read in 
hiftories of all forts, which rendered him accom- 
plifhed; and alfo would difcourfe well in arts 
and sciences ; and indeed, not unfitted for any 
fubject." 

It is generally admitted that the underftand- 
ing of Charles was far from defpicable, much, 
talent being difplayed in a ponderous volume, 
entitled BAXIAIKA, the words of King Charles 
the Martyr, althougb it is doubtful if much 
that is there rendered adlually proceeded from 
his pen, a doubt which has given, rife to many 
eontroverfies, and elicited many learned dif- 
putations. Whether Charles was adually the 
author of " Icon Bafilike," is a queftion that has 
been frequently canvafled, and, as there are pro- 
babilities on both fides, one difficult to refolve. 
It is however univerfally allowed, that whether 
the book was compofed by the king, or by 
fome other perfon in his name, it evidently con- 
tains his opinion of things, is well written, and 
was ferviceable to his memory. The poem here 



PoeiB of " Majejiy in Misery." 235^ 

appended, is acknowledged to have been written 
by Charles, at Carifbrook j and although fome- 
what long, will not only enable the reader to 
judge of the poetical talents of the king, but 
alfo afford a vivid expofition of his feelings at 
the time this narrative has now reached. It is 
entitled— 



" Majesty in Misery : [or an Imploration to the 
King of Kings, 

" Great monarch of the world, from whofe power fprings 
The potency and power of Kings, 
Record the Royal woe my fufFering lings ; 

And teach my tongue, that ever did confine 

Its faculties in truth's feraphic line 

To track the treafons of thy foes and mine. 

Nature and law, by thy divine decree 
(The only' root of righteous Royaltie) 
With this dim diadem invefted me : 

With it the facred Sceptre, purple Robe 
The holy Unftion and the Royal Globe j 
Yet I am levell'd with the life of Job. 

The fierceft furies, that do daily tread 
Upon my grief, my gray difcrowned head. 
Are thofe that owe my bounty for their bread. 

They raife a war and chriften it the cause, 
Whilft sacrilegious hands have beft applaufe, - 
Plunder and murder are the Kingdom's laws j 



236 Poem of" Majejiy in Misery." 

Tyranny bears the title of taxation. 
Revenge and robbery are reformation, 
Oppreffion gains the name of fequeftration. 

My loyal fubjefts who in this bad feafon 
Attend me (by the law of God and reafon). 
They dare impeach and punilh for high treafon. 

Next at the clergy do their fbries frown. 

Pious epifcopacy muft go down, 

They will deftroy the crozier and the crown. 

Churchmen are chained, and fchifmatics are freed ; 
Mechanics preach, and holy fathers bleed. 
The crown is cnicified with the creed. 

The Church of England doth all faflion fofter, 
The pulpit is ufurpt by each impoftor. 
Extempore excludes the patermfter. 

The Preftyter and Independent feed 

Springs with broad blades, to make religion bleed 

Herod and Pontius Pilate are agreed. 

The corner-ftone's mifplaced by every paviour. 
With fuch a bloody method and behaviour 
Their anceftors did crucify our Saviour. 

My Boyal confort, from whofe fruitful womb 
So many princes legally have come. 
Is forced in pilgrimage to feek a tomb. 

Great Britain's heir is forced into France 
Whilft on his father's head her foes advance. 
Poor child! he weeps out his inheritance. 

With my ovVn power my majefty they wound. 

In the King's name the King himself 's uncrown'd. 

So doth the duft deftroy the diamond. 

With propoCtions daily they enchant 
My people's ears, fuch as do reafon daunt 
And the Almighty will not let me grant. 



Poem of" Majejiy in Misery." 237 

They promife to ereft my royal ftem 
To make me great, t' advance my diadem 
If I will firft fall down and worfhip them I 

But for refufal they devour my thrones, 
Diftrefs my Children and deftroy my bones. 
I fear they'll force me to make bread of ftones. 

My life the prize at fuch a {lender rate 
That in my abfence they draw bills of hate 
To prove the King a traitor to the ftate. 

Felons obtain more privilege than I. 
They are allowed to anfwer ere they die, 
'Tis death for me to afk the reafon why. 

But, facred Saviour, with thy words I woo 

Thee to forgive, and not be bitter to 

Such, as thou know'ft do not know what they do. 

For fince they from their Lord are fo difjointed 
As to contemn thofe edifis he appointed, 
How can they prize the power of his anointed ? 

Augment my patience, nullify my hate, 
Preferve my iflue, and infpire my mate. 
Yet though we perilh, blefs the church and ftate." 



Dr. Burnett ftates, he was enabled to copy 
the poem from the original; and obferves, " that 
the mighty fenfe and great piety of it will be 
found to be beyond all the fineft fublimities of 
poetry, which yet are not wanting here." * 

By the teftimony of Sir Philip Warwick, it 
would appear that even the perfonal attentions 

* " Memoiis of the Dukes of Hamilton." 



238 Domejiic Privations of the King. 

of Herbert were foon interdicted, as he obfefves : 
" Being in the room with the king, at Newport, 
(at the time of the Treaty) he beckoned me, 
and fhowed me in the ftreet an old little crump- 
ling man, and afkt me whether I knew him : 
No, fir, (faid I,) I never faw him before. I 
fhew him you, (fays he,) becaufe that was the 
beft companion I had for three months together 
in Carifbrook Caftle, where he made my fires." 

The domeftlc privations of Charles were alfo 
not inconfiderable ; for Warwick likewife re- 
marks that, "obferving him to drink two parts 
of water and one of fack, I prefumed to afk how 
he came to leave French wine. He told me they 
afforded him not good, and then he thought 
this the better beverage ; nay, fays he, whilft 
I have been here among them I have wanted 
linen, which though I took notice of I never 
complained." A fact corroborated by Ham- 
mond himfelf, who, in a letter, dated as early as 
the 15th of April, draws the attention of the 
committee to the circumfl:ance. 

His hair had become grey in the prepon- 
derance of mental anxiety and deprivation; per- 
•fonal negleft had deranged his manners, clouded 
his countenance^ and proved him forrowfully 



Letter to Captain Titiis. 2339 

confcious of the dark prospeift which was rapidly 
enfuing, when his pitiable condition excited the 
sympathies of an humble attendant, whofe tafk 
it was to perform a menial office in his majefty's 
room, and by her affiftance an intercourfe with 
Titus and his faithful confidants was again 
effeded. 

Number XV. 

"Saterday, i July 1648. 
"W. 

" I have newly receaued yours of the 
22 June, for w""" I know not whether my 
aftonefhment or my joy were the greater; for 
indeed, I did difpaire of hearing any more from 
you, or any other of my iFrends, during theafe 
damnable tymes, without blaming anything but 
my owen misfortune ; w"'' makes me the more 
obliged to your kyndnefs and induftry for hauing 
found meanes to conuey a letter to me : I thank 
you for your Newes ; w* does much agree with 
what the Gouernor doth us the fauor to let us 
know; only we heere doe belive all the Gallant 
honneft men in Colchefter infallibly loft; though 
yet they hould out : and we have heard nothing 
concerning the votes of the Cornon Councell. 



240 Letter to Captain Titus. 

I am glad to hear of the welfaire of Z & L 
{Worjley and OJborn) for I feared that they had 
been in fome diforder, to whom I pray you 
comend me hartely ; as lykewaife to all the reft 
of my ffrends: and particuly to 715 {Mrs, 
Wborwood), telling 187 (her) that I hope 24: 
62' 186 {/he) knowes before this, how it was 
not my fait that I did [not] waite upon 187 
{her) according to my promife , for which you 
may afleure 715 {Mrs. Whorwood) that I was 
and am uery much greeved. 

" Tuching the writings for O. Rogers, I know 
not what you meane ; and though I did, at this 
time, I would not fend you them, being not 
confident that this will come fafe to you; but 
how foone I can haue any probable afleurance of 
a fafe conueance I fhall not fail to fend you 
what Papers you fliall defy re, as alfo letters to 
dyuers of my frends, and fo I reft 

** Your moft affeured reall frend, 

"J." 

117 : 465: 71 -.78:363:209:349 
72: 91 : 31 : 92: 50 : 136 : 96 : 10: 
32: 93:51 : 109:377:359:292: 
84:33: 136:94:109: 279: 251 : 



Renewal of Correfpondence. 241 

174 : 66 : 44 : 369 : (be content that 
I Jhall neuer difcouer any thing to 
prejudife any of my friends' truft.) 

Comment on feelings fo fenfitively expreffed 
would be here ufelefs, efpecially as the refult 
of the other topics alluded to by his majefty has 
been already detailed; but, with an incident he 
had rather hoped for than deemed poffible (the 
unexpeded realization of a contrivance for 
fecuring intelligence from his friends) his lelf- 
control partly returned ; the dejedion caufed by 
his adverfity diminifhed itfelf in the anxious cares 
which the renewed intercourfe created; and he 
buoyed himfelf up in the expeftation that a 
renewed attempt for fuccouring and liberating 
him would immediately follow. 

As Charles gradually recovered fome degree 
of his ufual equanimity, he became enabled to 
look more fteadily on the pofition in which he 
now ftood; and hearing that the endeavours of 
the prefbyterian party in the two Houfes of 
Parliament were urging the fettlement of a 
treaty with him, he decided on fending a private 
communication to the Speakers, foliciting them 
to ftate their defires, as by fuch a courfe he 

R 



242 Herbert's Narrative. 

imagined he might fucceed ;in conciliating the 
opinions of thofe anxious for a compromifej and 
perhaps facilitate the heceflary preliminaries for 
the tranfaftion. 

Mr» Herbert, to whom this defpatch, together 
with a letter to the Princefs Elizabeth, then at 
3t. James' Houfe, Whitehall, was intrufted for 
delivery, minutely narrates that the wind was 
not favourable, and he had therefore " much ado 
to crofs the fea from Cowes to Southampton; 
but in regard the king had ordered him to make 
hafte, fo as the letter might be delivered the 
next day before tiie Houfes rofe, no delay was 
fufFered." Being landed, he immediately took 
poft for London. 

" It may not be forgotten that at one ftage, the 
poftmafter (a malevolent perfon), having notice 
that he came from the king, and required extra- 
ordinary fpeed, mounted him upon a horfe that 
had neither good eyes nor feet, fo as he ufually 
ftumbled very much, which with the deep ways 
and dark nights, in all probability might have 
abated his fpeed; but through God's goodnefs 
the horfe, though at his full gallop moil part of 
that twelve miles riding, neither ftumbled nor 
fell, which at the next ftage was admired." 



.iGorreffohdence of Mr. Hopkins. 243 

The king's packet was delivered to the Speaker 
of the Houfe of Lords within the time Hmited, 
which done,, he waited (by permiflion) upon the 
Princefs Ehzabeth, who gave him her hand to 
kifs, being overjoyed with her royal father's 
kind letter, to which fhe returned anpther by 
Mr. Herbert, who had the king'is approbation, at 
his coming to Carifbrook, for his diligence. 

There were, at that time, living in Newport, 
two gentlemen, Mr. William Hopkins, mailer 
of the grammar fchool, and his fon, both ftrongly 
imbued with a ftrong predileftion for the royal 
caufe ; and the imprifonment of Rolph, coupled 
with the frequent abfence of Hammond in other 
parts of the ifland, having allowed of fome 
relaxation in the military regulations enforced at 
the caftle, Mr. Hopkins not only availed him- 
felf of the aid of the woman already alluded to 
for carrying on a clofe correfpondence with the 
king, but in company with Mrs. Whorwood, 
who had recently come to Newport, procured 
fome fecret interviews with him. 

This correspondence was printed by Wag- 
ftafFe in the laft edition of his " Vindication of 
the Royal Martyr," and reveals the fadt, in 
conneftion with other authorities, that with the 

R 2 



244 Exertions of the King's Friends. 

king's concurrence, an extended confpiracy had 
been organized in the ifland for the purpofe of 
difarming the military, and by an arranged 
ftratagem feizing upon the governor and the 
caftle, if the Prince of Wales had appeared off 
the coaft. 

With the ufual fatality attendant on every 
incident in the life of the unfortunate monarch, 
this was not done ; and on fome rumours of the 
difafFeftion which exifted in the ifland reaching 
the committee, their exertions foon enabled them 
to inform Hammond of the medium through 
which the king's correfpondence, aided by the 
endeavours of Titus and Bofville, had been re- 
arranged, and that there was flill a hope of 
efFefting his efcape by the aid of a " little 
ancient man, and a lufty ftout young man about 
26 or 27 years of age," (probably the two Hop- 
kins,) the place of landing to be near Gofport. 

In faft, . his friends were again vigoroufly 
battling his freedom when the critical event 
arrived which had been fo long the conftant 
objed of his wifhes, — the offer of a perfonal 
treaty ; for, towards the end of July, the Com- 
mons having yielded to the obflinacy of the 
Lords, the vote of non-addrefles was repealed, 



Offer of a Treaty. 245 

and there is no doubt but for the intervention of 
Cromwell's decifive viftories, the ruin of Hamil- 
ton, and other contingent circumftances which 
revived the courage and hopes of the Independ- 
ents, and the fears and mifgivings of the 
Presbyterians, that Charles would have been 
brought to London, and there treated with 
unrefervedly. 

Information of this important fad was foon 
tranfmitted to Carifbrook, and on the 5 th of 
Auguft the king was officially waited on by the 
Earl of Middlefex, Sir John Hippifley, and 
John Bulkeley, Efq., who informed him that 
the Parliament had agreed to a perfonal treaty 
with him at Newport, in the Ifle of Wight, 
where he fhould be in the fame ftate and freedom 
as he was at Hampton Court, but that no per- 
fons excepted by the Parliament from pardon, 
under reftraint, in aftual war againft the Parlia- 
ment, or in fuch numbers as would caufe fufpi- 
cion, could be fuffered to come into the ifland 
during his refidence at Newport. 

That no fhranger or foreigner would be per- 
mitted to go into his prefence without an order 
from Parliament, but that if he wifhed any of 
the Scottilh nation to advife with him, the 



246 Repeal of Vote of Nm-Addrejfes. 

governor would be authorifed to permit their 
coming. 

That Colonel Hammond was to provide a 
ftifficient guard for the fafety of the Ifle of 
Wight, and to hinder the taking away his perfon 
from thence. 

And that they were allotted ten days for their 
going, ftay, and return. 

With thefe commiffioners, under the autho- 
rity of a pafs froim the Houfes of Parliament, 
came alfo Captain Titus, Uriah Babington, the 
king's fworn barber, and Sir Peter Killigrew; 
and, as much of the reftraint which had h&&n 
impofed upon Charles was removed by the 
repeal of the vote of non-addrefles, Carifbrook 
put on a more cheerful appearance than it had 
exhibited for fome months- 
Herbert remarks that, on the introduftion of 
the commiffioners to the king, he in the firft 
place gave them his hand to kifs, and told them 
" that their addrefs being in order to peace, 
doubled their welcome; peace being the thing 
he eameftly defired:" and then aflured them 
withal "that if upon the treaty, peace did not 
enfue, it fhould be no fault of his — he would 
not be blamed," 



. Interview with Commijjioners. 247 

In the calamitous ftate of the king's affairs, 
there feemed to be fome hope that, by this pro- 
pofed treaty, he would be once more reftored 
to his former condition ; and therefore, after the 
interchange of fome preliminary correfpondence, 
on Thurfday, the loth of Auguft, he fignlfied 
to the commiffioners his acceptance of the Par^ 
liamentary propofition. The room was full of 
ladies, and he exprefsly faid that " the laft mef- 
fage he fent was delivered to the commiffioners 
fealed, and if it had been fo prefented to the 
Houfes it would have been better for him; but 
he now thought fit to fend this open, for he 
thought he could not be in a worfe condition 
than he was, being under fuch clofe reftraint, 
none being fuffered to fpeak a word without 
fufpicion." 

On the receipt of this meffage, a vote of the 
Lords and Commons was immediately paffed, 
which requefted his majefty to send the names 
of fuch perfons ''as he fhall conceive to be 
of neceffary ufe to be about him during this 
Treaty." 

" That the Houfes agreed that fuch domeftie 
fervants (not excepted in the former limitations) 
as his majefty ftiould appoint^ jvere to be fent to 
hiih. 



248 Charles Relieved from Rejiraint. 

" And that the time of the commencement of 
Treaty, was to be within ten days after the 
king's affent to treat, and to continue forty 
days;" with fome other refolutions of minor 
import. 

As the communications from the Parliament 
to Hammond had only intimated that the vote 
of non-addrefles had been repealed, he did not 
conceive himfelf juftified in permitting the king 
to leave the bounds of the caftle, until he 
received an exprefs order from the Houfes to 
that effeft, as he was detained there under the 
authority of a fubfequent ordinance. 

On the 1 5th of September, therefore, to relieve 
this difficulty, it was refolved that the orders 
concerning his majefty's reftraint in Carifbrook 
Caftle fhould be revoked ; and after more than 
eight months of durance and tribulation, fuch as 
few kings, and even few men, have expe- 
rienced, Charles was allowed to quit tlie fortrefs ; 
although he foon difcovered, that though appa- 
rently reftored to freedom, fo little reliance 
was placed on his word, that a troop of horfe 
was ever hovering about him when he was 
abroad.* 

• Aihmole'i MSS. 



Confirmation of Arrangements. 249 

On receiving the king's concurrence to the 
votes of the Houfes, refolutions were at once 
propounded and agreed on, confirming the 
arrangements propofed ; and that " his majefty 
be defired to pafs his royal word to make his 
conftant refidence in the Ifle of Wight, from the 
time of his affenting to treat, until twenty days 
after the treaty ended, unlefs it be otherwife 
defired by both Houfes of Parliament. And 
that Colonel Hammond be authorifed to receive 
his royal word pafled to the two Houfes of Par- 
liament, for his refidence in the Ifle of Wight, 
according as is formerly exprefl*ed." 

This neceflary precaution having been duly 
enforced, the inftrufttions iffued to Hammond 
on the 1 6th November, 1647, were at once 
recalled, and frefh regulations, founded on the 
agreement thus perfedted with the king, for- 
warded to him for his guidance and direc- 
tion. 

The names and occupations of perfons whofe 
prefence was defired by his majefty, are preferved 
in the Journals of the Houfes of Parliament, 
and the original lift in the autograph of the 
king, together with the letter which accom- 
panied it to the Earl of Manchefter, as Speaker of 



250 Attendants on the King. 

the Houfe of Peers, in the MSS. of the Britifh 
Museum.* 

The feleftion was as follows : — 

Gentlemen of his Bedchamber. — The Duke of 
Richmond, the Marquis of Hertford, the Earl 
of Lindfay, the Earl of Southampton. 

Grooms of his Chamber. — George Kirke, James 
Levington, Henry Murray, Jno. Afhburnhamy 
William Legg. 

Barber. — Thos. Davis. 

Pages of the Backftairs. — Hugh Henn, 
Hum. Rogers, Willm. Levitt. 

Teamen of the Robes. . Rives. 

Equerries. — Sir Ed. Sydenham, Rob. Tirwitt, 
John Houfdon {yliith /^ or 6 footmen^ as they 
fhould find fit tefi, to wait). 

Laundrejs. — Mrs. Wheeler {with such maids 
as fhe fhall choofe). 
■ Groom oftheprefence. — 

Per/ons to wait as they did, or as his majefiy 
fhould appoint them. — Sir Foulke Greville, 
Captn. Titus, Gaptn. Burroughes, Mr. Crefletj 
— . Hanftead, Ab. Dowcett, — . Fyrebrafle. 

Chaplains. — Bifliop of London, Bifhop of 
Salisbury, Dodor Sheldon, Do6tor Hammond, 

• Additional MSS. 11,251. >• 



Attendants on the King. 251 

Do(5tor Ouldfworthj Dodtor Saunderfon, Dodoi* 
Turner, Doftor Haywood. 

Lawyers. — Sir Thos. Gardiner, Sir Or. Bridge- 
man, Sir Ro. Ofbourne, Mr. Je. Palmer, Mr, 
The. Cooke, Mr. Jo. Vaughan. 

Clerks and Writers. — Sir Edward Walker, 
Mr. Philip Warwick, Jno. Oudart, Chas, Whi- 
taker. 

To make ready the Houfe for treaty. — Peter 
Newton and Clem. Kennerfley. 

Advocates.' — Dr, Duck, — . Rives (in an after 
communication^. 

The Parliament confented to the attendance 
of all thefe perfons with the exception of " Dow- 
cett, who was alleged to be under reftraint; 
Dr. Sheldon, Dr. Hammond, and Dr. Holdf^ 
worth, who were likewife under reftraint; and 
Mr. John Aftiburnham, and Col. Legg, the firft 
of whom was an exception from patdon^ and 
Col. Legg being under reftraint." 

The friends and attendants of the king were, 
therefore, not long before they once more re- 
joined their old mafter ; " all haftened and took 
their places in the fmall houfe at Newport, and 
the delufive fcenery of a court on a fudde^l 
feemed to have crowded round the lone man as 



252 Appearance of the King * 

in a pleafant dream ;" but, remarks Hume, " a 
great and fenfible alteration was remarked in his 
afpeft, from what it appeared the year before, 
when he refided at Hampton Court; as, from the 
moment his fervants had been removed, he had 
laid afide all care of his perfon, had allowed his 
hair and beard to grow, and to hang diflievelled 
and negledbed — his hair was become almoft 
entirely grey, either from the decline of years, 
or from that load of forrows under which he 
laboured ; and which, though borne with con- 
ftancy, preyed inwardly on his fenfible and tender 
mind :" a change beheld with compaflion by his 
friends, and perhaps even by his enemies. 

Firebrace writes, " When the treaty was voted, 
amongft thofe his majefty named to attend him 
I had the honour to be one ; of which he was 
pleafed to give me notice, by a letter, and com- 
manded me to make hafte to him. I no fooner 
arrived, than his majefty told me I fliould attend 
him as I did before, which was page of the bed- 
chamber and clerk of the kitchen ; for that there 
muft be feveral diets at the treaty, and he would 
have me undertake it, in order to fomething 
better he intended for me. 

"I defired to be excufed, as not at all under^ 



Expenfes of the Treaty. 253 

ftanding the employment. He was pleafed to 
tell me he would inftruft me (which in earned he 
did). Within two or three days, I heard that a 
gentleman, one of his majefty's clerks of the 
kitchen, was come to Newport, in expectation to 
wait in his employment, and then I defired his 
majefty that he might wait accordingly, I being 
unlkilful. He was pleafed to tell me again I 
ihould undertake it, and that that gentleman 
fhould wait as comptroller, as accordingly he 
did." 

The eftimated expenfes of this Treaty 
amounted to the fum of 10,000/., lent for that 
purpofe by the City of London, of which 6oco/. 
were on the ijth of September ordered to be 
paid for the king's charges, together with 500/. 
to Sir Edward Sydenham, Captain Titus, and 
Mr, Tirwhit, to provide coaches and horfes, 
footmen's liveries, ftable requifites, &c., for his 
majefty's ufe ; and the court being thus fettled 
in the houfe of Mr. Hopkins,* the Free Gram- 
mar School of Newport, which had been feledted 
by his majefty, preparations were at once made 
in the town-hall for conduding the Treaty, 

* Mr. Hopkins was, at this time, knighted by the king, for. 
his fervices. 



254 Parliamehtarian CommiJJioners. 

and at the Bull Inn,* for the reception of the 
ycommiffioners, appointed by the Parliament to 
-meet the king on their behalf, 

Thefe commiflioners were fifteen in number : 
the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Pem- 
broke, the Earl of Middlefex, the Earl of 
Salifbury, and the Lord Vifcounts Say and 
Seale on the part of the Lords : and Thomas 
Lord Wainman, Mr. Denzill HoUis, Mr. Wil- 
liam Pierrepont, Sir Henry Vane, Jun., Sir 
Harbottle Grimfton, Sir John Potts, Mr. John 
Crew, Mr. Saml. Browne, Mr. John Glynn, 
recorder of London, and Mr. John Bulkeley, 
members of the Houfe of Commons ; men per- 
mitted to argue, to advife, to entreat, but having 
no power given them to concede, as their in- 
ftrudions bound them to infift on the king's 
aflent to every propofition which had been 
fubmitted to his confideration at Hampton 
Court. 

Burnett ftates "that Vane, Pierrepont, and 
others, went to the treaty on purpofe to delay 
matters till the army could be brought up to 

* This fign was afterwards replaced by that of the Bugle, 
although the Bull is ftill ufed as the cognifance of the inn, on 
vehicles belonging to it. 



Pu'rpofe of Vane and Others. 255 

London ; and all that wijftied well to the treaty, 
prayed the king at their firft coming to dif- 
patch the bufinefs with all poffible hafte, and to 
grant the firft day all that he could bring him- 
felf to grant on the laft ; Hollis and Grimfton 
telling him (Burnett), they had both on their 
knees begged this of the king. They faid, they 
knew Vane would ftudy to draw out the treaty 
to a great length; and he who declared for an 
unbounded liberty of confcience, would try to 
gain on the king's party, by the offer of a tole- 
ration for the common prayer and the epifcopal 
clergy. His defign in that, was to gain time 
till Cromwell fhould fettle Scotland and return 
from the north. But they faid, if the king 
would frankly come in without the formality of 
papers backward and forward, and fend them 
back next day with the conceffions which were 
abfolutely neceflary, they did not doubt but 
that, in a few days, he fhould be brought up 
with honour, freedom, and fafety to the Parlia- 
ment, and that matters fhould be brought to a 
prefent fettlement. Titus, who was then much 
trufted by the king, and employed in a nego- 
ciation with the Prefbyterian party, told me he 
had fpoken often and earneftly with him in 



256 Day of Public Humiliation. 

the fame ftrain, but the king would not come 
to a refolution ; and he ftill fancied that in the 
ftruggle between the Houfe of Commons and 
the army, both faw they needed him fo much to 
give them the fuperior ftrength, that he ima- 
gined by balancing them, he would bring both 
fides into a greater dependence on himfelf, and 
force them to better terms. In this Vane flat'- 
tered the epifcopal party to the king's ruin, as 
well as their own. But they ftill hated the 
Prefbyterians as the firft authors of the war, 
and seemed unwilling to think well of them, or 
to be beholden to them. Thus the treaty went 
on with a fatal flownefs ; and by the time it was 
come to maturity, Cromwell came up with his 
army and overturned all." 

Tuefday, the 12th of September, was ap^ 
pointed as a day of public humiliation " by the 
members of both Houfes, and in all the churches 
and chapels within the lines of communication 
and weekly bills of mortality, to feek God 
earneftly for a blefling upon the Treaty of New-» 
port;" and on the 15th of the fame month the 
commiflioners, after being entertained by the 
authorities at Southampton, crofted to Cowes, 
where, on their arrival about two o'clock, they 



Reception of the Commijjioners. z^j 

were received by Colonel Hammond, and with 
" feveral voUies ofihot." 

The fucceeding day, Saturday, was likewife 
obferved by the king as a faft; and, after the 
morning fervice, the commiflioners were ad- 
mitted to an audience, and permitted to kifs 
his hand. On the announcement of their mif- 
fion, Charles feelingly faid, 

" My Lords and Gentlemen, 

" I am glad that you are come to treat 
with me for the fettling of my poor bleeding 
kingdom in peace. I pray God to perfe<5t' 
this blefled work, which I fhall on my part 
labour for, and I hope my Parliament and you 
will do the like. As for me, I fliall not feek 
revenge againft any, nor give occafion of delays, 
defiring that there may be no procraftination of 
time, but there being now only the broken piece 
of a day, and that the laft day of the week too, 
I defire that the treaty may not begin now, but 
that we may meet by 9 o'clock on Monday 
morn, and from thence the treaty to commence. 
And I pray God to give a bleffing upon our 
meetings, that there may be no more blood 
fpilt in this kingdom." 

s 



258 Commencement of the Treaty. 

From this time the Lords and Commons 
waited on the king with great outward fliow of 
duty and refpeft; and, obferves Clarendon, 
" though none of them durft adventure to fee 
the king in private, they communicated freely 
with fome of thofe lords and others who, with 
the Parliament's leave, were come to attend the 
king during the time of the treaty ; and fo they 
found means to advertife his majefty of many 
particulars, which they thought it neceflary for 
him to know, which made impreffion on him, 
as the information proceeded from perfons better 
or worfe affedled to him." 

On Monday, the and Odlober, 1648, this 
memorable treaty commenced in the (old) 
town-hall of Newport, then recently erefted. 

The commiflioners aflembled in a room 
appointed to their ufe at 9 o'clock in the morn- 
ing, and after hearing prayers from Mr. Vines, 
one of their chaplains, fertt an intimation to the 
king " that they were ready to wait upon him 
at the treaty." His majefty proceeded "from 
Mr. Hopkins' houfe to the treaty-chamber in 
ftate, in his coach, with the lords and others in 
attendance on him, his coachman and footman 
having new fuits with broad plate filver lace. 



Arrangements at the Treaty Houfe. 259 

two in a feam," and, being featedj the com- 
miffioners entered bare-headed. The king then 
arofe, and, taking oS his hat, defired them to 
be placed at the table, when they prefented 
their credentials, which authorifed them to treat 
with him perfonally upon the propofitions for- 
merly offered at Hampton Court ; and, as the 
king had frequently demanded a perfonal treaty, 
the commiffioners decided that it fliould be 
ftridtly fo, not admitting either peer or doctor 
to enter into the debates. " Charles was there- 
fore compelled to encounter fingly a hoft of 
fubtle diplomacy, and, what was worfe, another 
of the rabbins of the aflembly of divines." 

The arrangements were in this wife : — Under 
a canopy of ftate, afcended by fteps, was 
feated the king, whilft the commiffioners were 
arrayed at fome diftance on either fide of a 
long table ; and immediately behind the king's 
chair flood the lords in waiting and his chaplains, 
together with Sir P. Warwick, Mr. Oudart, 
Sir Edward Walker, and others. 

When his majefly defired to put a queflion, 
or his friends wifhed to offer a fuggeflion, he 
retired into a private apartment; and it fome- 
times happened, as Sir Philip Warwick, one of 

s 2 



26o Procedure of the Treaty. 

his fecretaries, relates, " that fome of his penmen 
who flood at his chair prayed from the lords to 
do fo, but more liberty than this the attend- 
ants were not allowed. And I remember on 
one day he overdid himfelf, and it was upon 
the great article, whether he or the Parliament 
began the war, and, in effeft, at whofe dbor the 
blood Ihould lie ? The king would have extin- 
guifhed the whole difcourfe by ads of oblivion 
to both fides, or by taking an equal fliare, viz., 
by expreffing that jealoufies had abruptly and 
unfortunately caft them both into this engage- 
ment, and by adts of indemnity would have 
fecured all ; but where moft guilt was, there was 
moft difficulty to fatisfy ; and by no means would 
they waive an explanation of this article. The 
king retiring, I took the confidence to ftep to 
my lord of Northumberland, and fay to him, 
' My good lord, remember how gracious this 
good prince hath been to you, and do you com- 
paffionate his diftrefles and the ftrait he is now 
in ;' and he civilly but pofitively replied, ' Sir, 
in this it is impoffible for me to do anything ; 
for the king in this point is fafe, as king : but 
we cannot be fo.' Two replies which the king 
made to two gentlemen that day were obferv- 
able — the one to a gentleman who is now a lord. 



. Procedure of the Treaty. 261 

who prefled fomewhat upon him hardly: 'A 
good naturcj fir (faid he), would not offer this 
you fay, nor is it true logic ;' and then made 
another kind of ingenious reply unto Mr. 
Buckley (who was a gentleman of that ifland, 
and now a commiflioner, when he prayed the 
king to make a right ufe of this treaty, having 
promifed him, that if a treaty could be procured 
for him, the malice of the devil fhould not be 
able to break it) : ' Confider (fays he), Mr. Buck- 
ley, if you call this a treaty, whether it be not 
like the fray in the comedy, where the man 
comes out and fays there has been a fray and no 
fray, and being aflced how that could be, why, 
(fays he) here hath been three blows given and 
I had them all. Look, therefore, whether this 
be not a parallel cafe. Obferve whether I have 
not granted abfolutely moft of your propositions, 
and with great moderation limited only fome 
few of them; nay, confider whether you have 
made me any one conceflion, and whether, at 
this prefent moment, you have not confeft to 
me, that though upon any propofition you were 
all concurrently fatisfied, yet till you had remit- 
ted them up to your fuperiors, you had not the 
authority to concur with me in any one thing.'" 



262 Mental "Powers of the King. 

The mental powers which the king difplayed 
in this treaty aftonifhed the commiffioners, 
" The king is wonderfully improved," faid Lord 
Salifbury to Sir P. Warwick. " No, my lord, 
it is your lordftiip who has too late difcerned 
what he always was," was the reply. Sir Henry 
Vane alfo told Sir Edward Walker that they 
had been much deceived in the charadler of the 
king, whom they had confidered a weak man ; 
" but now," fays he, " that we find him to be 
a perfon of great parts of abilities, we muft the 
more confider our own fecurity, for he is only 
the more dangerous." 

It has been already remarked that the com- 
miffioners had no power to fettle any point, and 
that all the king's objeftions and propofals were 
therefore transmitted to London, a procedure 
which caufed confiderable delay. Charles him- 
felf was alfo unfortunately too fond of difcuffion, 
in which he knew he excelled, fo that matters 
were protraded even beyond the time originally 
allotted. The treaty was extended twenty addi- 
tional days, and both the majority of the com- 
miffioners and his friends were urgent with him 
to concede all that was required in order to fave 
himfelf from the army, to whofe ulterior defigns 



Conclujion of the Treaty. 263 

no one at this time could be blind. On the 
27 th of November thefe remonftrances prevailed, 
and his firmnefs gave way. He eonfented to 
the demands he had hitherto ftedfaftly refufed to 
acknowledge ; — the abandonment of his friends, 
provided they were allowed the benefit of the 
ancient laws ; the fufpenfion of the funftions of 
the bifhops ; and the invefting their lands in the 
crown until religion fhould be fettled by the 
king and Parliament. 

This arrangement having been concluded, the 
commiffioners the next morning took their 
leave ; and Charles, it is faid,* addrefled them 
on parting, in thefe words : — " My lords, I 
believe we fhall fcarce ever fee each other again. 
But God's will be done ! I have made my peace 
with him, and fhall undergo, without fear, what- 
ever he may fuffer men to do unto me. My 
lords, you cannot but know that in my fall and 
ruin you fee your own, and that alfo near you. 
I pray God fend you better friends than I have 
found. I am fully informed of the carriage 
of them that plot againft me and mine; but 
nothing affedls me fo much as the feeling I 
have of the fufFerings of my fubjeds, and the 

• Evelyn's " Memoirs." 



264 Records of the Treaty. 

mifchief that hangs over my three kingdoms, 
drawn upon them by thofe who, upon pretence of 
good, violently purfue their own interefts and 
ends." 

Dr. Lingard obferves, that the beft account of 
this treaty is that compofed by order of the king * 
himfelf, for the ufe of the Prince of Wales; but 
it is queftionable if it was not the produftion of 
his own pen, for, as has been urged, with much 
juftice, who could infufe the paternal feeling and 
the deep perfonal emotion therein contained, but 
Charles himfelf? 

In Peck's " Defiderata," there is alfo pub- 
lifhed a diary of each day's occurrences during 
this remarkable controverfy, drawn up by Mr. 
Oudart; but as the fubjefts which are involved 
in the articles have little intereft for the prefent 
generation, and as the endeavour of this nar- 
rative is rather to relate the pafling incidents 
Attendant on its procedure, than dilate on the 
fubjedl-matter of the treaty itfelf, it is believed 
the following abftrad of the demands and con- 
ceflions, as prepared by Mr. Oudart,f will 

* See Clarendon's " State Papers," vol. ii. 
f "Nicholas Oudart was born at Mechlin, in Brabant, and 
brought from beyond the feas by Sir Henry Wotton. who trufted 



Articles of the Treaty. 265 

fvilly fuffice to fatisfy the reader; the fources 
already mentioned being eafily available for 
more extended illuftration of this extraordinary 
conference. 

Abstract of the propofition or demands of the 
Two Houfes, and his majefty's conceffions, at 
the Treaty, held at Newport, in the Ifle of 
Wight, 1648. 

I. An Adh for the repeal and nulling of all 
his majefty's oaths, declarations, proclamations, 
&c., with a preface about the legality of the war 
on the Parliament's fide. 



him with his domeftic affairs. He afterwards went with Sir 
William Bofwell, as his fecretary, when appointed ambaffador to 
the States in 164.0, and there ftudied medicine, of which faculty 
he was created a Bachelor at Oxford, in January 164.2, about 
which time he became fecretary to Sir Edward Nicholas, one of 
the fecretaries of eftate there (then compounding for its delin- 
quency), and afterwards attended King Charles at Hampton 
Court, and at the treaty in the Ifle of Wight. After the execu- 
tion of the king, Mr. Oudart lived in obfcurity for fome time, 
but at length became fecretary to the Princefs of Orange, and 
one of her executors, flie giving him a high charafter in her 
will. He was afterwards Latin fecretary to William, Prince of 
Orange, and one of his council, he being mentioned as fuch in 
1659, and then held the fame appointment in the court of Charles 
the Second, dying in Little Dean's Yard, Weftminfter, about 
Chriftmas 1708."— Note in Peck's " Defiderata." 



266 Articles of the Treaty. 

Granted, as defired, after a provifo made on 
both fidesj that nothing agreed in this Treaty 
fliould be binding, in cafe the fame break 
ofF. 

2. That the king take and enjoin the Cove- 
nant. 

The Covenant, in fine, was not infilled 
upon. 

3. An Aft for abolifhing archbifliops, bifliops, 
deans, chapters, &c. 

Granted, fo that epifcopacy only accord- 
ing to Scripture be preferved. Yet the 
biftiops to be fufpended till the king and both 
Houfes (after conference with the afTembly 
of divines, to which 20 to be added of the 
king's appointment) fhould agree. The pref- 
byterian government to be eftablifiied in the 
interim. 

4. An Ad: to confirm the ordinances for the 
calling and fitting of the afl"embly of divines. 

Granted, with the proviso for the 20 afore- 
faid to be added by his majefl:y. 

5. An A6t for reformation of religion accord- 
ing to the Covenant, as the Two Houfes have 
or fhall agree. 

Granted, as inviolable in the premifes. 



Articles of the Treaty. 267 

6. An A(5t to take away the Book of Common 
Prayer, and to make the ordinances about Adls. 

Granted, as far as neceflary, till the agree- 
ment. 

7. An A(5t for fettling the diredlory. 
Granted, as defired. 

8. The Short Catechifm to be approved. 
Granted, as defired. 

9. An Ad to abjure popery. 
Granted, as defired, 

10. An A6t for the education of papifts' 
children. 

Granted, as defired. 

1 1 . An A6t to levy penalties on papifts. 
Granted, as defired. 

12. An Adt againft the growth of popery 
and hearing mafs. 

Granted, as defired. 

13. An A&. for the obfervation of the Lord's 
day. 

Granted, as defired. 

14. An Adl for the fupprefllon of inno- 
vations. 

Granted, as defired. 

1 5 . An A6t for the advancement of preaching. 
Granted, as defired. 



268 Articles of the Treaty. 

1 6. An Ad againft pluralities and non- 
refidence. 

Granted, as defired. 

17. An Ad: for reforming and regulating the 
univerfities. 

Granted, as defired. 

1 8. An Ad or Ads to empower the Parlia- 
ment to raife money to pay public debts and for 
other public ufes, as the Parliament fhall agree, 
with a claufe, if the king confent not, yet the 
Ad to bind all the fubjeds. 

Granted, as defired, for two years to come. 

19. An Ad for the Militia to be difpofed 
by both Houfes, both by fea and land, for 
20 years, with feveral powers to levy men and 
monies. 

Granted, as defired, for 20 years. 

20. An Ad to empower both Houfes to 
nominate all the great officers, counfellors, 
judges, &c., in England and Wales, for 20 
years. 

Granted, as defired, for 20 years. 

21. An Ad for nulling and disabling peers 
to fit in Parliament, who had been created fince 
May, 1642. 

Granted, as defired. 



Articles of the Treaty. 26g 

22. An Adt about delinquents in feveral 
branches. 

All fubmitted to compofition as they could 
agree, but mitigation defired. His majefty's 
adherents not to bear office — fome reftrained 
from court and the Parliament, and others left 
to the known laws. The king's clergy to 
have the thirds; where difpofleffed to be 
reftored to the livings when not pofTeffed 
by others, and the fcandalous left to cen- 
fure. 

23. An Adt for dating public debts and the 
difcovery of delinquents' eftates. 

Granted, as defired. 

24. An Adt to render void the ceflation of 
Ireland, and to fettle the management of that 
war in both Houfes, with feveral branches. 

Granted, as defired, and the management 
for 20 years. 

25. An A& fettling religion there according 
to the Covenant. 

Granted, as in England. 

26. An Adt nominating the chief officers 
there without limitation of time. 

Granted for 20 years. 

27. An Adt for the Militia of London to 



270 Articles of the Treaty. 

be in the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common 
Council. 

Granted, as defired. 

28. An A(5t that the citizens be not drawn 
out of the city but by their own confent. 

Granted, as defired. 

29. An Ad: for the grant and confirmation 
of the charter and privileges of the City of 
London. 

Granted, as defired. 

30. That the Laws made and to be made by 
the Common Council be to them as Ads of 
Parliament. 

Granted, as defired. 

3 1 . That all propofitions which fliall be made 
for London by both Houfes be pafled into 
Ads. 

Granted, as defired. 

32. An Ad to authorife all Ads pafled 
under the great feal made by the Two Houfes; 
and all done by any other fince May 1642, to 
be vacated. 

Granted, as defired. 
22- An Ad for annulling all grants by the 
great feal of Ireland fince 1643. 
Gfanted, as in England. 



Articles of the Treaty. 2ji 

34. An Adl that the two ordinances of the 
Two Houfes, for the abolition of epifcopacy 
and for the fale of church lands, be made Ads 
of Parliament. 

Refpited; becaufe the firft is included in 
the grant for taking all the hierarchy but 
bifliops, ordy ; and the other anfwered in that 
in which his majefty offereth the church lands 
to be fettled in the crown in truft for the 
clergy, charged wiith leafes for ninety-nine 
years to fatisfy purchafers; referring a rent 
for the livelihood of fuch to whom the fame 
appertained. 

2$. An Aft for taking away the Court of 
Wards. 

Granted, as defired, fo as 100,000/. per 
annum be anfwered to the crown in lieu of it. 

(^Additional propojitions after the 40 days.) 

26. That new delinquents upon the fecond 
war fhall pay one year's value more. 

All left to compound as they, can, but 

moderation defired. 

37. That agreements made and to be made 
with the Scots, be confirmed by Ad of Parlia- 
ment. 



272 Articles of the Treaty. 

Granted for all paft, and his majefty will be 
willing to join with both Houfes for the 
future, for fecuring the nations mutually. 
38. That my Lord "of Ormond be difavowed 
and recalled. 

Granted, if the treaty conclude well, and 
the marquis fhould not then defert. Mean- 
time, a letter to be fent to him from his 
majefty to ceafe, becaufe a treaty is hopefully 
begun, and claufes in it about leaving that 
war to both Houfes. 

The king's proportions were four : — 

1. For his revenues, lands, and houfes to be 

returned. 

2. A compenfation to be given him and his 

fucceflbrs for what he is now to part with. 

3. That he be fettled in a condition of honour, 

freedom, and fafety. 

4. That an A.&. of oblivion be pafled, including 

all perfons. 
All four granted by both Houfes with fome 
limitations. 



CHAPTER VII. 



Deportment of the King during the Treaty — Overtures to Ham- 
mond by the Army, and his Recall to Windfor — Seizure of the 
King by the Anny at Newport, and his Removal to Hurft 
Caftle, 



T7OR fixty-and-one days Charles continued to 
■^ date his correfpondence from " Our Court 
at Newport;" and it would certainly feem that 
Newport muft have been fuddenly endowed with 
the power of elafticity, in order to receive and 
accommodate the number of perfons this event- 
ful procedure had there congregated together. 

Years upon years have pafled fince then, but 
never again has Newport or any other town pre- 
fented fo Angular a tranfition from tranquillity 
and retirement to a fcene fo ftriking in the ex- 
treme. The ftaid inhabitant agape with wonder- 

T 



274 Appearance of Newport. 

ing inquirement — the ancient pikeman and 
muflceteer with his coil of match flowly fmoul- 
dering — the republican high-crowned hat, and 
the more gaudy coftume of the cavaliers and 
others in attendance on the king ; — foremoft 
among them being recognized " Monfieur 
Circourt, refident in England for the Duke of 
Gilderlandj" James Stuart, Duke of Richmond, 
and his fon Efme Stuart, with his love-locks 
and plumed hat — the coming and going of Par- 
liamentary polls — and the conftant arrival of 
perfonages favoured with pafles by the Houfes. 

All thefe were prominent objefts during the 
time the negociation was allowed to proceed; 
whilft the ftate routine accompanying the paflage 
of the king to and from the treaty-houfe was 
daily enaded ; and as fome little relaxation, the 
Commiflioners oftentimes vifited the governor 
at Carifbrook, " where they went to the bowl- 
ing-alley, after being received with great affec- 
tion and love by the foldiers, and 20 fhot made 
from the great ordnance to give them a falute." 

Amidft fo difunited an aflemblage, there was 
alfo neceflarily a great variety of opinion; and 
on many occafions the diflenfions caufed by 
party-difputes were quelled with difficulty. 



Affray at the George Tavern. I'j^ 

A houfe of entertainment in Newport, called 
the George Tavern,* was the place of aflemblage 
for the royalifts; and among other difturbances 
which are noticed as occurring in this " hoftelrie," 
it is ftated, that on the night of the nth of 
Odober, " divers of the royal party aflembled 
here, and began to drink their fovereign's 
health right luftily; but upon a conference 
refpefting the king's conceflion to the Bill for 
the abolition of the archbifhops, &c., they 
refblved againft it, and made great proteftations 
to avenge their quarrel upon fome of the oppo- 
fite party. In a fhort time their difputation be- 
came fo noify, that four files of mulketeers were 
fent to apprehend and bring them before the 
governor ; but upon this endeavour, the royalifts 
drew their fwords, and difcharged their pocket- 
piftols, and fo bloody a conflidl began to enfue, 
each party refufing to give way, that a reinforce- 
ment of foldiers was fent for, who, under 
Enfign Smith, ultimately fecured the whole of 
the company, with the lofs of two royalifts and 
three foldiers killed in the affray." 

* The George was on the fouth fide of the High Street, where 
the (hops of Meffrs. Wavell (chemift), Cowdery (grocer), and 
Gubbins (ftationer), now are, 

T 2 



276 Injincerity of the King. 

Whilft the negotiation lafted, it was believed 
the king might eafily have made his efcape; and 
the charge of infincerity, which has been often- 
times urged as prompting him to accede to this 
treaty, becomes painfully obfervable in the 
letters to Captain Titus. More than once he 
expreffes himfelf: "if the Parliament offer a 
treaty, I fhall make ufe of it only to my efcape." 
But to this determination a ferious impediment 
was raifed up by the engagement of his royal word 
that he would not depart out of the ifland during 
the conference, nor in three weeks after, although 
it is recorded that on one occafion he confidered 
himfelf releafed from it by mifcondud: on the 
part of Hammond, who, on the 4th of No- 
vember, became aware of that perfuafion, and 
with confiderable difficulty prevailed on him to 
renew the pledge ; and after the renewal, it has 
been incorredtly faid that he refufed to efcape, 
even when every facility was offered him. 

The exad time of this releafe is particularly 
recognifable by the tone of his anxious correfpon- 
dence with Mr. Hopkins; for in a letter written 
on the night of Saturday, October 7th, he fays : — 
"Though I doubt not of your care in expediting 
that bufinefs whereof I fpoke to you this morn- 



Letters to Mr. Hopkins. 277 

ing, yet I cannot but tell you that you cannot 
make ready too foon ; for by what I have heard 
fince I faw you, I find that a few days will 
make that impoffible which is now feafible. 
Wherefore I pray you give me an account as 
foon as you can, firft where I ftiall take boat ? 
fpare not my walking in refpeft of fecurity. 
Then how the tide falls out ? or whether In cafe 
the wind do ferve, it be neceflary to look to the 
tides ? What winds are fair ? what may ferve ? 
and what contrary ? Confider alfo if a pafs from 
50 (^Hammond), may not be ufeful ? Laftly, 
how foon all will be ready, and what the impe- 
diments are which refts ? I fhall order the time 
of night as you fhall judge moft convenient." 

The fame point is alfo touched on in his 
letters of the fucceeding days, Sunday and Mon- 
day ; and in that of Sunday he adds this expref- 
five remark, "I am fo careful to keep this 
bufinefs fecret, that 1 refolve to acquaint no man 
with it, but at the inftant when I am to aft." 

On Monday he wrote thus: "I pray you 
rightly to underftand my condition, which, I con- 
fefs, yefternight I did not fully enough explain, 
through want of time. It is this : notwithftand- 
ing my too great conceflions already made, I 



278 Letters to Mr, Hopkins. 

know that unlefs I fhall make yet others, which 
will diredly make me no king, I fhall be at befl: 
but a perpetual prifoner, Befides, if this were 
not, of which I am too fure, the adhering to the 
church, from which I cannot depart, no, not in 
fhow, will do the fame. And to deal freely 
with you, the great conceflion I made this day 
(the church, militia, and Ireland), was made 
merely in order to my efcape, of which, if I had 
not hope, I would not have done ; for then I 
could have returned to my ftrait prifon without 
reluftancy. But now, I confefs, it would break 
my heart, having done that which only an 
efcape can juftify. To be fhort, if I ftay for a 
demonftration of their farther wickednefs, it will 
be too late to feek a remedy ; for my only hope 
is, that now they believe I dare deny them 
nothing, and fo be lefs careful of their guards. 
Wherefore, as you love my fafety, let us def- 
■patch their bufinefs as foon as we can, without 
expedting news from London; and let me tell 
you, that if I were once abroad and under fail, I 
would willingly enough hazard the three pin- 
naces. To conclude, I pray you believe me 
(and not the common voice of mankind), that I 
am loft if I do not efcape, which I ftiall not be 



Letters to Mr. Hopkins. 279 

able to do, if, as I have faid, I ftay for farther 
demonftrations. Therefore, for God's fake, 
haften with what diligence you can, and give a 
daily account to 39 (^the king)." 

On Tuefday, Odober 10, his majefty fays: 
''What I wrote yefternight was not to add fpurs, 
but really to give you the true ftate of my con- 
dition ; and as I have freely trufted you with 
the greateft fecret I have, in regard to your 
fidelity, for the feafibility I j[hall trufl: to your 
judgment. It were a wrong to my confidence 
and your diligence, more to exhort you. Where- 
fore this is only to tell you that I find it necef- 
fary to acquaint this bearer, my oldeft and moft 
trufty fervant, with this great fecret, both to 
eafe my pains of writing, and the better adjuft- 
ing of all particulars, and fo I refer you to what 
he fhall fay to you from 29 {t^i king) ;" adding 
in a poftfcript, "the procuring of a Dutch pink 
would make all fure." 

Another letter, dated "Thurfday night, 9th 
November, after fupper," contains this paflage ; 
" I fhould be very forry that your expofing 
yourfelf to the eaftern wind fhould do you any 
harm ; but it will make me the more beholden 
to you, nor fhall I ever forget your daily pains 



28o Letters to Mr. Hopkins. 

and hazards for jny fervice. In the meantime, 
I hope that the wind, which probably may bring 
me good luck, will do you no harm. At this 
time I will fay no more ; but if the fhip come, I 
like that way beft ; yet if fhe come not quickly, 
I muft take fome other way, for I daily find 
more and more reafon to haften ; and even fince 
fupper I have it from fure intelligence, that the 
bufinefs in Ireland will break all, wherefore I 
muft ftay no longer than towards the end of 
next week, if fo long, fo that you muft adt 
accordingly; and upon Levet's return, which I 
hope will be Saturday, I muft fet a day." 

And in the next letter, dated Sunday, No- 
vember 1 2th, the king tells the fame correfpon- 
dent, whom he ftyles 48 : " That you may give 
me the fuller account to-morrow night, I defire 
you to inform yourfelf of the tides, and alfo of 
the horfe guards, both how they are placed, 
and what rounds they ride. This is all now; 
but when you come I will propofe fome con- 
fiderations unto you how to prevent accidents." 

Among thefe letters there is alfo found one 
with the fignature " Hellen," to Sir W, Hop- 
kins, but evidently deciphered by the king him- 
felf. It was dated in Odtober, and contains the 



Appreh'enjions of the King. 281 

following remarkable paflages : " There is a 
notable defign, to which are agreed the army 
and Parliament; and by concurring counfels, to 
which end an exprefs is fent to Cromwell to dif- 
pofe of his majefty. 

" Many here wifh (for his friends in the city 
are numerous), that the king would thoroughly 
concede, to prevent dangers incumbing. But, I 
fear, if good be not intended him, no conde- 
fcenfion of his can avert it. If then he will 
betake him to his efcape, let him do it on 
Thurfday or Friday next, but by all means out 
of fome door, and not from the houfe-top by 
means of ladders. For I have heard too much 
of that way talked of by fome near him. Farther 
I defire none may be trufted herewith but your 
fon and Levet." 

It has been feen, from the king's own words, 
in his parting addrefs to the commiffioners, that 
he had then apprehenfions for his life ; and it is 
ftill more apparent by thefe extrads, that of late 
his hopes had fucceffively vanifhed, until the 
convidtion was ftrongly felt that the refult of 
this trying treaty afforded no promife, even by 
ample conceffions, and a furrender of his rights^ 
of either a reftoration of his liberty, or reconci- 
liation with his opponents. 



282 Condition of the King. 

His fituation at this moment was alarmingly 
critical; and it can therefore fcarcely create 
wonderment, that under fuch circumftances, he 
fought to efcape, or that his parole was feem- 
ingly no objedlion to the attempt. 

He knew that befides the Parliament there 
was the army, which had both the will and the 
power to fet afide any agreement which might be 
made between him and the two Houfes, and 
hence arofe his convidtion that " the treaty 
would come to notliing ;" whilft added to this, 
was his acquaintance, fince his releafe, with all 
that paffed in the private councils of his enemies 
— their determination to bring him to trial and 
the fcafFold — and the intimation he had received 
of an intention to aflaffmate him during the treaty. 

With all thefe thoughts in his mind, how 
pitiable was the condition of Charles at Newport. 
His labours were intenfe, and morning, noon, and 
night, brought neither ceflation of mental fatigue 
nor modification of his calamitous diftrefles, 

Defcribing the king's avocations at this time, 
a cotemporary authority writes : " on that day 
(Sept. 26) his majefty had confultation with the 
bifhop of London and the reft of the dodtors 
with him, about the bill for church government, 
prefented to him the night before. At dinner 



Labours of the King. 283 

and fupper the bifliops faid grace, and waited 
upon his majefty (as they do every day), and 
after dinner his majefty had again confultation 
with them and the doftors upon the bill aforefaid. 

"His majefty in conference with them had 
pen, ink, and paper, and took divers notes for 
his private ufe afterwards, and after fupper was 
clofe writing in his privy chamber, 

" Wednefday, Sept. 27, was the faft-day ; 
his majefty had common prayer read that 
morning, and a fermon in the prefence-chamber, 
and the additional prayer* concerning the treaty 
was alfo read, and a pfalm fung for peace. 

* In addition to the ufual Liturgy, the following prayer, 
" drawn by his majefty's fpecial direftion and dictates for a 
blefllng on the Treaty at Newport," was ufed on all occafions 
of Divine Service : — 

" O moft merciful Father, Lord God of Peace and Truth, we, 
a people forely afilifted by the fcourge of an unnatural war, do 
earneftly befeech thee to command a bleffing from Heaven upon 
this prefent Treaty, begun for the eftabliftiment of a happy 
peace ; soften the moft obdurate hearts with a true Chriftian 
defire of faving thofe men's blood for whom Chrift himfelf hath 
fhed his : or if the guilt of our great fins caufe this Treaty to 
break off in vain. Lord, let the truth clearly appear who thofe 
men are which under pretence of the public good do purfue 
their own private ends ; that this people may be no longer fo 
blindly miferable as not to fee at leaft in this their day the things 
that belong unto their peace. 

" Grant this, gracious God, for His fake, who is our peace 
itfelf, even Jefus Chrift our Lord. Amen." 



284 Labours of the King. 

" After fermon his majefty had again further 
conference with the bifliops, doftors, and the 
lords then alfo in prefence who have leave from 
the Parliament to attend his majefty ; and they 
were very clofe in argument about the Bill for 
church government. 

"And after fupper his majefty withdrew to 
prepare a paper to be prefented to the Parlia- 
ment commiffioners the next day. But befides 
the difpute about this bufinefs of church govern- 
ment, the king had confultation with the lords, 
and alfo with the lawyers and others about him, 
concerning the reft of the propofitions."* 

Sir Philip Warwick alfo remarks that " every 
night when the king was alone about eight 
o'clock, except when he was writing his own 
private letters, he commanded me to come to 
him, and he lookt over the notes of that day's 

* " His majefty not long fince being prefent at the treaty, one 
of his late fervants that did attend him in his chamber, did 
fecretly break open his cabinet, in hope to difcover fomething 
by which he might both fatisfy his curiofity and advantage it j 
but the event not anfwering his expeftations he fuddenly clapt it 
together again. His majefty being returned, the diforders of the 
papers did confefs that his cabinet had been opened and exa- 
mined, at which his difcretion would take no notice, but being 
as full of forgivenefs as of candour, he took his pen and wrote 
this diftich readily on his cabinet : 

" A Pick-thanke and a Pick-locke, both are bafely evil. 
The difference is, this trots, that ambles to the devill." 



RecolleSiions of Sir P. Warwick. 285 

treaty, and the reafons upon which it moved^ 
and fo didtated the heads of a difpatch, which 
from time to time he made concerning this treaty 
unto his prefent majefty, then prince :* and 
thisj Mr. Oudartj whofe hand his majefty ufed in 
thofe difpatches, tranfcribed. And I had my 
own papers when the king came over, but lent 
them unto fome hand that never reftored them 
to me, which hath lamed me much about this 
treaty. Some things I remember I faid which 
fhowed thofe eminent chriftian virtues in him 
which were rarely to be found among any fort 
of men — fcarce ever among princes. For 
about the latter end of the Treaty, finding 
it was like to be inefFedual, ' I wiih (fays 
he) I had confulted nobody but my own felf, 
for then where in honour or confcience I could 
not have complied, I could have early been 
pofitive. For, with Job, I would willingly have 
rather chofen mifery than fin.' 

" I never faw him flied tears but once, and 
he turned his head prefently away ; for he was 
then didtating to me fomewhat in a window, 
and he. was loth to be difcerned ; and the lords 
and gentlemen were then in the room, though 

* Several of thefe letters are among the MSS, preferved in 
the Britifti Mufeum. 



286 RecolleSlions of Sir P. Warwick. 

his back was towards them — but I can fafely 
take my oath they were the biggeft drops that 
I ever faw fall from an eye — ^but he recoUedted 
himfelf, and foon ftifled them. 

" When he was preft by the Parliament 
minifters to give way for a fmall Catechifm for 
Children, * I will not (fays he) take upon me to 
determine all thefe texts you quote are rightly 
applied, and have their true fenfe given them ; 
and I aflure you, gentlemen, I would licenfe a 
catechifm at a venture fooner for men than I 
would for children, becaufe they can judge for 
themfelves : and I make great confcience to 
permit that children fliould be corrupted in their 
firft principles.' 

" And this was fpoken unto Stephen Marfliall, 
of whom I know by a gentleman that was in the 
fociety of the Parliament commiffioners, that 
he was a bloody man in thofe extemporary 
prayers, which in his courfe he then made unto 
the commijflioners (and his fermons fhow how 
far he was from a Chriftian fpirit), for that gen- 
tleman told me that there was a great diiference 
of fpirit betwixt thofe prayers which Vines, and 
thofe that Marfliall made. 

" I remember one evening, when I waited on 



RecolleSiions of Sir P. Warwick. 287 

the king with the notes that paffed that day 
(and then fometimes he would eafe himfelf by 
fome difcourfe on the bye), his majefty told me 
that he fhould be like a captain that had 
defended a place well, and his fuperiors not being 
able to relieve him, he had leave to furrender it ; 
but (he replied), ' though they cannot relieve me 
in the time I demand it, let them relieve me 
when they can: elfe I will hold it out till 1 make 
fome ftone in this building my tombftone, and fo 
I will do (fays he), by the Church of England.' 

" Another time, talking of the unreafonable- 
nefs of the two Houfes' propofitions about the 
civil government : * Well (fays he), they will afk 
fo much, and ufe it fo ill, that the people of 
England will be one day glad to relodge the 
power they had taken from the Crown, where it 
is due, and I have offended againft them more 
in the things I have granted them, than in any- 
thing I ever defigned againft them.' " 

The chaplains fpoken of by Warwick were 
thofe fent by the Parliament to attend on the 
commiflioners, and before whom they preached. 
Herbert remarks that "the king would not 
accept of them amongft his chaplains, either 
preaching or praying. His majefty was never- 



288 Religious Obfervances. 

thelefs affable to them, and faid they were wel- 
come, always defiring thofe pious affiftances 
which holy and good minifters, either prelates 
or preftyters, could afFord him, efpecially in 
thofe extremities which God had pleafed to per- 
mit fome of his fubjedls to reduce him to ;" and 
as the parifh church was poffefled by thefe men 
and the commiffioners, divine fervice was regu- 
larly and decoroufly performed before him in 
the prefence-chamber* by one of his felefted 
chaplains, or one of the prelates who had come 
to Newport to afTift him in his deliberations 
touching the government of the church, who 
preached from texts apparently felefted as perti- 
nent to the occafion of their aflembly. 

On the 8 th of Odober the fermon was deli- 
vered by Dr. Turner, dean of Canterbury, from 
the 5th chapter of John and 14th verfe: "After- 
wards Jefus findeth him in the temple, and faith 
unto him, Behold, thou art made whole ; fin no 
more, left a worfe thing come unto thee." 

On the fucceeding Sunday, Dr. Hey wood. 
On the 29th Odober, Dr. Turner again. On 
the 5th November, Dr. Heywood, from the 68th 
Pfalm. On the 12th Dr. Gulfon, from the 

* The prefent fchool-room in the Grammar School at Newport. 



Touching for the Evil. 289 

wordsj " Ye fhall fwear by me in truth, judg- 
mentj and righteoufnefs." And on the 19th, 
his majefty's birthday, the primate of Armagh, 
upon the 49th chapter of Genefis and 3rd verfe; 
whilft on the remaining Sabbath is found the 
name of Dr. Sanderfon. 

Thefe matters were all carefully recorded by 
Mr. Oudart, in whofe diary many other intereft- 
ing reminifcences illuftrative of the king's difpo- 
fition and fortunes at this time are to be found. 

On the 7 th of Odlober he writes : — 

" This evening happened a very remarkable 
thing. A young gentlewoman of about fixteen 
years of age, Elizabeth Stevens, of Winchefter, 
came into the prefence-chamber to be touched 
for the evil, which ftie was fuppofed to have, 
and therewith one of her eyes (that, namely, on 
the left fide) was fo much indifpofed that, by 
her own and her mother's teftimony (who was 
then alfo prefent) fhe had not feen with that eye 
of above a month before. 

" After prayers read by Dr. Saunderfon, the 
maid kneeled down among others likewife to be 
touched ; and his majefty touched her, and put 
a ribbon, with a piece of money* at it, in ufual 

* Thefe were angels, called " Healing Gold," 

U 



290 Proceedings of the Army. 

manner about her neck. Which done, his 
majefty turned to the lords, namely, the Duke 
of Richmond, the Earl of Southampton, and the 
Earl of Lindfey, to difcourfe with them. And 
the faid young gentlewoman, of her own accord, 
faid openly, ' I can fee of this fore eye.' And 
afterwards declared fhe did fee more and more 
by it, and could by degrees endure the light of 
a candle. All which his majefty, in the prefence 
of the faid lords and very many others, examined 
himfelf and found to be true. And it hath fince 
been difcovered, that fome months agone the 
faid young gentlewoman profefled, that as foon 
as ftie was of age fufficient, flie would convey 
over to the king's ufe all her land, which, to 
the value of about 130/. per annum, her father, 
deceafed, had left her fole heir unto." 

The army was now drawn together in the 
town of St. Albans, and there a council of offi- 
cers, after a week's deliberation, had drawn up a 
remonftrance to the Houfe of Commons, in 
which they urged their fad apprehenfions of the 
danger and evil of the treaty with the king, and 
of any accommodation with him ; that he ought 
to be brought to trial on account of the evils 
done by him j that the Englifli monarchy fhould 



EffeSt on Hammond. 291 

henceforward be eleftive ; and that a period 
fhould be fet to the prefent Parliament, which, 
for the future, fhould be annual. This remon- 
ftrance, which is of great length, was figned by 
Rufhworth, the fecretary to Fairfax, and induced 
a long and high debate. In fadt, Cromwell was 
at hand, and he, the moft powerful of all, was 
determined above all not to confide in the treaty 
with Charles, nor to brook the domination of 
the Prefbyterian party, which had of late carried 
moft of their meafures by large majorities. 
He, together with Ireton and others of the vio- 
lent party, had been for fome time in earneft 
correfpondence with Hammond, reafoning with 
him, and exhorting him to hold the perfon of 
the king folely for the fervices and ufes of the 
army. But thefe appeals feem to have awakened 
Hammond, when too late, to that fenfe of his 
duty which the love of felf had hitherto ftilled 
within him ; and perceiving that, notwithftanding 
their overtures, he was determined to keep the 
king for the Parliament, they refolved to have 
recourfe to the expedient of drawing him away 
from his government for a fhort time, under the 
pretence of that claufe in his original appoint- 
ment, by which the authority of the commander- 

u 2 



292 Recall of Hammond. 

in-chief had been exprefsly referved and con- 
firmed." 

To the fuccefsful accomplifhment of this 
fcheme, the refpedive charadters of each of the 
adtors in it were well calculated to afford every 
facility. It was eafy to make Fairfax believe 
the commander-in-chief poflefTed the right to 
fummon Hammond to appear before him ; and 
therefore, the right alfo of appointing a fubfti- 
tute during his abfence : a courfe of reafoning 
which procured the governor's recall to head- 
quarters, and the appointment of Colonel Ewer 
in his place; but on the receipt of the letter 
containing this information, Hammond, now 
poflefTed by fome confcientious fcruples, imme- 
diately tranfmitted it to the Houfe of Commons, 
by whom it was refolved, on the 27 th of No- 
vember, that he fhould be required to flay in 
the Ifle of Wight, and attend his charge there 
until further orders ; that the general be informed 
of this note ; and an order difpatched to the 
lord admiral, to fend fomq fhips to the Ifle of 
Wight, where he was to be in communication 
with Colonel Hammond, and confider himfelf 
under his commands. 

Before the arrival of thefe wifhes of the 



Hammond's InJiruSiions. 293 

Houfe, Hammond, had however, left the ifland, 
by reafon of the pofitive injundiion exprelTed in 
the general's letter. He informed the lords and 
commons, from Farnham, that he was proceeding 
towards the army, and intimated to them at 
Bagfhot, that he was there put under reftraint. 
This intelligence caufed an ordinance to be 
pafled " for a letter to be written to the general, 
to acquaint him that his orders given to Col. 
Ewer, were contrary to the refolutions of the 
Houfe, and the inftruftions to Col. Hammond ; 
and defired him to recall the faid order, and imme- 
diately command Hammond back to the ifland." 

Although Hammond had obeyed the gene- 
ral's injundtions by haflening to head-quarters, 
he, however, refufed to furrender his charge to 
Ewer; as before his departure from the ifland, 
which he did in the company of Ewer by the 
fame boat as the commiflioners, he appointed 
three deputies for the fafety of the ifland, and 
the care of the king's perfon. 

Thefe three perfonages were, Major Rolph in 
command at Newport, Capt. Boreman at Carif- 
brook, and Capt. Hawes, to whom he delivered 
a copy of his own inftrudtions as received from 
the Parliament, as well as additional direftions 



294 Hammond's InJiruBions, 

for this efpecial occafion. He particularly en- 
joined on them, " that if any perfon whatever, 
under any pretence whatever, fliall endeavour 
the removing the perfon of the king out of this 
ifland, unlefs by dired order of Parliament, that 
you refifl, and to your uttermoft oppofe any 
fuch perfons, and you ufe your beft endeavours to 
fecure the perfon of the king from being taken 
out of the ifland." He endowed them with 
power to fummon the trainbands, if neceflary, to 
their affiftance, and gave them command over 
all officers and foldiers of the army now in the 
ifland, captains, governors, and forts, and all boats 
and barks belonging to it ; whilfl to Sir Robert 
Dillington, colonel of the regiment of the Eafl; 
Medine Trainbands, and Sir John Leigh, co- 
lonel of thofe of the Weft Medine, fimilar in- 
junctions were addrelTed, with the addition that 
they were to be aiding and aflifting unto the 
three commiffioners already mentioned. 

The known prediledions of Rolph would not 
urge him to attach much importance to thefe 
commands; as the deliverance of the perfon of 
the king to the army was a procedure in which 
he would rather fympathife, than exert any 
authority delegated to him to prevent. 



Preparations for Seizing the King. 295 

Little furprife will be therefore excited at the 
events which clofely followed the departure of 
Hammond from the ifland. Firebrace, after 
fpeaking of the refult of the treaty, quaintly 
fays, " Our hopes were all blafted, when the 
army, thirfting for his blood, fent a party into 
the ifland to fecure him, which was fo fuddenly 
and privately done, that there was no notice or 
appearance of them until that night they began 
their horrid tragedy, being the 29th of Novem- 
ber, 1648. 

" The king had commanded me to attend 
him that night at eight of the clock, for a 
packet he was preparing for me to fend to the 
queen; but before that hour I perceived fome 
foldiers with piflols in their hands, bufily prying 
about the houfe where the king was lodged; 
this, together with the news of a party newly 
arrived, put me into great apprehenfion of the 
king's danger. And, therefore, not flaying till 
the time his majefly appointed me, I knocked at 
the bedchamber-door, which his majefty had 
commanded me to do at any time when I had 
bufinefs with him ; and by fuch a knock, which 
he knew and directed me to ufe. He prefently 
opened me the door, and feeing me appear in 



296 Firebrace's Narrative. 

great aftonifliment, afked me, * What is the mat- 
ter ? ' I anfwered, * God Almighty preferve your 
majefty, for I much fear fome difmal attempt 
upon your perfon; and told him what I had 
feen and heard. He was pleafed to lay his hand 
upon mine, and ufe thefe or like words : ' Fire- 
brace, be not thus affrighted; things will be 
well. You know Hammond is this day gone for 
London, and he hath appointed three deputies 
in his abfence ; thefe will be trebly diligent ; and 
it may be he will fet a treble guard upon me, 
but I am aflured there will be no danger.' 

" I replied. Ah ! fir, I much fear you are 
deceived ; for God's fake yet think of your 
fafety — there is yet a door of hope open. The 
night is dark, and I can now fafely bring you 
into the ftreet, and thence condudt you to your 
old friend Mr, John Newland, who hath a good 
boat always ready, and a good heart to ferve 
you. Commit yourfelf to the mercy of the 
feas, where God will preferve you, and truft not 
yourfelf in the hands of thefe mercilefs villains, 
who I fear this night will murder you ; which, 
indeed, I feared, and therefore was tranfported 
in my paffionate expreffions. Which his majefty, 
notwithftanding, took very well, and ufed ex- 



Arrival of Troops. 297 

prefllons of great kindnefs to me, which I 
begged he would forbear, and yet think of his 
fafety, 

" He told me he did not fear, and that if he 
did think there was any danger, he fhould be 
cautious of going in regard of his word, which 
I fuppofed he had paffed to Hammond not to 
ftir ; then he bid me ftay, and he would feal up his 
letters, which he had jufl: finifhed, and gave me 
that difpatch to fend away, which accordingly 
he did, and I with a forrowful heart left him." 

Soon afterwards, another of the royal fer- 
vants was called by a difguifed perfon, who 
defired him to acquaint the king that the army 
would feize upon him that night, and then 
abruptly withdrew; and although as yet no 
one was aware that any additional foldiers had 
arrived in the ifland, for with fuch great fecrecy 
was this prelude managed, Lieut.-Col. Cobbett 
had actually landed with a troop of horfe and a 
company of foot. 

Boreman at firft refufed to admit him into 
Carifbrook, but Rolph readily offered his aid 
at Newport; and thefe movements foon after 
coming to the king's knowledge, he became 
alarmed, and inftantly fummoned to his councils 



298 CoL Cooke s Narrative. 

the Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Lindfeyi 
and Colonel Edward Cooke ; the latter of whom 
has preferred a minute defcription of this, the 
laft fcene in this memorable drama. He ftates, 
" That evening, between the hours of feven and 
eight, the king fent for the Duke of Richmond, 
the Earl of Lindfey, and Col. Edward Cooke, 
(who were all three together at the Duke of 
Richmond's lodgings in Newport,) with all 
fpeed to attend him, who accordingly haftened 
to court, the two lords entering into the king's 
inner room, while the colonel waited in the 
outer room for further orders. 

" The king acquainted the lords, that one of 
his fervants had been fent for by a perfon in a 
kind of difguife, who having informed him that 
the army would that night feize upon the king's 
perfon, abruptly left him. The Duke of Rich- 
mond acquainting the king that Col. Cooke 
attended without, was commanded to call him 
in. The king afked him whether he had 
heard anything, that the army defigned to feize 
upon him that night ; he anfwered, that he did 
not hear anything fo much as tending towards 
it ; adding, furely if I had, I would have ac- 
quainted the king with it. The king, giving 



Col. Cooke's Narrative. 299 

the colonel the reafon of his queftion, com- 
manded him to find out Major Rolph, and in- 
quire of him what he knew of it (who was then 
left as deputy-governor by Col. Hammond, with 
diredlions that on all occafions he fhould addrefs 
the king through Col. Cooke, as himfelf had 
ufually done during the treaty.) 

''Col, Cooke having the king's commands, 
and opportunely finding Major Rolph in his 
chamber, acquainted him that the king fent him 
to inquire of him, whether the army refolved to 
feize upon him that night. He anfwered, not 
that he knew of, adding, you may ajfure the king 
from me, that he may reft quietly this night, he 
Jhall have no difturbance this night. Col. Cooke 
obferving that he placed fo much emphafis on 
thofe words, this night, though that was all he 
was commanded by the king to afk, urged him 
farther, whether really there was any fuch 
defign at all, or not. After a little paufe, he 
anfwered, it was impoflible for him to know the 
prefent purpofes of the army at fo great a dif- 
tance, but that as yet he had received no fuch 
orders. The colonel replied. But if you Jhall 
hereafter, /hall I be Jure Jo timely to he made 
acquainted with them, as that the king may not be 



300 Col. Cooke's Narrative. 

furprifed with the execution of them. To which 
requeft he feemingly confented, anfwering, that 
was but a due refpedt to the king. 

" Col. Cooke thereupon returning to the king, 
gave him a punctual account of thefe paflages, 
who, in the meantime, having been informed 
that a confiderable number of the army were 
that night landed on the ifland, remanded Col. 
Cooke back to Major Rolph, to inquire the 
truth thereof; who thus anfwered him : That 
he knew frefh forces would ere long come over 
to relieve thofe that then pafled on duty there^ 
but that as yet he was not certain of their being 
landed ; which anfwer, alfo, the colonel returned 
to the king, who, in that fhort time of his 
abfence, had received farther information that 
two thoufand foot were drawn up about Ca- 
rifbrook Caftle, at which the king feemed to be 
much ftartled, faying, fure there muft needs be 
fome extraordinary defign on foot, that fuch a 
body of men fhould not only be fo privately 
landed, but alfo in fuch a bitter night as this to 
be expofed to fuch extremity of weather, the 
wind blowing very high, and the rain falling 
faft. The king expreffing a great defire to be 
fatisfied on the truth of this, and doubting that 



Col. Cookers Narrative. 301 

he might not be fo clearly dealt with by Major 
Rolph, Col. Cooke offered his fervice to go and 
fee : but the king, refledting on the feverity of 
the weather, refufed to expofe him, yet owning 
it an important particular whereof to be rightly 
informed, which the colonel obferving, impor- 
tuned the king, that if he could be fo long dif- 
penfed with from his majefty's fervice there, he 
would give him leave to go, he knowing no 
other expedient for the king's certain fatif- 
fadlion. 

" He alfo preffed the lords to intercede for 
him therein, and at laft obtained leave of the 
king, his majefty adding thefe gracious expref- 
fions : that he hoped he being young and 
healthy would receive no prejudice by it, and 
that he might live to requite it ; repeating his 
defire to know the truth of it. 

"The colonel took leave, and having foon 
got himfelf and his horfe ready, though the 
night was extraordinary dark, fortunately groped 
out his way through the dark and found the 
caftle : which having carefully rounded, and 
finding nobody without, he went to the gate, 
and having performed the ufual ceremonies (as 
giving the word to the corporal), and fheltered 



302 Col. Cooke's Narrative. 

himfelf under the gate from the excefs of rain 
that then fell, he fent his defires to the governor, 
one Capt. Boreman, a gentleman of the ifland 
who commanded a militia company there), with 
whom he was well acquainted, to come to him. 
In the meantime, he difcourfed with the foldiers 
to try what he could get out of them, but found 
they were altogether ignorant, being a company 
of the iflanders newly marched in ; the two army 
companies formerly garrifoned there being drawn 
down into the town of Newport, probably to 
double the guards. 

"After a longer ftay than he expeded, the 
meflenger returned with this excufe. That the 
captain could not conveniently come out to him, 
but invited him in ; who, when he came into the 
parlour, was furprifed with the fight of about a 
dozen officers of the army, moft of whofe faces 
he knew. And after mutual falutation, he ad- 
drefled himfelf to the governor, defiring to fpeak 
with him, who, he obferved, firft afked and 
obtained leave of thofe officers ; wherefore, alk- 
ing him in private what he meant by that, the 
governor plainly told him, he was no better than 
a prifoner in his own garrifon, for they had 
threatened him with immediate death if he but 



Col. Cooke's Narrative. 



3°3 



fo much as whifpered with any of his own fer- 
vants. The Colonel afked him whether he 
could imagine the caufe of all this ? He 
anfwered. He fuppofed there was fome con- 
fiderable defign on foot, but knew not what it 
was; adding, that he underflood that the cap- 
tain that commanded the troop of horfe in the 
ifland was in the fame condition, and that his 
lieutenant commanded in his place, but that he 
knew no other caufe for either, unlefs they fuf- 
pedted that they had too much duty for the 
king, which gave the Colonel the opportunity of 
alking the particular queftion, whether he knew 
anything of the king's being that night to be 
feized upon ? who anfwered. It was not im- 
probable but that might be their defign, though 
he knew nothing of it. 

"Colonel Cooke received as much light as 
the governor could give him, took leave, and 
haftened to give the king an exadl account of 
all that had pafled; but found, at his return, a 
great alteration at court. Guards not only fet 
round the king's lodgings, and at every window, 
but even within doors alfo, nay, fentinels at the 
king's very chamber-door, fo that the king was 
almoft fulFocated with the fmoke of the burning 



304 Col. Cooke's Narrative. 

match, which haftened the Colonel to Major 
Rolph to complain of the rudenefs of the fol- 
diers, whom he found in bed (it being now 
near twelve or one o'clock), having entered his 
chamber againft the will of his fervant. After 
an apology, he made his complaint, and received 
this anfwer, that he was no way guilty of it ; 
that the two companies being late drawn out of 
the caftle, could not that night have quarters 
provided them, and therefore he had ordered 
them to double the guards, not forefeeing this 
would happen, but the next day he would 
redrefs all things himfelf, with due refped: to the 
king, and confult him, the faid Colonel, in it; 
and that in the meantime he was confident, on 
the Colonel's complaint to the captain of the 
guards, he would draw off the men from being 
ofFenfive to the king, adding, if the Colonel 
found it needful, he might make ufe of his name 
to the captain of the guards, to whom the 
Colonel making his application on his return to 
the king, prevailed with him to draw off thofe 
guards that were fo great an annoyance to the 
king, to a more tolerable diftance. 

" At Colonel Cooke's return to the king, he 
made him repeat over all the feveral paflages 



Col. Cooke's Narrative. 305 

that had happened that night, which being com- 
pared together, and duly confidered by the king, 
the Duke of Richmond, and Earl of Lindfey, 
(for the Earl of Southampton, being indifpofed, 
was before that time returned to his lodgings, 
and the Marquis of Hertford had taken leave of 
the king, and left the ifland that morning, and 
was gone to Netley,) all unanimoufly concluded 
that the army would fuddenly feize upon the 
king's perfon, which being taken for granted on 
all hands, the queftion was, in this defperate cafe, 
what was mofl: advifable to be done ? 

" The lords argued for the king's attempting 
an immediate efcape, for he would better bring 
about a perfonal treaty with the Parliament 
(which he fo much coveted), when out of the 
reach of the army, than when within their 
power, and this would certainly fecure the 
fafety of his perfon, which elfe might be very 
probably much in danger. 

" But before they could proceed to debate the 
manner of this efcape, the king prevented it, 
thus arguing againft the efcape itfelf; firft 
arguing the difficulties, if not impoffibility, of 
accomplifliing it ; next, the confequences ; that in 
cafe he fhould mifcarry in the attempt, it would 



306 Col. Cooke's Narrative. 

exafperate the army, and difhearten his friends; 
and, laftly, that if the army fhould feize upon 
him, they muft preferve him for their own fakes, 
for that no party could fecure their own interefts 
without joining his with it, his fon being now 
out of their reach. 

" The Earl of Lindfey replied. Take heed, 
fir, left you fall into fuch hands as will not fteer 
by rules of policy ; remember Hampton Court, 
where your efcape was your beft fecurity. The 
Duke of Richmond added. That yet he thought 
it feafible enough; and turning to Colonel 
Cooke, alked. How he pafTed to and fro ? Who 
anfwered. He had the word. The duke afked 
him. Whether he believed he could pafs him 
too ? who anfwered. He made no queftion but 
he could. At which the duke took a longer 
cloak, without a ftar, and made the colonel go 
along with him through the guards, and fo 
returned again to the king, acquainting him 
with what he had done, and with what eafe, and 
thence took the advantage again to perfuade the 
king's attempting to efcape. 

" Who on a fudden turning himfelf from the 
two lords, that were difcourfing with him at the 
window, to Colonel Cooke, who ftood drying 



Col. Cooke's Narrative. 307 

himfelf by the fire, faid, Ned Cooke, what do 
you advife me ia this cafe? Who humbly 
anfwered, He fufpefted his own judgment too 
much to prefume to offer any advice, confider- 
ing both the greatnefs of the danger, and the 
perfon concerned in it ; that his majefty had his 
privy council with him, to whom he humbly 
befought him to liften, obferving what they 
preffed him to. At which tlie lords refumed 
their former difcourfe of attempting an efcape. 

" But the king, turning about again, faid, 
Ned, I command you to give me your advice. 
At which the colonel begged leave, that after he 
had premifed fome particulars, he might afk his 
majefty a queftion, who permitting him: Sup- 
pofe, faid he, I fhould not only tell your majefty 
that the army would very fuddenly feize upon 
you, but by concurring circumftances fully con- 
vince your majefty it would be fo ; and alfo that 
I have the word, horfes ready at hand, a veflel 
attending at Cowes and hourly expeding me; 
that I am ready and defirous to attend you, and 
this difmal dark night, as it were, fuited to 
the purpofe, fo that I can forefee no vifible diffi- 
culty in the thing, which I fuppofe to be in all 
particulars the true ftate of this prefent cafe. 

X 2 



308 Col. Cooke's Narrative. 

The only queftion now is. What will your 
majefty refolve to do ? Who, after a fhort 
paufe, pronounced this pofitive anfwer: They 
have promijed me, and I have ■promijed them ; I 
will not break firfl. 

The Duke of Richmond urging the colonel 
to fpeak, he craved leave to fpeak to argue the 
point with the king, who faid. With all my 
heart. I prefume, fir, faid the colonel, your 
majefty intends by thefe words (they and them), 
the Parliament; if fo, the fcene now is quite 
altered or changed, your prefent apprehenfion 
arifing from the army, who have fo far already 
violated the promifes of the Parliament as to 
invade your majefty's freedom and fafety, by 
changing the fingle fentinel of ftate at the outer 
door, unto ftrong guards on your very bed- 
chamber, which is in itfelf no better than a con- 
finement, and probably the forerunner of fome- 
thing more — a fpeedy abfolute imprifonment. 

" The king replied, however. He would not 
do anything that ftiould look like a breaking of 
his word; and fo bade him and the Earl of 
Lindfey good night, and that he would go and 
take his reft too, fo long as he could. To 
which Colonel Cooke replied, I fear it will not 



Col. Cooke's Narrative. 309 

be long. The king anfweredj As pleafe God. 
The king perceiving great uneafinefs and dif- 
order in the colonel, faid, Ned, what troubles 
you ? tell me. Who replied. Sir, to confider the 
greatnefs of your majefty's danger, and your un- 
willingnefs to avoid it. The king replied, Ne'er 
let that trouble you; were it greater I would 
not break my word to prevent it. Sir, faid the 
colonel, will your majefty but refpite the refo- 
lution, and give me leave to ftep and call my 
Lord Southampton ? What needs that, faid the 
king, are not thefe two my friends ? (pointing to 
the Duke of Richmond and the Earl of Lindfey), 
I tell you they are my two true friends. Said 
the colonel. Be pleafed then to confult them. 
Said the king, I am refolved ; go you two to bed 
(meaning the Earl of Lindfey and Colonel 
Cooke, for the Duke of Richmond was then in 
waiting) ; and if I have need of you I will fend 
for you. Whereupon both took leave. 

''But the Duke of Richmond ftepped after 
Colonel Cooke to confult him whether or no he 
had beft put off his clothes that night? who 
anfwered. He himfelf for his part would not; for 
notwithftanding Major Rolph's promife, he feared 
the king would foon be difturbed, or elfe the 



3IO Col. Cooke's Narrative. 

face of affairs deceived him. The duke afked 
hinij Whether he fhould let the king know 
what his opinion was ? who anfwered. With all 
his heart ; and that he would flay in- the outward 
room in hopes that he might occafion fqme new 
difcourfe of the bufinefs. But the duke foon 
returned, and told him the king was refolved to 
go to bed. It was then almoft one o'clock ; and 
though Colonel Cooke went not to bed all night, 
yet all things were carried with fo great fecrecy 
and quiet, that not the leafl noife was heard, nor 
the leaft caufe of fufpicion given. 

" But in the morning, juft at daybreak, the 
king, hearing a great knocking at his dreffing- 
room door, fent the Duke of Richmond to know 
what it meant; who, on inquiring who was 
there, was anfwered. One Mildmay (one of the 
fervants the Parliament had put to the king, and 
brother to Sir Henry). The duke demanding 
what he would have ? anfwered. There were 
fome gentlemen from the army very defirous to 
fpeak with the king ; which account the duke gave 
the king ; but the knocking increafing, the king 
commanded the duke to let them into his drelT- 
ing-room. No fooner was this done, but before 
the king got out of his bed, thofe officers rufhed 



Col. Cooke's Narrative. 311 

into his chamber, and abrupdy told the king 
they had orders to remove him. From whom ? 
faid the king. They replied. From the army. 
The king afked whither he was to be removed ? 
They anfwered. To the caftle. The king afked. 
What caftle? They again anfwered, To the 
caftle. The caftle, faid the king, is no caftle. 
He told them he was well enough prepared for 
any caftle, and required them, to name the caftle. 
After a ftiort whifpering together, they faid, 
Hurft Caftle. The king replied. They could 
not well name a worfe , and called to the Duke 
of Richmond to fend for the Earl of Lindfey 
and Colonel Cooke. At firft they fcrupled at 
the Earl of Lindfey's coming ; but the king, 
faid. Why not both, fince both lie together ? 
They promifed to fend for both, but fent for 
neither. 

''And though the Duke of Richmond had 
ordered the king's breakfaft to be haftened, pre- 
fuming that there was but little provifion in the 
defolate caftle ; yet, when he was fcarce ready, 
the horfes being come, they hurried him away, 
only permitting the duke to attend him about 
two miles, and then told him he muft go no 
further; where he fadly took his leave, being 



312 Col. Cooke's Narrative i 

fcarce permitted to kifs the king's hand, whofe 
laft words were. Remember me to my Lord 
Lindfey and Colonel Cooke, and command 
Colonel Cooke, from me, never to forget the 
paflages of this night."* 

Firebrace, on hearing that his anticipations 
had been too furely verified, procured leave, with 
fome difficulty, to enter his majefty's chamber, 
in difcharge of his duty as page ; and on the 
king's remarking, " I know not where thefe 
people intend to carry me, and I would willingly 
eat before I go, therefore give me fomething to 
eat;" immediately proceeded to comply with 
the king's defire ; but, as if in corroboration of 
Colonel Cooke's ftatement, he relates, " that on 
his returning in half an hour to tell him his 
repaft was ready, he met the officers, in company 
with Rolph, leading him down ftairs, to hurry 
him away, without fufFering him to break his 
faft. He then," he fays, " kneeled down to kifs 
the king's hand, at which he flopped and gave me 
leave to do, when they thruft him up into the 
coach, which was fet clofe to the door."j- 

* November 29, 1648. 
f On tefting the rhodomontade of Sir John Bowiing (f) with 
ftatements that cannot err, the Journal of the Hbufes of Farlia- 



Eff'eB on the Royal Attendants. 313 

" Never," writes Mr. Herbert, " at one time, 
he thought, was beheld more grief in men's faces, 
or greater fears in their hearts, the king being 
at fuch a time and in fuch a manner hurried 
away they knew not whither ; but no remedy 
appearing, the noblemen, the venerable perfons, 
and others, his majefty's fervants, approached to 
kifs the king's hand, and to pour forth their fup- 
plications to Almighty God to fafeguard and com- 
fort his majefty in that his difconfolate condition. 

" His majefty, who at other times was cheer- 
ful, at his parting from his friends fhowed 
forrow in his heart by the fadnefs of his counte- 
nance — a real fympathy. 

ment, &c., I have thought it better to pafs by his extraordinary 
tales — for nothing more they are — of this. particular time, as alfo 
the unfounded allufion of Lord Clarendon to the ungenerous 
part the queen is fuppofed to have performed in connexion with 
the king's attempts to efcape. The letter on which the accufa- 
tion is founded, contains in truth no allufion to the queen at all. 
The perfon mentioned in the letter, under the number 351 
(printed in Afliburnham's narrative), is not the queen, but Mrs. 
Whorwood, who was then in the ifland advifing with him. And 
it is here worthy of remark, that the king in his cipher letters 
never calls Henrietta Maria " the queen," but invariably fpeaks of 
her as " my wife," and that the numbers were changed for the 
ufe of every correfpondent ; as, for inftance, in Titus' cipher the 
number 315 exprelTed queen, but not the queen. And had 
Charles wiftied to write the queen, he would have ufed the num- 
bers 560 : 315 (the queen). 



314 Departure of the King, 

" When the king was ready to take coach, he 
afked whether he was to have any fervants with 
him ; ' Only fuch, anfwered the Lieut.-Colonel, 
' as are ufeful.' The king then nominated Mr. 
Harrington and Mr, Herbert to attend in his 
bedchamber, and fcarce a dozen more for other 
fervice. The king taking notice that Mr. Her- 
bert had for three days abfented himfelf, Mr. 
Harrington told his majefty he was fick of an 
ague. He then defired the Duke of Richmond 
to fend one of his fervants to fee in what condi- 
tion he then was, and if anything well, to come 
along with him. The gentleman the duke fent 
found him fweating, but fo foon as he received 
the meflage he arofe, and came fpeedily to his 
majefty, who foon took coach and commanded 
Mr. Harrington, Mr. Herbert, and Mr. Mild- 
may (his carver) to come into his coach ; and the 
Lieut.-Colonel, offering to enter the coach unin- 
vited, his majefty (by oppofing his foot) made 
him fenfible of his rudenefs,* fo as with fome 

* Firebrace afferts that this perfonage was no other than 
" Rolph, who had before attempted to murder him ; he impu- 
dently, with his hat on, ftept up into the coach, but his majefty, 
with great courage, rofe up and thruft him out, faying, ' It is 
not come to that yet — get you out;' and called up Mr. Herbert and 
Mr. Harrington, who at that time waited as grooms of the bed- 
chamber." — "Memoirs," p. 199. 



Progrefs to Worjley's Tower. 315 

confufion he mounted his horfe and followed 
with a guard of horfe ; the coachman driving as 
direfted. 

" The king in this paflage fhowed no difcom- 
pofure at all, but would be alking the gentle- 
men in the coach with him whither they thought 
he was travelling ? They made fome fimple 
replies, fuch as ferved to make his majefty fmile 
at their innocent conjecftures ; otherwhile he could 
comfort himfelf with what he had granted at his 
late treaty with the commiffioners, whom he 
highly praifed for their ingenuity and fair de- 
portment at Newport, as formerly mentioned. 

" The coach went weftward, towards Wors- 
ley's Tower, in Frefhwater Ifle, a little beyond 
Yarmouth Haven, and thereabout his majefty 
refted until the vefTel was ready to take 
him aboard with thofe few attendants. The 
king, after an hour's ftay, went aboard, a for- 
rowful fpeftacle and great example of Fortune's 
inconftancy. 

" The wind and tide favouring, they crofTed the 
narrow fea in three hours, and landed at Hurft 
Caftle. The captain of this wretched place was 
not unfuitable ; for at the king's going aftiore he 



3i6 Reception at Hurst Cajlle. 

flood ready to receive him.with fmall obfervance. 
His look was ftern ; his hair and large beard 
were black and bufliy ; he held a partifan in his 
hand, and (Switz like) had a great baflcet-hilt 
fword by his fide ; hardly could one fee a man 
of more grim afpe<5t, and no lefs robuft and rude 
was his behaviour. Some of his majefty's fer- 
vants were not a little fearful of him, and that 
he was defigned for mifchief, efpecially when he 
vapoured, being elevated with his command and 
puffed up by having fo royal a prifoner : fo as 
probably he conceived he was nothing inferior 
to the governor of the caftle of Milan; but 
being complained of to his fuperior officer, 
appeared a bubble; for being pretty fharply 
admonifhed, he quickly became mild and calm, 
a pofture ill becoming fuch a rhodomont, and 
made it vifible that his humour (or tumour, 
rather) was afted to curry favour, wherein he 
alfo was miftaken : for to give the Lieut.-Colonel 
[Eyres] his due, after his majefty came under 
his cuftody, he was very civil to the king, both 
in his language and behaviour, and courteous to 
thofe that attended upon all occafions ; nor was 
his difpofition rugged towards fuch as in loyalty 



Conclujion. 317 

came to fee the king, and to pray for him, as 
fundry out of Hampftiire did, and the neigh- 
bouring counties." 



This, reader, is a faithful chronicle of the 
remarkable proceedings attendant on the deten- 
tion of King Charles the Firft in the Ifle of 
Wight — a hlftory perhaps unparalleled in the 
lives of kings ; and it is hoped that the incidents 
which have been here rendered may be deemed 
a not uninterefting memoir of the latter days of 
this unfortunate monarch. 



APPENDIX, 



CONTAINING 

THE INSTRUCTIONS 

RECEIVED BY COLONEL TITUS AT VARIOUS TIMES, 
FROM 

KING CHARLES THE SECOND 

AND 

QUEEN HENRIETTA MARIA. 



APPENDIX. 



Anfwer to an Addrefs received by King Charles 
the Second when refident in Jerfey, froni the 
Englilh party, It was conveyed to him by 
Captain Titus, and apparently refers to the 
Treaty of Breda. 

"Charles, R. 

" Trufty and well-beloved, we greet you well. 
Having received your late addrefs by Captain 
Titus, we have accordingly given credit to him, 
and we gracioufly accept thofe profeffions he 
hath made to us in your name, believing that 
they proceed from perfons who are both able 
and willing to ferve us. As concerning your 
defires propofed to us by him, we conceive we 
have in part anfwered the fame by appointing a 
treaty with our fubjefts of Scotland, in which 
we fhall likewife endeavour to give you further 



322 InJiruSiions to Captain Titus. 

fatisfadion in all reafonable things. To which 
purpofe we think fit and defire that you fend 
fome perfons fufficiently authorized to be prefent 
at the treaty, where we doubt not but they may 
be ufeful to us, and very inftrumental to the 
agreement between us and our fubjefts of Scot- 
■ land, which we fo much defire. In the mean- 
time, as we are very fenfible of thofe endeavours 
which we underftand from Captain Titus you 
have already ufed to perfuade them to modera- 
tion ; fo we entreat you to fend prefently into 
Scotland to prevail with them to bring fuch 
reafonable demands to the treaty as, meeting 
with our inclinations and refolution to accord all 
juft and reafonable things, may, by the blefling 
of God, produce a full and happy agreement. 

" Amongft other things that we have under- 
ftood of your good afi^edbion to us, we cannot but 
take notice of the courage and conftancy of the 
minifters in their good wiflies and endeavours 
for us, which we fhall not fail to acknowledge 
efi^edtually both to them and to you, as it fliall 
pleafe God to blefs our proceedings, and bring 
any favourable change to ' our condition. And 
fo we bid you heartily farewell. 

"Given at our Court in Jerfey the ff th day of 
January, 1 6|f , in the firft year of our reign." 



InfiruSfions to Captain Titus. 323 

Inftrudions (from the Englifk party) for the 
Right Honourable Francis Lord Willoughby, 
of Parham, Major-General Maflie, Colonel 
Richard Graves, Alderman James Bunce, and 
Captain Titus, whom in order to his Majeftie's 
Command we have defired to affift at the 
Treaty of Breda. 



cc 



I. You are to give his majefty our humble 
thanks for the great favour and grace he was 
pleafed to do us in his late letter. 

" 1. You are to give him an account that in 
order to his command we have deputed you to 
reprefent our moflt humble opinions and defires 
in things concerning us, and to employ all our 
intereft to bring this treaty to fuch a happy clofe 
as may give juft fatisfaftion to all his majefty's 
faithful fervants. 

"3. You are to communicate this to the 
Commiffioners of Scotland. 

" 4. You are not to make any particular addrefs 
to the king from us, but by their advice and 
approbation; that nothing from us may contra- 
dift what comes from' them. That in all things 
a good correfpondency may be preferved between 
us according to our covenant, and our enemies 
may find no advantage to attempt to divide us. 

y 2 



324 InJiruSiions to Captain Titus. 

" 5. You are in our names to be inftant with 
his majefty to hearken to the juft delires of his 
fubjeds in Scotland, to aflure him that our fatif- 
faftion is bound up in theirs, being both engaged 
in one common intereft of the covenant, from 
which neither of us can recede without a mani- 
feft violation of our faith both to God and man, 

" 6. If it fhall pleafe God that the king fatif- 
fies the delires of our brethren in Scotland, you 
are to defire the affiftance of their honourable 
commiffioners in propofing thofe particulars to 
the king in our behalf which we fend you 
enclofed, 

"7. If you fhall find reafon to diflru'fl the 
ifTue of this treaty, you fhall then (after all pof- 
fible endeavours to perfuade the king to com- 
pliance) communicate to the Scottifh Commif- 
fioners thofe inflrudtions which we have fince 
fent you, wherein we fhall give you no direftions 
as to the managing of them, but leave that to 
your own difcretion." 



Inftrudions to Captain Titus from Charles the 
Second, on the occafion of his proceeding to 
Paris in 1651, for the purpofe of having her 
Majeflie's opinion on a propofed Marriage of 



Injlructions to Captain Titus. 325 

Charles with a daughter of the Marquis, of 
Argyle* 

Thefe inftrudlions apparently reveal an inci- 
dent in the life of Charles the Second which is 
little, if at all, known, and are therefore of pecu- 
liar intereft in connexion with the memoirs of 
that monarch. The Earl of Argyle here alluded 
to was Archibald the eighth Earl, created Mar- 
quis of Argyle " in refpedt of the remarkable 
fidelity and loyalty of his family in former 
times to the crown," by letters patent bearing 
date November 15, 1641. In contradiftindlion, 
however, to this aflumed family virtue, he, 
during the civil war, joined with the Parliament, 
and fhowed himfelf a zealous aflerter of the 
rights of the Prefbyterian church government 
as then eftablifhed. After the death of Charles 
the Firft, he contributed much to the favourable 
reception of the fecond Charles in Scotland in 
1650; and at the folemnity of Ms coronation, 
January ift, 165 1, he placed the crown on his 
head, but with the evident defign of forming an 
alliance between the young king and his only 
unmarried daughter. By the politic reply of 
the queen, this ambitious contrivance would 
feem to have been efFeftually thwarted, and the 



326 InJiruBthns to Captain Titus. 

afFecftions of the marquis again transferred to 
Cromwell ; as, on the Refloration, he was accufed 
of high treafon for correfponding and complying 
with Crqmwell, and beheaded on the 27th of 
May, 1 66 1. 

Argyle had two fons and three daughters— 
Ann, who died ,unmarried, and for whom the 
erown was defigned , Jane, married to Roberty 
firft Marquis of Lothian; and Mary, to George 
Earl of Caithnefs ; and on his death, to John 
Earl of Breadalbane. 



(Accompariied by a paflport under the king's 
own hand and feal.) 

'* Inftruftions for our trufty and well-beloved 
fervantj Captain Titus, one of the grooms of 
our bedchamber. 

" Charles, R. 

" I. You are with the firft opportunity to 
go to Holland, and there to apply yourfelf to 
fuch perfons who are friends to our intereft, and 
to get particular information from them what 
is likely to be refolved and tranfaded there, in 
relation to England; you are likewife to give 



InJiruBhns to Captain Titus. 327 

them account what is afted and determined 
here, which may be a means to hinder any refo- 
lution there that (by our enemies' fuggeftions) 
may be taken to our prejudice. 

" 2. You are to give us account from thence 
upon the firft: occafion how you find affairs 
there, that we may the better refolve what 
we have further to do in relation to thofe 
States. 

"3. You are after your defpatch in Holland 
to repair to Paris, and there to addrefs yourfelf 
to the queen our deareft mother, and to fuch 
perfons as flie fhall give you diredions to apply 
yourfelf unto. You are likewife to receive my 
Lord Jermyn's advice in your applications to 
perfons. 

" 4. You are with all fpeed to return us 
account what there is there afting, or a6led, in 
relation to England: how you find the Court of 
France inclined to our intereft : what refentment 
they have of the rebels' peace with Spain, and 
the late embaffy and acknowledgment they have 
received from that king. Laftly, you are to get 
the beft information and advice you can poffible, 
whether it would produce any effed: to fend 
an embaflador to France, to defire that king's 
afliftance, and to renew and confirm the ancient 



328 InJiruSiions to Captain Titus. 

alliance that hath for fb many years been 
between that kingdom and this. 

"5. If you find your ftay neceffary, you are 
to give us account of your proceedings by an 
exprefsj and to attend our further commands; 
otherwife you are to haften your return. 

" Dated at our Court, at Perth, the fy day of 
January, 1651. (In the fecond year of our 
reign.)" 



Private inftrudtions from Charles the Second to 
Captain Titus, who arrived in Paris, March 
17, 1657. 

" Inftrudtions for Captain Titus, one of the 
grooms of my bedchamber. 

" I. Firft you are with all convenient fpeed 
to repair to the queen my mother, and after 
delivery of my letters, to communicate to her 
what I here give you in command. 

" 2. You are to let the queen know, that 
taking into ferious confideration of how much 
importance the making of a right choice in my 
marriage may be to my affairs, I would refolve 
nothing in a bufinefs of that nature and con- 



InJiruSllons to Captain Titus. 329 

fequence, without her privltie, advice, and con- 
fentj for which purpofe I have now exprefsly 
fent you to her* 

"3. You are to give the queen account upon 
what grounds and confiderations I do thus far 
propofe this bufinefs. 

*' I. That no foreign match can at the prefent 
be propounded, which does not either appear 
through fome impediment or defedb infeafible, 
or to my intereft and prefent condition incon- 
fiderable. 

" II. That the Marquis of Argyle is a perfon 
of great intereft, of a very ancient and noble 
family, that hath been always loyal to the 
crown, and fometimes allied to it, and himfelf, 
in all transadions between me and my fubjeds 
of this kingdom, hath particularly merited of 
me. 

" III. I am informed that this marriage will 
be a great fatisfadtion and fecurity to all the 
church and all the Prefbyterian party, and the 
beft means to unite all parties, and remove all 
differences occafioned by the late troubles. 

" IV. The ftrength of Scotland being united, 
it will be the greateft encouragement to all of 
loyalty in England. 

" Thefe confiderations you fhall reprefent to 



33° InJiruBions to Captain Titus. 

the queen, but with this aflurance, that I neither 
am engaged, nor ever fhall engage in a matter 
of this importance, without her approbation and 
confent. 

"4. You are to communicate your meflage 
to my Lord Jermin. 

" 5. You are with all poffible fpeed to return 
with the queen's anfwer, and to omit no oppor- 
tunity to give me an account of your proceed- 
ings in this bufinefs. 

" Charles, R, 
"Falkland,Januarythe 23, 1657." 



In Captain Titus* autograph, and apparently the 
private inftruftions he received from the 
Marquis of Argyle. 

"I . That Scotland acknowledgeth her majeftie's 
great favour in her former interpofition for the 
procurement of a happy agreement between the 
king and them. 

" 2. Her majefty's advice and approbation of 
this to the king, will be a great confirmation of 
that favour, and lay upon them a perpetual obli- 
gation. 



InJiruSlions to Captain Titus. 3 3 1 



(C 



3. They are the more encouraged to hope 
this favour from her majeftie, fhe being a 
daughter of France, with which kingdom Scot- 
land hath had fo ancient and firm alliance for fo 
many ages, which this may be a means to con- 
firm, and procure that kingdom's affiftance to 
the king, 

'' 4. As to her majefty particular, Scotland 
will endeavour that her majeftie be reftored to 
her joynture, and all her other civil rights, and 
that ftie may live in a condition anfwerable to 
the honour and greatnefs of the mother of their 
king." 

" To my Lord Jermain. 

" That in this the Prelbyterian party repofe 
a great truft in him, and have a good confidera- 
tion of him, and opinion of his afFedtion to 
them. 

"That this will engage them to do him all 
good offices, both to the king, and any other 
way in their power. 

" This will fecure him againft that violent 
party that are his enemies." 



332 InJiruBions to Captain Titus » 

Inftrudions for Captain Titus, from Henrietta 
Maria, April 15, 165 1, on the propofal of 
Charles the Second's marriage with the 
daughter of the Marquis of Argyle, accom- 
panied by a paflport under the hand and feal 
of her majefty. 

" You are to repair to the king our deareft 
fon, will all convenient fpeed you fhall be 
able. 

" I. You are in the firft place to let him 
know with how tender a fenfe I have received 
this great demonftration of his kindnefs, that in 
a matter fo much importing the future good and 
bad of his life, as his marriage, and fo confe- 
quently a thing wherein I muft neceflarily be fo 
much concerned, he would make no advance 
nor contrad, the leaft engagement, without com- 
municating to me the firfl; overtures. 

" 1. You are in the next place to let him 
know, that looking upon this propofition as no 
lefs importing then it doth in the nature of it, 
and by all the circumftances incident to it, that 
if I fhould give him council in it that fhould not 
be wife, I could not be fufpeded of offering that 
which fhould be infincere. 

" 3. You are in the third place to let him 



InJiruBions to Captain Titus. 333 

know that I have moft ferioufly and frequently, 
fince your being here, taken this matter into my 
thoughts, and have confidered all the feveral 
circumftances relating to it. That I am not un- 
informed of my Lord of Argyle's ability, credit, 
or affecftions, nor how ufefuUy he hath em- 
ployed them all for the good and benefit of the 
king my fon ; that there is nothing new or extra- 
ordinary that a perfon fo well born as the Mar- 
quis of Argyle's daughter fhould be married to 
the crown ; that towards this daughter there can 
lie no exception in regard of herfelf, fhe being a 
perfon of whom I never heard any thing but 
very good. But it is to be confidered that the 
misfortunes under which we are fallen, are of a 
large extenfion — that the fettlement of the 
affairs of Scotland, though it be a great and 
difficult work, yet not to be refl:ed in without 
the recovery of England — that the kingdom of 
England, upon very great claims, is like to 
require a part in a council in which it is fo much 
concerned, and would take themfelves to be too 
juftly offended, if by a prefent conclufion of the 
thing in quefl:ion they fhould find themfelves 
excluded totally from it. That even Scotland 
itfelf may not be without parties very confider- 
able to the prefent affairs, that would be fo far 



334 InJtriiSlwns to Captain Titus. 

perhaps from concurring now to this matter, 
that a finifhing of it might induce a moft un- 
feafonable irritation of them. 

" 4. You are in the fourth place to let the 
king our deareft fon know, that upon thefe con- 
fiderations fo irrefiftibly preffing againft a pre- 
fent conclufion, that I cannot think fit to give 
any other advice than that the thing remain for 
a while in the fame eftate it doth, by which he 
will have the opportunity, if the difficulties that 
now occur fhould be removed, to go then feafon- 
ably through with it. He will alfo avoid the 
inconveniences that have been reprefented for 
Scotland, which are not a little perilous ; and the 
kingdom of England will have no caufe to com- 
plain if the fufpenfion of the refolutions leave 
them the means of being feafonably confulted in 
a matter wherein they are fo much concernedj 
and fo like to pretend to have a part in the 
councils belonging to it. 

" Henrietta Maria, Regika." 



THE END, 



ERRATA. 

At page 96, line '),for " Cromwell," read " the Parliament." 

At page 1 37, line 7, for " Suffolk," read " Kent." 

At page 249, line zz,for " is," read " are." 

At page 256, line iiffor " Septr. 15," read " Septr. 30." 



London : 

Imprinted by Harrifon & Son, at The London Gazette Office, 

in St. Martin's Lane, 



