Ex  Ubris 
C.  K.  OGDEN    < 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 


I  V 


THE 

H  ISTO  R  Y 

or  THE 

ISLE    OF  WIGHT; 

MILITARY, 

ECCLESIASTICAL,  CIVIL,  &  NATURAL 


TO     WHICH    IS     ADDED 

A  VIEW  OF   ITS  AGRICULTURE. 
By  the  Rev.  RICHARD  WARNER; 

EDITOR     OF 

"HAMPSHIRE   EXTRACTED   FROM   DOMESDAY   BOOK,"    AND  or 

THE   "   ANTIQJJITATES   CULINARIiE  j" 

AND    AUTHOR     OF 

"    TOPOGRAPHICAL    REMARKS    RELATING    TO    HAMPSHIRE,"    AND 

"    AN    ATTEMPT    TO   ASCERTAIN    THE    SITUATION    OF 

THE     ANCIENT     C  L  A  U  S  E  N  T  U  M." 


"  Tu  nimio  nee  ftrifta  gelu,  nee  fidere  fervens, 

Clement!  ccelo,  tempeneque  places. 
Cum  pareret  Natura  parens  varioque  favore 

Divideret  dotes  omnibus  una  locis, 
Sepoluit  potiora  tibi,  maaemque  profefTa, 

'  Ir.fula  fis  felix,  plenaque  pacts'  ait. 
'  Quicquid  amat  luxus,  quicquid  defiderat  ufus, 

Ex  te  provenie^,  vei  aliunde  tibi.'  " 


SOUTHAMPTON. 
PRINTED    FOR    T.    CADELL,  JUN.  AND   W.   DAVIEJ,    (sUCCES*0*5 

TO  MR.  CADILL)  IN  THE  ITRAND,  LONDON  j 

AND   T,   BAKER,    SOUTHAMPTON. 
MDCCXCV. 


DA 

670 

Wfe 

SIR  WILLIAM  HEATHCOTE,  BART. 

AND 

WILLIAM  CHUTE,  ESQ. 
MEMBERS  FOR  THE  COUNTY  OF  HANTS, 

SIR  HARRY  BURRARD,  BART. 

GEORGE  ROSE,  ESQ. 
JAMES   MOWBRAY,  ESQ. 

AND 

THE    REV.    WILLIAM    GILPIN, 

THE  FOLLOWING  EPITOMIZED 
HISTORY  OF  THE  ISLE  OF  WIGHT, 
IS  GRATEFULLY  INSCRIBED, 
BY  THEIR  OBEDIENT 

AND  OBLIGED 

HUMBLE  SERVANT, 
BATH, 

February  i,  179$. 

R.  WARNER,  JUN. 


Hf  r 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


OEVERAL  publications  have  already 
appeared  relative  to  the  Ifle  of  Wight. 
It  will  therefore  be  naturally  expefted, 
that  the  author  of  the  prefent  one  either 
produce  fomething  new  on  the  fubje6t,  or 
prefent  the  materials  before  offered  to 
the  public,  in  a  different  and  improved 
form. 

Both  thefe  objects  it  has  been  his  en- 
deavour to  attain  ;  with  what  fuccefs  the 
reader  will  beft  pronounce. 

Frequent 


VI  ADVERTISEMENT. 

Frequent  vifits  to  the  ifland,  and  ha- 
bitual propensities,*  allowed  him  oppor- 
tunity and  inclination  to  make  ibme 
collections  relative  to  its  natural  hiftory  ; 
and  a  conviction  that  very  little  infor- 
mation of  this  kind  had  hitherto  been 
given  to  the  world,  infpired  the  hope  of 
his  collections  carrying  at  lead  the  re- 
commendation of  novelty  with  them, 
fhould  he  methodize  and  publifh  them. 
This  he  at  length  determined  to  do  ; 
adding,  at  the  fame  time,  to  his  plan,  a 
luminous  and  methodical,  but  concife 
detail,  of  the  principal  circurnflances  in 


Hs  yxiris  ^vvx(jMt   yXwctfomfox   «/,Xo   1010-6x1."  —  Horn.   Odyff. 


To  me  no  fond  purfuits  fuch  pleafures  yield, 
As  the  gay  fcenes  of  Nature's  varied  field. 

the 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


the  military,  ecclefiaftical,  and  civil  hif- 
tory  of  the  ifland. 

He  would  not,  however,  be  underfiood 
to  have  attempted  a  complete  natural 
hijtoryof  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  in  the  follow- 
ing  pages.  He  wifhes  them  to  be  con- 
fidered  rather  as  an  index,  which  fome 
future  fauniji  may  improve  and  amplify. 
An  accurate  natural  hiftory  of  this  varied 
and  extenfive  diflricl;,  would,  of  itfelf, 
form  a  very  bulky  volume  ;  fo  large  an 
one,  as  perhaps  the  abilities  and  leifure 
of  no  tingle  individual  would  allow  him 
to  complete.  The  fubjecl:  is  fo  un- 
bounded, and  Nature  fo  inexhauftible, 
that,  even  after  all  his  labors,  he  muft  find 
.much  remained  undone  ;  and  be  content 
at  laft  to  allow  the  truth  of  the  Philo- 

fopher's 


Vlll  ADVERTISEMENT. 

fopherV  obfervation  :  "  Multum  adhuc 
rejlat  operis,  multumque  reftabit ;  nee  ulli 
nato  pqft  mille  fecula  prcecluddur  occa/io 
aliquid  adhuc  adjiciendi"* 

*  L.  A.  Seneca,   Epift.  Ixiv. 


CONTENTS. 


The  Military  Hi/lory  of  the  IJlc  of  Wight. 

CHAP.    I. 
Of  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight          i 

CHAP.    II. 

Of  the  Romans,  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight        -        -8 

CHAP.    III. 
Of  the  Saxons,  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight          •        -       16 

CHAP.    IV. 

Of  the   Danes   and   Normans,   in  the   Ifle  of 

Wight      ...         -         ---24 

CHAP.    V. 
Military  hiftory  of  the  ifland,  from  Edward  I. 

to  the  prefent  time     .....       36 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP.   VI. 

The  ancient  and  prefent  defence  of  the  Ifle  of 

Wight      -  -       54 

The  Eccl'fiajlical  Hlflory  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight. 

CHAP.    I. 
Of  the  ancient  religion  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight, 

and  the  introduction  of  Chriftianity  there    -       87 

•CHAP.    II. 
Of  the  religious  foundations  in  the*  Ifle  of  Wight       98 

The  Civil  Hi/lory  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight. 

CHAP.    I. 
Of  the   boroughs   of   Newport,  Newtown,  and 

Yarmouth  -        ^  j     -     129 

CHAP.    II. 
Of  the  lords  of  the  ifland;    their  power,  rights, 

and  franchifes ;    and  of  the  Knighton  Court       147 

CHAP.    III. 

Of  the  wardens,  captains,  and  governors  of  the 

ifland  .  .      1<54 

Tht 


CONTENTS. 


The  Natural  Hi/lory  of  the  IJlc  of  Wight. 

CHAP.   I. 

General  defcription  of  the  ifland ;  climate ; 
foil ;  timber  ;  rivers ;  fprings ;  inhabitants ; 
downs  ;  and  curious  particulars  relating  to 
them  -  -  167 

CHAP.   II. 

Of  the  ancient  connexion  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight 
with  the  mam  land ;  its  coaft ;  rocks ;  ca- 
verns ;  chines,  &c. '"  .  -  -  186 

CHAP.    III. 

The  zoology  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight ;  its  animals, 

reptiles,  and  fifli  -         -         -     403 

CHAP.    IV. 
The  ornithology  of  the  ifland  -     22,5 

CHAP.    V. 
Of  the  botany  of  the  ifland      -  -     147 

CHAP.    VI. 

Of  the  foffilogy  of  the  ifland   -         -  -     256 

A  General 


Xli  CONTENTS. 


A  General  View  of  the  Agriculture  of  the 
JJle  of  Wight. 

CHAP.  I. 

A  fketch  of  the  progrefs  of  agriculture  in  Bri- 
tain, from  the  earlieft  to  the  ptefent  times  .       265 

CHAP.    II. 
Of  the  different  grains  fown ;   ufual  courfe  of 

crops ;    various  manures,  &c.      -  -     273 

CHAP.    III. 
Turnips  ;  grafies ;  pafture  ;  draining  ;  and  roads     285 

CHAP.   IV. 
Sheep,  horfes,  cows,  and  fwine  -     288 

CHAP.    V. 
Wafte-Iand  ;   forefls  ;   and  fea-mud  -     293 

CHAP.   VI. 

Improvements  and  experiments  -     300 

CHAP.  VII. 

The  poor  ;   laborers  ;  and  rates  of  wages  -     305 

APPENDIX. 


CONTENTS.  Xlii 

APPENDIX.     ' 
A  Diflertation  on  Six  Roman  Coins  i 

A  copy  of  the  Rate  made  for  the  Maintenance 

of  the  Minifter  of  Newport  .       13 

PLATES. 

•ff 

Map        -  to  face  title-page 

Needle  Rocks  -     200 

Coins  -      (appendix}  i 


THE 


MILITARY  HISTORY 


ISLE    OF    WIGHT, 


CHAP.     I. 


OF    THE    ORIGINAL    INHABITANTS    OF    THE 
ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


nr* 


JL  HE  imperfetl  light  which  glimmers  on  the 
early  antiquities  of  Britain,  is  chiefly  imparted 
by  the  writings  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans. 

From  thefe  fources  of  intelligence  we  colle£t, 

that  the  Aboriginal  inhabitants  of  this  kingdom 

were  a  tribe  of  the  Celtae,  Galatae,  or  Gauls, 

B  (defendants 


2  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLt    O  F    WIGHT. 

(defcendants  of  the  Gomerians,  or  Phrygians) 
who  migrated  hither  from  the  coaft  of  Gaul.* 

At  what  period  they  performed  this  migration, 
cannot,  perhaps,  be  txaftly  ascertained ;  though 
it  feems  likely  to  have  happened  about  one  thou- 
fand  years  before  the  Chriftian  yEra.t 

The  Kentifh  more  would  probably  be  the 
fpot  which  firft  received  thefe  wanderers,  on 
account  of  its  vicinity  to  the  regions  from 
whence  they  came.  They  would  not,  however, 
long  confine  themfelves  to  this  corner  of  the 
kingdom ;  the  preffure  of  additional  emigrants 
would  oblige  them  to  feek  more  diftant  habita- 
tions, and  they  would  foon  extend  themfelves 
along  the  Southern  and  Eaftern  coafts  of  the 
country.  This  would  probably  happen  about  a 
century  after  the  arrival  of  the  original  tribe ; 
at  which  period  we  may  fuppofe  the  Ifle  of 
Wight  received  its  firft  inhabitants. 

*  Tacitus,   de  Vit.  Agric.    c.  xi.     Strabo,    lib.  II.   et 
Cxfar,  lib.   V. 

t  Whit-.ker's  Hift.  Manchefter,    b.  I.  c.  i.  p.  7. 

Thefc 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  g 

Thefe  Aborigines  do  not  feem  to  have  been 
far  removed  from  the  rudeft  ftate  of  favage  life; 
they  were  barbarous  and  unenlightened ;  having 
no  fixed  habitations ;  wandering  from  place  to 
place;  and  fubfifting  chiefly  by  the  labours  of 
the  chace.* 

After  thefe  wild  tribes  had  continued  about 
five  centuries  in  their  acquifitions,  another  hoft 
of  wanderers,  to  whom  hiftorians  give  the  appella- 
tion of  Belgae,  deferted  their  own  country,  Gallia 
Btlgica,  croffed  the  ftrait  that  feparated  them 
from  Britain,  and  began  to  difperfe  themfelves 
through  the  Southern  mores  of  the  kingdom. 
A  people,  who,  though  originally  a  Celtic  tribe, 
were  not  marked  by  the  fame  ferocious  charac- 
teriftics  with  their  anceftors,  but  were  more 
cultivated  and  refined;  more  civilized  in  their 
manners,  and  comfortable  in  their  modes  of 
life. 

It  is  not  to  be  iuppofed,  however,  that  thefe 
new  vifitors  would  gain  an  immediate,  or  a 
peaceable  pofTeffion  of  the  diftricl,  to  which 

*   Caefar,  lib.   V. 

B  3  accident, 


4  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

accident,  curiofity,  or  diftrefs,  had  led  them. 
Every  inch  of  territory  was  obftinately  difputed, 
and  many  a  bloody  battle  fought,  ere  the  furly 
Britons  were  driven  by  their  fuccefsful  invaders 
into  the  interior,  and  more  retired  parts  of  the 
country.  At  length  the  Belgae  fucceeded,  and 
before  the  period  of  Caefar's  arrival  in  Britain, 
the  whole  Southern  coaft  was  in  the  pofleflion 
of  this  warlike  tribe. 

The  Ifle  of  Wight  had,  doubtlefs,  been  deeply 
affefted  by  this  great  and  general  revolution; 
and,  at  leaft  a  century  before  the  Chriftian  ^Era, 
had  received,  in  the  room  of  its  fordid  and  barba- 
rous inhabitants,  a  race  of  people  who  already 
underflood  and  pra&ifed  the  arts  of  hufbandry 
and  commerce.* 

In  their  porTeflion,  it  foon  began  to  afTume  a 
more  comfortable  appearance  than  it  had  hitherto 
exhibited ;  villages  and  townst  were  built,  and 
its  ports  vifited  by  foreign  traders. 

*   Caefar,  ut  fupra. 

t  It  feems  likely  that  a  Britifh  town,  or  city,  flood  on, 
or  near  the  fpot  of  the  prefent  Carifbrook  ;  for  Caer  broc 
(the  probable  original  name)  is  a  Celtic  compound,  fig- 
nifying  the  city  or  town  of  yew  trees. 

The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  5 

The  daring  fpirit  of  the  Phoenician  naviga- 
tors, had  led  them  to  the  South-  Weftern  pro- 
montories of  Britain,  about  four  centuries  be- 
fore the  birth  of  our  Saviour.*  Here  they 
found  an  article  of  traffic,  rare  and  ufeful  ;  and 
immediately  entered  into  a  commercial  corref- 
pondence  with  the  Belerian  Britons,  for  the  pur- 
chafe  of  the  tin,  which  was  produced  in  large 
quantities  in  the  iilands  of  Cornwall,  t 

For  upwards  of  two  hundred  years  did  the 
merchants  of  Tyre  and  Carthage  preferve  the 
monopoly  of  this  lucrative  trade,  notwithftand- 
ing  the  conftant  endeavours  of  all  the  other 
Mediterranean  powers  todifcover  and  participate 
it.*  The  Greeks  of  Marfeilles,  however,  at 

*    Herodotus,  Weffelingii,  p.  254. 

T  Pliny,  lib.  VII.  c.  Ivi.       The  Scilly  Iflands  received 
their  ancient  appellation  of  Cajitcrides,  from  the  circum- 
ftancc   of  their  yielding  this   valuable   metal  ;  from  the 
Creek,   Kxao-tTsfor,  tin. 


t  So  careful  were  the  Phoenicians  in  concealing  the 
courfe  of  the  veffcls  employed  in  this  trade,  .that  the  captain 
of  one  of  them,  perceiving  he  was  purfued  by  a  Roman 
galley,  in  order  to  find  out  to  what  part  he  was  bound,  im- 
mediately funk  his  hark,  to  prevent  the  difcovery.  Strabo, 
p.  265. 

length 


6  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

length  traced  out  the  fecret,  and  about  two  cen- 
turies prior  to  the  Chriftian  .^Era,  began  to  avail 
themfelves  of  it.  From  this  period  the  Cartha- 
ginian commerce  dwindled  away,  and  the  Maf- 
fylian  daily  extended  itfelf;  but  as  the  latter 
people  were  by  no  means  fuch  experienced  fea- 
men  as  the  mariners  of  Phoenicia,  and  confe- 
quently  lefs  able  to  encounter  the  ftormy  feas  of 
the  Belerian  coaft,  the  mode  of  traffic  was  (pro- 
bably at  the  folicitation  of  the  Greeks,  and  by 
the  confent  of  the  Britons)  fomewhat  changed; 
and  the  ftaple  of  tin  removed  from  the  Weftern 
extremity  of  the  kingdom,  to  the  Southern 
more;  and  fixed  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  or,  (ac- 
cording to  the  name  by  which  it  was  known  to 
the  Marfeiilefe)  in  the  Ifland  Iclis.* 

The  foreign  traders  were  now  no  longer  at 
the  trouble  of  performing  a  tedious  and  danger- 
.ous  voyage;  but  employing  the  Vcneti  of  Gaul 
to  tranfport  the  commodity  from  the  new  em- 
porium to  the  oppofite  more,  they  there  receiv- 
ed it,  and  fcnt  it  over  land  to  Narbonne  and 
Marfeilles.t 

*   Diodorus  Siculus,  p.  347.          f  Strabo,   297. 

We 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  7 

We  may  fairly  fuppofe  that  the  Ifle  of  Wight 
now  began  to  rife  into  confideration. — The  re- 
fort  of  foreign  merchants  to  its  ports,  would  in- 
troduce a  degree  of  civilization  among  its  in- 
habitants, hitherto  unknown  on  the  Southern 
fhores  of  Britain.  A  rapid  progrefs  would  be 
made  in  all  the  neceffary  arts  of  life.  Improve- 
ments would  be  adopted  in  the  civil  polity  of 
the  people ;  and  the  whole  diftricl:  would  foon 
fmile  with  wealth,  comfort,  and  profperity. 


CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    II. 


OF    THE    ROMANS,    IN    THE    ISLE    OF    WIG!,':. 

A  HE  expeditions  of  Caefar  into  Britain  can- 
not be  confidered  as  amounting  to  a  conqueft  of 
the  country.  His  firft  defce-nt  was  little  more 
than  a  difcovcry  of  it.*  The  fucceffes  alfo 
which  attended  his  fecond,  were  confined  only  to 
the  South-Eaftern  corner  of  the  ifland,  and  gave 
to  the  Romans  neither  a  firm  footing,  nor 
durable  authority  in  it.  To  complete  the 
reduction  of  our  anceftors,  and  bring  them  under 
the  Roman  yoke,  was  a  tafk  left  for  Claudius  to 
perform;  which,  by  himfelf  and  his  lieutenants, 

*  !i  Igitur  primus  omnium  Romanorum  D.  Julius  cum 
exercitu  Britanniam  ingreffus,  quanquam  profpera  pugna 
terruerit  iricolas,  ac  litore  potitus  fit,  poteft  videri  often- 
diffe  pofteris,  non  tradidiffe."  Tacitus,  Vit.  Agric.  c.  xiii. 

he 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  9 

he  effected,  about  the  year  of  our  Lord  43.* 
Vefpafian  was  the  leader  who  chiefly  (ignalifed 
himfelf  in  the  fubjugation  of  Southern  Britain. 
During  his  expedition  into  thefe  parts,  this  fuc- 
cefsful  commander,  it  is  faid,  was  victorious  in 
thirty  pitched  battles ;  conquered  two  powerful 
nations ;  and  planted  the  Roman  ftandard  in  the 
Ifleof  Wight.t 

It  is  probable  this  laft  acquifition  was  made 
without  any  great  difficulty,  fince  there  are  no 
veftiges  of  ancient  camps  or  intrenchments,  and 
very  few  tumuli, +  that  lead  us  to  apprehend  the 
inhabitants  of  the  ifland  ftruggled  hard  for  the 
prefervaticfri  of  their  liberties.  It  is  indeed 
found,  that  conftant  commercial  occupations 
have  a  tendency  to  deftroy  thofe  finer  fenfibilities 
of  the  foul,  without  which,  genuine  patriotifm3 
and  a  warm  attachment  to  civil  liberty,  cannot 

*  "  Divus  Claudius,  auftor  operis,  tranfveftis  legionibus 
auxiliisque,  et  affumpto  in  partem  rerum  Vefpafiano:" 
— Tacitus,  ut  fupra. 

+  Tacitus,  Hift.  lib.  III.  cap.  xliv. — Suetonius,  in  Vit. 
Vefp.  cap.  iv. 

J  Thefe,  by  the  bye,  may  be  attributed  to  the  times  of 
the  Danifh  defcents. 

C  fubfift. 


1O  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


fubfift.  The  merchants  of  the  ifland,  deeply 
engaged  in  the  aftive  purfuits  of  commerce,  were 
altogether  carelefs  as  to  the  protection  under  which 
it  was  carried  on ;  whether  it  were  the  fan&ion 
of  their  own  native  laws,  or  the  tolerating 
permiflion  of  a  conqueror.  While  their  traffic 
continued  to  be  uninterrupted,  and  their  ac- 
cuftomed  gains  to  be  received,  they  fuffered 
but  little  concern  from  the  idea  of  their  moft 
facred  rights  being  at  the  mercy  of  a  foreign 
mafter.  Juftice,  however,  obliges  us  to  confefs, 
that  the  well-known  lenity  of  the  Romans  to  the 
nations  which  they  reduced,  juftified,  in  a  great 
degree,  this  confidence  and  unconcern  on  the 
part  of  the  conquered.  Their  laws  and  their 
religion  were  generally  uninfringed;  their  civil 
rights  refpe£ted  :  or  if  any  alteration  were  made 
in  the  one  or  the  other,  it  was  by  the  intro- 
duction of  inflitutions  that  had  a  tendency  to 
extend  the  comforts,  and  increafe  the  happinefs 
of  life.* 

*  For  a  proof  of  this,  advert  to  the  conduft  of 
Agricola,  during  his  refidence  in  Britain. — Tacitus,  in 
Vit,  Agric.  c.  xxi. 

-  The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  11 

The  Romans,  having  acquired   the   Ifle  of 
Wight,  foon  impofed  the  firft  badge  of  conqueft 
upon  it,   by  altering   its  name,  which,  by  an 
eafy  variation,  became  Veffis,  or  Vetfa,  inflead 
of  Iftis.       Tradition  fays,  they  alfo  built  a  forr 
trefs  on  the  fite  of  Carifbrook,  and  formed  it 
into  a  ftation ;    and,  indeed,  this  is  very  likely 
to  have  been  the  cafe,  fince,  in  their  feleftion  of 
fites  for  thefe  places  of  defence,  they  ufually 
chofe  fuch  fpots  as  had  been  the  ground-plots 
of  Britifti  cities.  *     But  the  moft  material  change 
which  the  Ifle  of  Wight  experienced,  was  the 
removal  of  the  tin-Jlaple,  and  the    confequent 
declenfion  of  its  trade.     Londinium,  or  London, 
had  now  become  the  great  emporium  of  the 
kingdom,  and  began  to  afTume  that  confequence 
which  it  has  ever  fince  maintained.     Hither  the 
merchants  of  all  nations  flocked ;    and  the  firft 
feeds  of  its  prefent  univerfal  commerce  might 
be  feen,   in    the    various    articles    its    market 

4  There  is  not,  however,  at  prefent,  the  leafl  trace  of 
Roman  architefture  to  be  difcerned. 

C  2  exhibited, 


12  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

exhibited,  and  the  different  people  who  crowded 
its  exchange.* 

But  few  traces  of  the  Roman  government 
have  been  difcovered  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight, 
and  thefe  are  confined  to  a  fmall  feries  of  coins, 
about  ten  or  twelve  in  number,  of  fome  of 
which  the  reader  will  find  an  account  and 
engraving  in  the  appendix. t  They  embrace, 
however,  a  confiderable  period  of  time,  and 
include  fome  of  the  emperors  from  Tiberius  to 
Gal.  Maximianus. 

It  is  probable  indeed,  that  a  fmali  number  of 
the  military  were  fufficient  to  preferve  peace 
and  order  in  this  diftricl;  and  as  the  frontiers 

*   "  Londinium cognomento  quidem  coloniae  non 

infigne,  fed  copra  negociatorum  et  commeatuum  maxime 
celcbre." — Tacitus.  Anna},  lib.  XIV,  c,  xxxiii. 

•f  Two  coins  arc  mentioned  to  have  been  found  at 
Newport  in  1759 ;  one  inscribed,  TIBERIUS  C/ESAR 

DIVI    AUGUSTI  FIL.  AUGUSTUS. Reverfe, 

PONTIFEX  MAXIMUS.  The  other  had,  on  one  fide, 
a  galley  with  a  crofs  at  the  ftern  ;  and,  on  the  reverfe,  a 
cippus.  furmounted  by  a  globe  crofs — a  coin  of  the  lower 
empire. — Cough's  Caroden.  vol.  I.  p.  144. 

Of 


HISTORY   OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  13 


of  Wales,  and  North  of  Britain,,  required  the 
prefence  of  all  the  legionaries  that  could  be 
fpared,  only  a  few  foldiers  would  be  left  in  the 
fortrefs  of  Carifbrook.  This  may  account  for 
the  fcarcity  of  coins  difcovered  here  ;  which  are 
always  found  fomewhat  abundantly  in  places 
where  the  Romans  have  been  ftationary  for  any 

r 
time. 

If  we  take  a  view  of  the  pifture,  that  Veftis, 
and  its  inhabitants,  would  probably  prefent, 
during  the  period  of  the  Roman  government 
there,  we  (hall  not  be  aftonifhed  at  their  being 
able  to  fupport  their  power  in  it,  with  the  flight 
military  force  which  they  maintained. 

It  was  invariably  the  plan  of  theie  matters  of 
the  world,  to  bind  the  conquered  nations  to 
them,  rather  by  the  tie  of  affcBion  than  of  terror  ; 
to  treat  them  rather  as  friends  than  as  /laves. 
Hence,  the  firft  fteps  they  took,  after  having 
effectually  fubdued  them,  was  to  introduce  fuch 
arts,  manufactures,  and  cuftoms  among  them, 
as  would  adminifter  to  their  amufement  as  well 
as  comfort.  This  conduft,  indeed,  might  be 

fuggefted 


14  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

fuggefted  rather  by  the  policy  of  the  Romans, 
than    their    humanity ;    fince    they   were    well 
aware,  that  modes  of  refinement,  and  habits  of 
luxury,   would   more   effectually   enervate   the 
mind,   and   extinguifh   that   ftrong   attachment 
to  freedom,  which  burns  fo  fiercely  in  the  bofom 
of  the  hardy  and  unenlightened  barbarian,  than 
all  the  feverities  of  fkvery.      This   principle, 
then,  they  would  of  courfe  adhere  to,  in  their 
conducl  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight. 
Such  manufactures  as  were  already  in  ufe  among 
them,  they  would  encourage  and  improve ;  fuch 
arts   as    were   unknown   to   them,  they  would 
introduce  and  promote.     The  treafures  of  the 
foil  whereon  they  lived,  would  be  difcovered  and 
unfolded  to  them.      The  luxuries  of  life  would 
be  held  up  to  their  obfervation ;   and  the  bath 
and  portico,  the  rich  repaft,  and  elegant  attire, 
recommended  to  their  ufe.     Under  thefe  cir- 
cumitances,  their  manners  could  be  gradually 
refined  into  politenefs;    their  minds  illumined 
with  fcience ;    and  themfelves,   contented  with 
the   advantages    which   they   poffeflec],   utterly 

for- 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.     •          1£ 

forgetful  and  regardlefs  of  the  high  price  at  which 
they  were  procured. 

That  this  was  the  cafe  in  other  parts  of 
Britain,  we  know  from  the  teftimoriy  of  an 
excellent  hiftorian;*  and  that  it  was  fo  in  the 
Ifle  of  Wight  may  be  fairly  inferred,  from 
the  peace  and  quietude  of  the  diftricl:,  during  the 
whole  time  the  Romans  poflefled  it ;  a  fpace  of 
four  hundred  years,  wherein  we  read  of  no  dif- 
turbances  on  the  part  of  the  conquered,  nor  of 
feverity  on  that  of  the  victors. 

*  Tacitus.  See  his  'Life  of  Agricola;'  wherein  is 
depifted  the  refined  policy  of  that  commander,  in  thus 
foftening  and  fubduing  the  minds  of  the  conquered 
Britons. 


CHAP. 


l6  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    III. 


OF  THE  SAXONS,  IX  THE  1 3  L  E  OF  WIGHT. 

JL  HE  peaceable,  inactive  ftate  in  which  the 
Britons  lived,  during  the  continuance  of  the 
Romans  among  them,  had,  long  before  the 
departure  of  the  latter  to  their  own  country, 
totally  extinguished  that  enthufiaftic  love  of 
liberty,  that  contempt  of  danger  and  death, 
which  were  ftriking  features  in  the  character  of 
their  anceftors,  the  ancient  Britons.  Debilitated 
by  fenfual  indulgence,  and  effeminated  by 
indolent  voluptuoufnefs,  they  were  utterly 
inadequate,  on  the  defertion  of  the  Romans,  to 
the  protection  of  themfelves  againft  the  tribes  of 
barbarians,  who,  iffuing  from  the  mountains  of 
Scotland,  Ipread  devaluation  and  (laughter  thro' 

all 


HISTORY    OK    THE    ISLF     O;     WIGHT.  ij 

all  the  Southern  counties.  Repeatedly  did  the 
unhappy  Britons  difpatch  erhbaflies  to  Rome, 
intreatirig  the  aid  of  their  departed  friends,  \vho, 
equally  prefTed  by  the  irruptions  of  barbarians, 
were  obliged  to  concentrate  their  forces  for  the 
prefervation  of  themfelves.  Affiftance,  however, 
was  from  time  to  time  afforded  them ;  till,  at 
length  the  domeftic  neceflities  of  the  Romans 
not  permitting  them  to  impart  further  aid,  they 
finally  left  the  Britons  to  their  own  exertions, 
in  the  year  of  our  Lord  four  hundred  and 
forty-eight.* 

The  depredations  of  the  Pi6h  and  Scots 
continually  increafing,  the  Britons  were  reduced 
to  the  deepeft  diftrefs  ;  and,  in  the  fatuity  of 
defpair,  invited  the  Saxons,  a  warlike  Gerraan 
people,  to  their  affiftance.  A  party  of  thefe 
freebooters,  under  their  leaders,  Hengift  and 
Horfa,  obeyed  the  fummons,  and  landed  from 
three  vefTels,  about  the  year  four  hundred  and 
forty-nine,  in  the  Ifle  of  Thanet.t  They  foon 

*  Bede,  Eccl.  Hift.  lib.  I.  c.  xiii.  p.  55.  Cantab,  edit. 
+  Bede,  lib.  I.  c.  xv. 

D  difperfed 


l8  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

difperfed  the  Northern  depredators;  but,  ob- 
fervingthe  imbecility  of  the  Britons,  determined 
attempting  the  acquifition  of  a  kingdom,  which 
its  inhabitants  appeared  unworthy  to  enjoy,  and 
unable  to  defend.  They  foon  put  their  deter- 
mination into  effe6l ;  and  Hengift,  after  fhedding 
oceans  of  blood,  and  committing  the  moft 
horrible  atrocities,  feated  himfelf  on  the  throne 
of  Kent,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord,  four  hundred 
and  eighty-eight.* 

*  Bede.  lib.  I.  c.  xv.  This  venerable  author,  who 
lived  at  no  great  diftance  from  thefe  times,  thus  defcribes 
the  devaftations  of  the  Saxons,  and  the  deplorable  ftate 
of  the  Britons.  ':  Sic  enim,  et  hie  agente  impio  viftore. 
imo  difponente  judo  judiec.  proximas  quafque  civitates- 
agrosque  depopulans,  (ab  Orientali  mari  ufque  ad  Occi- 
dentale,)  nullo  prohibente,  fuum  continuavit  incendium. 
totamque  prope  infulae  pereuntis  fuperficiem  oblexit. 
Ruebant  asdificia  publica,  funul  et  privata ;  paflim  facer- 
dotes  inter  altaria  trucidabantur  -,  praefules,  cum  populis, 
fine  ulk)  refpeftu  honoris,  ferro  pariter  ac  flammis 
abfumebantur :  nee  erat  qui  crudeliter  interemptos  fepul- 
£urae  traderet.  Itaque  nonnulli  de  miferandis  reliquiis,  in 
montibus  con>prehenfi,  acervatim  jugulabantur.  Alii 
fame  confefti  procedentes.  manus  hoftibus  dabant  pro 
accipiendis  alimentorum  fubfidiis  ;  aeternum  fubituri 
fervitium,  fi  tamen  non  continue  trucidarentur.  Alii 
tranfmarinas  regiones  dolentes  petebant." 

Hitherto 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  19 

Hitherto  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  lying  rather 
remote  from  the  fcene  of  a&ion,  had  not  beeh 
agitated  by  the  convulfions  which  tore  the  South- 
Eaftern  parts  of  the  kingdom  ;  but  the  period  of 
its  fuffering  fimilar  evils  was  approaching.  In 
the  year  four  hundred  and  ninety-five,  Cerdic, 
and  his  fon  Cinric,  at  the  head  of  a  large  band 
of  Germans,  who  chiefly  confifted  of  a  race  of 
people  called  Jutes,*  landed  in  England,  excited 
to  aftion  by  the  fuccefs  which  had  crowned  the 
arms  of  his  Saxon  brethren  here.  Though  their 
irruptions  were  oppofed  by  the  unconquerable 
fpirit  of  Arthur,  the  gallant  prince  of  the  Silures ; 
yet,  aided  by  continual  fupplies  from  the  con- 
tinent, and  the  affiftance  of  fuch  tribes  as  had 
already  gained  a  footing  in  England,  they  at 
length  bore  down  all  oppofition,  and  in  the  year 
five  hundred  and  thirty  gained  poffeflion  of  the 
Ifle  ofWight.t 

*  Saxon  Chronicle,  p.  12.  Bede,  lib.  I.  c.  xv.  "De 
Jutarum  origine  funt  Cantuarii  et  VeEluarii,  hoc  eft,  ea 
gens  quae  VtEtam  tenet  infulam." 

t  Sax.  Chron.  edit.  Cantab.  Wheloc.  p.  509. 

D  2  A  fpirit 


SO  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE.    OF    WIGHT. 


A  fpirit  of  revenge  is  one  of  the  moft  ftriking 
features  of  the  favage  character;  and  hence  it  is 
that,  in  all  the  contefts  of  barbarous  nations,  the 
fcene  of  blood  is  feldom  clofed,  without  the 
infliction  of  death  or  torture  on  the  perfons  of 
the  conquered.  Irritated  by  oppofition,  the  two 
Saxon  leaders  followed  the  dictates  of  unbridled 
paffipn,  and  flew  moft  of  the  inhabitants  whom 
the  rage  of  war  had  fpared,  in  cold  blood,  at  the 
city  of  Carifbrook.*  . 

Cerdic,  the  firft  Saxon  monarch  of  the  lile  of 

- 

Wight,  died,  A.  D.  534;  and  bequeathed  this 
acquifition  to  his  nephew  Withgar,  tor,  according 
to  fome  authors,  to  his  two  nephews,  Withgar 
and  Stuffa.  J 

*  Bede,  ut  fupra.  "  Cirtic  namque,  ct  Cinric  filiufi 
ejus,  congregatis  ingentibus  copiis  apud  Withland,  pras- 
iiati  funt,  belloque  devi&am  iafulam  ceperunt,  et  in- 
numerabilem  hoftium  ftragem  fecerunt  apud  \Vitgarefbrige 
xiii  anno  regni  fui." — Leland,  Collefb.  vol.  II.  p.  293. 

t  "  Ccrdic  moriens  dedit  Veftam  infulam  Withgaro  fuo 
ex  forore  nepoti,  qui  poftea  eadem  regnavit." — Leland, 
Colleft.  vol.  I.  p.  78. 

|  Sax.  Chron.p.  18. 

Thefe 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  21 

Thefe  ferocious  chieftains  filled  up  the  mea- 
fure  of  woes  which  the  unhappy  Britons  of  the 
Ifland  were  doomed  to  experience  ;  and  actually 
murdered  all  fuch  of  them  as  had  furvived  the 
perfecutions  of  their  uncle  Cerdic*  Withgar 
alfo  gave  a  new  appellation  to  Carifbrook,  its 
moft  confiderable  town  ;  which  was  now  called, 
after  his  own  name,  Withgarijburg,  that  is,  the 
city  of  Withgar.  t 

Thus  have  we  feen  the  Ifle  of  Wight  change 
its  inhabitants  a  fecond  time.  The  Saxons  now 
poffefled  it  entirely,  and,  though  fometimes 
difturbed  by  the  tranfient  vifits  of  the  Danes, 
retained  the  undivided  pofleffion  of  it  for  five 
centuries,  till  the  conqueft  of  the  kingdom  by 
the  Normans. 

We  find  nothing  recorded  relative  to  this 
diftriG,  from  the  maflacre  by  Withgar  to  the 
year  fix  hundred  and  fixty-one,  when  it  was 
attacked  and  laid  wafte  by  Wulpher  King  of 


*    Sax.  Chron. 


p.  1 


t  The  ifland  itfelf  aifo  began  to  be  called  Wiht,  or 
Wihtland  —  an  eafy  corruption  of  the  Roman  Vefta, 
or  Veftis. 

Mercia, 


£2  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

Mercia,  the  fon  of  Penda.  He  prefented  his 
conqueft  to  Edelwalch,  King  of  the  South 
Saxons,  who  had  been  his  baptifmal  fponfor.* 

The  Ifle  of  Wight  continued  fubjeft  to  this 
monarch  till  the  year  fix  hundred  and  eighty-fix, 
when  Ceadwalla,  a  lineal  defcendant  of  Cerdic, 
and  King  of  Weflex,  flew  Adelwalch,  and  an- 
nexed this  territory  to  his  own  dominions.     As 
the  iflanders  were  yet  idolaters,  this  warrior,  in 
the  true  fpirit  of  the  times,  determined  to  ex- 
terminate the  whole  of  them,  and  people  their 
habitations  with  his  own  fubje&s.     A  fourth  part 
of  thefe  devoted  wretches  were,  however,  faved, 
in  confequence  of  a  vow  which  he  had  made, 
when   attempting   to    conquer    the    ifland,    of 
dedicating  this  proportion  of  its  inhabitants,  and 
their  lands,  to  the   Lord.     He  performed  this 
vow  by  conferring  three  hundred  families  (for 
the  ifland  only  contained  twelve  hundred),  and 
their  property,  on  Bifhop  Wilfred  ;    who  com- 
mitjed  the  care  of  them,  and  the  diftric~t,  to  a 
nephew  of  his  own,  a  prieft  called  Bernwinus.f 

*   Sax.  Chron.  Wheloc.  p.  516. 
f  Bede,  lib.  IV.  c.  xvi. 

This 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


This  anecdote  is  fomewhat  curious,  as  it  gives  us 
an  opportunity  of  comparing  the  population  of 
the  ifland  eleven  hundred  years  ago,  with  the 
ftate  of  it  at  prefent ;  for  if  we  allow  an  average 
of  five  fouls  to  a  family,  we  mail  find  that  it 
contained,  in  the  feventh  century,  not  more  than 
fix  thoufand  inhabitants;  whereas  a  conjectural 
cenfus,  made  about  four  years  ago,  brought  its 
population  to  eighteen  thoufand  feven  hundred 
fouls.  A  prodigious  increafe  ;  and  a  finking 
example  of  what  agriculture  and  commerce  are 
gradually  able  to  effe£t. 

The  Ifle  of  Wight  prefents  but  a  gloomy 
and  difgufting  appearance  during  the  early 
periods  of  the  Saxon  dominion  in  it.  Every 
veftige  of  refinement  difappeared  when  the 
Britons  were  exterminated.  Their  conquerors, 
remarkable  only  for  determined  valor  and  the 
boundlefs  love  of  freedom,  neither  refpefted,  nor 
cultivated,  the  arts  of  peace.  Commerce  and 
hufbandry  were  alike  neglecied ;  war  and  hunting 
alone  purfued;  and  a  cloud  of  ignorance, 
ferocity,  and  fuperftition,  fettled  for  centuries 
over  the  whole  diftrift. 

CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    IV. 


OF    THE    DANES,     AND    NORMANS,    IN    THE    ISLK 
OF    WIGHT. 

JL  HE  Saxons  did  not  long  retain  the  un- 
difturbed  poffeflion  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight.  A 
formidable  enemy,  towards  the  latter  part  of  the 
ninth  century,  began  to  interrupt  their  quiet. 
This  was  the  Danes,  a  ferocious  race,  who 
inhabited  Denmark,  Sweden,  Jutland,  and  the 
other  frozen  regions  of  the  North.  The  penury 
of  their  own  country  had  early  impelled  thefe 
people  to  commit  depredations  on  happier 
climes;  and  in  confequence  of  thefe  freebooting 
habits  they  had  acquired  considerable  fkill  in 
naval  taftics.  Their  fliips,  being  fmall  and  light, 
were  eafily  managed,  and  extremely  fwift. 
With  thefe  they  ran  up  rivers  and  creeks; 

hauled 


HISTORY   OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  25 

hauled  them  afhore;  raifed  a  flight  rampart 
around  them ;  and  then  began  the  work  of 
plunder.  Having  effe&ed  as  much  havoc  as 
they  could ;  and  collected  as  much  booty  as 
they  were  able  to  carry  away,  they  immediately 
embarked  ;  and,  before  meafures  could  be  taken 
to  repel  them,  were  at  fea. 

Thefe  ravagers  had  made  feveral  defcents  on 
the  Southern  coaft,  before  th'ey  attempted  the 
Ifle  of  Wight.*  At  length  fix  Danifh  mips, 
in  the  year  eight  hundred  and  ninety-feven, 
appeared  off  this  plaqe;  the  crews  of  which, 
landing,  committed  great  depredations,  and  then 
failed  for  the  coafl  of  Devonfhire.  The  throne 
of  England,  was,  however,  at  this  time  filled  by  a 
prince  altogether  equal  to  the  arduous  times  in 
which  he  lived.  Alfred,  ever  attentive  to  the 
aggrandizement  of  his  country,  and  the  improve- 
ment of  his  fubje&s,  had  obferved  the  fuperiority 
of  the  Danifh  to  the  Englifh  mips,  and  had 
already  conftrufted  vefTels  higher,  longer,  and 
fwifter,  than  thofe  of  his  enemies.  Nine  of 

*  Sax.  Chron.  p.  64  ct  73. 

E 


26  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


this  defcription  he  difpatched  to  the  Weft  of 
England,  to  intercept  and  punifh  the  Northern 
invaders.  Thefe  effe&ually  revenged  the  out- 
rages which  had  been  committed,  by  taking 
two  of  the  Danifh  fhips ;  driving  three  on 
fhore ;  and  killing  a  great  number  of  their 
men.  Such  as  were  taken  prifoners,  Alfred 
tried  as  pirates  at  Winchefter,  and  condemned 
them  to  be  hanged.* 

To  particularize  the  various  tranfient  vifits 
of  thefe  *  naval  robbers  to  the  Ifle  of  Wight, 
would  be  tirefome  and  ufelefs ;  as  they  were  at- 
tended with  no  permanent  effect,  and  as  they 
all  exhibit  the  fame  difgufting  fcene  of  unmer- 
ciful butchery  and  wafting  conflagration.  We 
pafs  over,  therefore,  the  temporary  diftreffes  of 
the  iflanders,  occafioned  by  thefe  inroads;  as  well 
as  the  defcent  of  Earl  Godwin,  in  the  year 
one  thoufand  and  fifty-two,t  (who  had  been  out- 
lawed by  Edward  the  Confeffor,)  and  the  in- 
vafion  of  Tofti,  fon  of  Earl  Godwin,  in  one 


*  Sax.  Chron.  Wheloc,  p.  546. 
•fr  Sax.  Chron.  p.  166. 


thoufand 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  27 


thoufand  and  fixty-fix ;  *that  we  may  notice  the 
more  weighty  alterations  which  took  place  in  the 
internal  ftate  of  the  ifland  by  the  Norman 
conqueft. 

The  important  battle  of  Ha/lings,  fought  on 
the  fourteenth  day  of  October,  in  the  year  of  our 
Lord  one  thoufand  and  fixty-fix,  put  the  crown 
of  England,  together  with  the  dominion  of  the 
Ifle  of  Wight,  and  other  dependancies,  into  the 
pofleffion  of  William  the  Norman. 

It  is  obferved,  that  what  is  acquired  with  eafe, 
is,  generally,  diffipated  with  thoughtleflhefs ;  an 
axiom,  the  truth  of  which  is  well  exemplified  in 
the  extravagant  munificence  with  which  the 
Conqueror  rewarded  the  barons  who  attended 
him  in  this  expedition.  His  kinfman,  William 
Fitz-Ofborne,  flood  particularly  high  in  his 
favor ;  as  he  had  long  been  a  confidential  friend ; 
had  planned  and  affifted  the  attempt  on  England  ; 
been  marfhal  of  the  Norman  army  at  the  battle 
of  Haftings,  and,  by  his  a&ive  valor,  had  greatly 
contributed  to  the  fuccefs  of  that  well-fought 

*  Florence  of  Worcefter,  p.  428.  edit.  1592. 

day. 


28  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


day.      Thefe  fervices  the  monarch  rewarded  by 
the  donation  of  the  ifle  of  Wight,  to  be  held  by 
Fitz-Ofborne,  as  freely  as  William  himfelf  held 
the  realm  of  England.*      The  Norman  baron 
imitated  the  bounty  of  his  lord,  and  diftributed 
the  lands,  thus  conferred  on  him,  among  the 
fub-feudatories  who  ranged  themfelves  under  his 
ftandard.      What  became,  in  the  mean  time,  of 
the   unfortunate  inhabitants  of  the  ifland,  thus 
bereft  of  all  their  property,  we  are  not  informed  ; 
but  it  is  likely  many  of  them  perifhed  through 
want,  as  was  the  cafe   in  feveral  parts  of  the 
kingdom ;  while  others  were  content  to  lengthen 
a  wretched  exiftencc  by   becoming  flaves,  on 
thofe  lands    which   they  had   formerly  held  as 
their  own. 

William  Fitz-Ofborne,  firft  lord  of  the  Ifle  cf 
Wight,  enjoyed  his  acquifition  only  four  years, 
being  flain  in  battle  on  the  continent.  He  was 
fucceeded  in  his  dignity  by  Roger  de  Breteville. 
Earl  of  Hereford,  his  third  fon. 

*  Chartulary  of  Carifbrook  priory,  in  the  poffeflion  of 
Sir  Richard  Worfley,  bart. 

Gratitude 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  2£ 

Gratitude  is  fomuch  the  virtue  of  a  cultivated 
mind,  that  it  is  but  rarely  found  among  the 
illiterate  and  unenlightened.  Of  this  defcription 
was  the  Earl  of  Hereford,  who,  unmindful  of  the 
obligations  which  William  had  conferred  on  his 
family,  and  the  perfonal  favors  he  himfelf  had 
received  at  his  hands,  entered  into  a  confpiracy 
to  depofe  him,  during  his  abfence  in  Normandy. 
Wahheof,  Earl  of  Northumberland,  however, 
one  of  the  confpirators,  difclofed  the  fecret, 
which  gave  William  an  opportunity  of  checking 
it  in  the  bud.  Earl  Roger  was  taken,  tried, 
found  guilty,  and  condemned  to  perpetual 
imprifonment.  His  lands  were  confifcated,  and 
the  Ifle  of  Wight,  amongft  the  reft,  efcheated  to 
the  crown.* 

This  valuable  lordfhip  was  a  fecond  time 
beftowed  on  a  fubje6l,  during  the  reign  of  Henry 
the  firft,  who  granted  it  to  Richard  de  Redvers, 
a  Norman  of  high  defcent.  On  his  death, 
which  occurred  in  the  year  one  thoufand  one 
hundred  and  thirty-five,  Baldwin  de  Redvers, 
his  fon,  fucceeded  to  the  dignity.  Being  a 

*   Dugdale's  Baron,  vol.  I.  p.  67. 

devoted 


go  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

devoted  partizan  of  the  emprefs  Maud,  he  was 
one  of  the  firft  to  rebel  againft  the  ufurped 
authority  of  Stephen.  He  therefore  fortified  his 
caftle  of  Exeter,  put  the  I  fie  of  Wight  in  a  ftate 
of  defence,  and  boldly  defied  the  king.  Stephen, 
however,  proved  too  powerful  for  him;  his 
fortrefs  was  taken;  the  ifland  fubdued;  and 
himfelf  obliged  to  fly  the  kingdom;*  Shortly 
after  this  event,  an  accommodation  took  place 
between  the  contending  parties,  when  the  honors 
and  poffeffions,  which  Baldwin  had  loft  in  the 
ftruggle,  were  again  reftored  to  him  ;  and  he  had 
an  opportunity  of  bequeathing  the  lordlhip  of 
the  Ifle  of  Wight  to  his  fon  Richard,  in  the  year 
one  thoufand  one  hundred  and  fifty-four.t 

After  paffing  lineally  through  feveral  of  the 
Redvers  family,  the  Ifle  of  Wight  devolved  to 

*  Annali  Waverly,  p.  154. 

•f  In  the  year  one  thoufand  one  hundred  and  feventy- 
fcven,  during  the  time  the  ifland  was  in  the  pOiTeflion  of 
Baldwin's  nephew,  Richard,  a  fearful  miracle  is  faid  to 
have  happened  in  it;  a  fnowtr  of  blood  of  two  hours 
continuance.  <;  Pluitin  infula  Ve&ae  xiii.  cal.  fanguineus 
imber,  fere  per  duas  horas  integras." — Lei.  Col.  vol. 
I.  p.  326. 

William 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  $1 

William  de  Vernon,  a  collateral  branch  of  the 
fame  flock,  anno  domini  one  thoufand  one 
hundred  and  eighty-four.  The  oppreflive  gripe 
of  King  John  was  extended  to  this  nobleman, 
out  of  whom  he  fqueezed  a  fine  of  five  hundred 
marks,  on  reinftating  him  in  his  caftle  of 
Plympton,  and  allowing  him  to  govern  his  Ifle 
of  Wight  tenants,  by  military  fervice,  and, 
according  to  the  laws  of  the  land,  by  judgment  in 
his  court.* 

It  was  by  this,  and  fimilar  a£ls  of  harfhnefs  and " 
injuftice  towards  his  barons,  that  John  at  length 
roufed  the  fpirit  of  this  formidable  clafs  of  his 
fubjefts;  who,  rather  for  the  purpofe  of  re- 
drefling  their  own  wrongs,  than  emancipating  the 
great  body  of  the  people  from  the  oppreflions 
under  which  they  groaned,  raifed  the  llandard 
of  rebellion,  and  obliged  the  tyrant  to  fign  that 
great  charter  which  is  the  facred  foundation  and 
bulwark  of  all  our  liberties. 

It  has  been  obferved,  however,  by  an  hiftorian, 
on  an  occafion  analogous  to  this,  that  "  the  king 

*  Sir  Richard  Worfley's  Hift.  p.  54. 

meant 


32  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

meant  not  to  bind  himfelf  with  fetters  of  parch- 
ment;" a  remark  extremely  applicable  to  the 
ratification  of  Magna  Charta :  for  as  foon  as 
John  had  pacified  the  furious  barons,  by- 
complying  with  their  demands,  he  refolved  not 
to  reft,  till  he  again  releafed  himfelf  from  the 
obligations  which  necefiity  and  fear  had  impofed 
upon  him.  Scarcely  therefore  had  the  aflertors 
of  freedom  retired  to  their  refpeftive  caftks, 
when  the  king  applied  to  the  pope  for  ab- 
folution  from  the  tremendous  oaths  by  which 
he  had  ratified  the  great  charter.  He  alfo 
empowered  his  favorites  to  raife  bodies  of 
mercenary  foldiers,  in  Germany,  France,  and 
Flanders,  to  aflift  his  meditated  revenge  on  the 
barons,  and  his  encroachments  on  the  budding 
liberties  of  his  fubje&s.  During  the  time  thefe 
crafty  negociations  were  on  foot,  the  king 
retired  into  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  that  he  might  be 
iefs  expofed  to  the  obfervation  of  the  public. 
Here  he  continued  fome  time,  confining  himfelf 
to  the  fociety  of  the  lower  ranks  of  people,  fuch 
as  fimermen  and  failors  ;  a  conduct  which  raifed 

the 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


the  curiofity  of  all,  and  the  merriment  of  many, 
who  aflerted  he  had  turned  fifherman,  or 
merchant;  or  intended  to  betake  himfelf  to  the 
profeflion  of  piracy.* 

It  is  fomewhat  odd,  indeed,  the  monarch 
fhould  choofe  this  fpot  for  the  place  of  his 
concealment;  fince  it  was  then  in  the  poffeflion 
of  William  de  Vernon,  a  baron  who  had  been 
extremely  active  in  his  oppofition  to  him.  Per- 
haps, however,  as  the  ratification  of  Magna 
Charta  had  produced  a  kind  of  fpecious  recon- 
ciliation between  John  and  his  nobility,  he 
apprehended  he  might  remain  with  tolerable 
fafety  on  the  demefne  of  De  Vernon,  till  his 
plans  were  fufficiently  matured ;  aware  that  the 
fecrecy  of  his  negociations  would  preclude  a 
difcovery  of  the  intentions  he  harboured,  and 
the  real  manner  in  which  he  was  employed. 

The  Ifle  of  Wight  defcended,  through  Bald- 
win the  grandfon,  and  Baldwin  the  great- 
grandfon,  of  William  de  Vernon,  to  Ifabella. 
(the  daughter  of  the  latterBaldwin,)  who  obtained 

*   Rapin's  liift.  Eng.  vol.  I.  p.  2^7. 

F  poffeffion 


34  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

pofieffion  of  its  lordfhip  in  the  twelfth  year  of 
Edward  I.  This  lady  married  William  de 
Fortibus,  Earl  of  Albemarle,  and,  furviving  him, 
was  llyled  Countefs  of  Albemarle,  and  Lady  of 
the  Jfle  of  Wight.  In  the  thirteenth  century, 
and  for  fome  centuries  afterwards,  it  was 
cuftomary  for  the  great  barons  to  refide  upon 
their  eftates,  begirt  by  numerous  dependants  and 
retainers,  and  furrounded  with  the  barbaric 
magnificence  of  the  age.  The  Countefs  Ifabella, 
on  the  deceafe  of  her  lord,  chofe  Carifbrook 
caftle  for  the  place  of  her  abode,  where  me  lived 
for  fome  years  in  almoft  regal  fplendor;  ad- 
miniftering  juilice;  difpenfing  charity;  and 
heaping  donations  (according  to  the  miftaken 
piety  of  the  times)  on  the  numerous  monafteries 
under  her  protection. 

Upon  her  death  bed,  it  appears  fhe  was  pre- 
vailed upon  by  the  agents  of  Edward  I.  to 
alienate  to  the  crown  this  valuable  lordfhip, 
for  the  fum  of  fix  thoufand  marks.  Walter, 
Bifhop  of  Litchfield  and  Coventry,  drew  the 
deed  of  fale ;  which  was  executed  by  the  coun- 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  35 


tefs,  a  few  hours  before  her  death,  in  the  year 
1293  :*  not  without  ftrong  fufpicions  of  improper 
advantages  having  been  taken  of  the  weaknefs 
and  fatuity  which  generally  precede  the  hour  of 
diflblution.t 

*  Rot.  Parl.  8  et  9,  Edward  II. 

t  Dugdale,  Baron,  vol.  I.  p.  55  et  56.  The  fmallnefs 
ef  the  purchafe-money,  and  other  circumftances,  feem  to 
indicate  fomething  fraudulent  and  difhonorable  in  this 
tranfaftion  ;  fince  fix  thoufand  marks  (about  £"4000 
fterling)  can  never,  by  any  reafonable  mode  of  calculating 
the  comparative  value  of  money,  be  fuppofed  to  have  been 
the  real  worth  of  the  ifland  in  the  thirteenth  century. 
Beudes,  Edward  himfelf,  a  few  years  previous  to 
Ifabella's  death,  had  entered  into  a  treaty  with  her 
daughter  Aveline,  and  Edmund  Crouchback  her  hufband, 
to  pay  her  no  lefs  than  twenty  thoufand  marks,  together 
with  the  grant  of  an  eftate,  for  a  fimple  affurance  of  this 
\'aiuablc  lordfhip,  to  himfelf  and  heirs,  after  the  deceafe 
of  her  mother ;  a  treaty  which  was  annulled  by  the 
premature  death  of  Aveline.  Cough's  Camden,  vol. 
I.  p.  125. 


Fa  CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    V. 


MILITARY     HISTORY    OF     THE     ISLAND,     FROM 

EDWARD       THE      FIRST      TO      THE 

PRESENT      TIME. 


JJuRING  the  time  the  Ifle  of  Wight  con- 
tinued in  the  De  Redvers  family,  its  poffefibrs 
feem  to  have  held  it  by  the  moft  free  and 
independent  tenure.  By  the  grant  of  Henry  I. 
to  Richard  de  Redvers,  that  baron  became 
pofleffed  not  only  of  the  royal  demefnes  within 
this  diftrift,  but  was  inverted  alfo  with  the 
dominion  of  the  whole  ifknd ;  holding  it  under 

the 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  37 

the   crown  in  efcuage,*  at  fifteen  knights'  fees 
and  an  half.t 

A  fief  of  fuch  importance,  of  confiderable 
magnitude,  and  great  ftrength  from  the  circum- 
ftances  of  its  fituation,  was  foon  found,  in  the 
turbulent  and  unfettled  ftate  of  the  government 
at  this  period,  to  give  too  much  confequence  to 
a  fubjecl,  and  afford  him  too  frequent  oppor- 
tunities of  infulting  and  endangering  regal 
authority.  The  wifdom  of  Edward  I.,  therefore, 
determined  him  to  make  the  Ifle  of  Wight  an 
appendage  to  the  crown,  and  his  policy  at  length 
gave  him  pofleffion  of  it,  in  the  manner  mentioned 
in  the  laft  chapter. 

*  According  to  the  cuftoms  of  the  feudal  fyftem,  the 
king  could  demand  the  perfonal  attendance  of  all  his 
vaflals  in  war.  This  troublefome  fervice  was,  however, 
very  Toon  changed  into  a  pecuniary  cempofition,  which 
was  aptly  enough  termed  efcuage,  from  the  wordfcutum,  the 
Latin  for  (hield.  It  was  a  fum  paid  upon  every  knight's 
fee,  for  fome  reigns  precarious  and  uncertain ;  being  at 
times  2os.  per  knight's  fee,  at  others,  2  marks,  &c. 

+  One  knight's  fee  was  compoied  of  four  hydes  of 
land ;  and  each  hyde  contained  one  hundred  Norman 
acres,  which  were  equal  to  one  hundred  and  twenty 
EngliJ/i  ones.  Arthur  Agarde,  p.  9. 

Shortly 


38  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OT    WIGHT. 

Shortly  after  Edward's  purchafe  of  it,  the 
preparations  of  Philip,  King  of  France,  to  in- 
vade the  Englifh  coaft,  threw  the  Southern  part 
of  the  kingdom  into  fome  confirmation;  and  a 
defcent  being  apprehended  on  the  Ifle  of  Wight, 
Edward  took  proper  precautions  for  its  defence, 
by  giving  a  joint  commiffion  to  the  Bifhop  of 
Winchefter,  Adam  de  Gordon,*  and  Sir  Richard 
de  Affeton,  to  aft  as  wardens  of  it.  The  French 
force,  however,  took  a  direction  more  to  the 

*  This  Adam  de  Gordon  was  a  famous  rebel  and  free- 
booter in  the  reign  of  Henry  III.,  who  ranged  through 
the  extennve  forefts  of  Hampfhire,  committing  de- 
predations on  all  who  fell  into  his  hands.  He  became  at 
length  fufficiently  formidable  to  merit  the  notice  of 
government,  and  Prince  Edward  was  difpatched  in 
purfuit  of  him.  They  met  near  Alton  in  Hampfhire, 
and  a  defperate  fingle  combat  immediately  commenced 
between  them ;  in  which  Edward  was  at  length  vic- 
torious, though  not  without  great  difficulty.  Inftead  of 
being  enraged  by  the  oppontion  of  Gordon,  the  young 
prince  was  ftruck  with  admiration  of  his  valor  ;  pardoned 
him  on  the  fpot  for  his  former  atrocities,  and  received  him 
into  his  confidence  and  friendfhip.  A  curious  example 
of  the  romantic  fpirit  of  the  times  ;  and  a  remarkable 
inflance  of  generous  gallantry  in  Eaward.  T.  Wikes, 
p.  76. 

Eaftward ; 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  39 


Eaftward ,    attacked   the  town    of  Dover,  re- 
duced it  to  afhes,  and  retired.* 

The  peace  of  the  ifland  continued  unmolefted 
till  the  reign  of  Edward  III.;  whofe  abfurd 
claims  to  the  crown  of  France  involved  him  in 
a  war  with  France,  which,  though  brilliant  with 
refpecl:  to  temporary  fuccefs,  was  extremely 
pernicious  to  his  country  in  its  confequences. 
During  thefe  hoftilities,  the  Ifle  of  Wight  was 
repeatedly  threatened  with  a  defcent,  which 
induced  the  iflanders  to  enter  into  regulations 
for  their  fecurity,  of  the  following  nature  :  t" 

1.  That  there  mould  be  but  three  ports  in  the 
ifland ;     namely,    La   Riche,    Shamblord,   and 
Yarmouth. 

2.  That  three  perfons  fhould   be  appointed 
wardens  of  thefe  ports,  who  were  to  prevent  any 
one  from  retiring  from  the  ifland,  or  exporting 
provilions  from  thence  without  licence. 

3.  That  none  but  licenfed  boats  mould   be 
permitted  to  pafs,  except  the  boat  belonging  to 

*  Trivetus.  p.  284. 
t  Rot.  Far.  i2th  Edward  III. 

the 


40  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

the  abbot  of  Quar;  a  boat  belonging  to  Sir 
Bartholomew  de  Lifle,  and  another  belonging  to 
Robert  de  Pimely. 

4.  That  feveral  watches  fliould  be  appointed, 
and  perfons  nominated  to  fuperintend  them  and 
the  beacons.* 

Nor  were  thefe  precautions  ufelefs,  for  in 
the  thirteenth  of  Edward  HI.,  the  French 
aftually  landed  at  the  Eaftern  extremity  of  the 
ifland,  in  confiderable  force.  They  were, 
however,  foon  oppofed  by  Sir  John  de  Long- 
ford, Sir  Bartholomew  de  Lifle,  and  SirTheobald 
Ruflel,  (who  had  been  appointed  wardens,)  with 
a  body  of  iflanders  under  their  command.  A 
{harp  conflict  enfued,  in  which  Sir  Theobald 
Ruflell  was  flain,  but  the  French  were  obliged  to 
retire  with  lofs  to  their  (hipping. 

The  fituation  of  the  ifland,  immediately  op- 
pofite  to  the  coaft  of  France,  rendered  it  always 
liable  to  vifits  from  the  French,  before  the 
exiftence  of  thofe  caflles,  which  the  prudence  of 
Henry  VIII.  creeled.  So  that  there  was  fcarcely 

*   Sir  R.  Worfley,  p.  31. 

a  war 


HISTORY   OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  41 

a  war  with  that  kingdom  from  the  thirteenth  to  the 
feventeenth  century,  in  which  Tome  attempts  were 
not  made  to  land  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight.  Many  of 
the  inhabitants,  indeed,  confcious  of  its  expofed 
fituation,  and  the  conftant  danger  in  which 
they  ftood  of  lofing  their  lives  and  fortunes, 
during  the  almoft  perpetual  hoftilities  between 
France  and  England  in  the  fourteenth  century, 
voluntarily  withdrew,  with  their  effe£ls,  to  the 
coaft  of  Hampfhire  :  and  this  fpirit  of  emigra- 
tion began  to  be  fo  univerfal  amongft  them,  that 
Edward  IH.  was  obliged  to  enforce  their  con- 
tinuance on  it,  by  an  order  to  the  wardens,  that 
the  lands  of  thofe  who  had  retired  from  the 
ifland,  and  did  not  immediately  return,  fliould 
be  feized,  and  efcheat  to  the  crown.* 

G  It  appears 

*  Brcv.  Regis  de  Morando  in  Inf.  Ve£a,  51.  Ed.  III. 
Rex  dileftis  et  fidel.  fuis,  Johi.  de  Cavendifh  et  fociis  fuis 
jufliciariis  ad  placita  coram  nobis  tenenda  aflignatis,  fal., 
&c.  Cum  infula  Vefta,  qme  infra  littus  maris  in 
comitatu  Southamptoniae  fituatur,  hoftibus  noftrispublicis 
maxime  fit  propinqua,  quam  etiam  infuiam  iidem  hoftes 
multum  deiiderant ;  et  cum,  infra  breve  tompus,  appro- 
pinquare  et  debellare  proponunt,  ut  audivimiis.  ct  I* 
parint.  Nos  licet  de  avifamento  concilii  noftri  felliones 

noftras 


42  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

It  appears  that  their  apprehenfions  were  not 
without  foundation.  Early  in  Richard's  reign, 
the  French,  with  a  multitude  of  galliesand  fhips, 
landed  at  the  village  of  Rye,  which  they  burnt 
to  the  ground,  making  prifoners  of  many  of  its 
inhabitants,  and  murdering  the  reft.  They  then 
proceeded  into  the  heart  of  the  ifland,  and  at- 
tacked Carifbrook-caftle,  whither  numbers  of  the 
iflanders  had  retired  for  protection.  This  for- 
trefs  was  defended  by  a  gallant  knight,  Sir  Hugh 
Tyrrel,  who,  by  his  prudence  and  bravery,  at 
length  obliged  the  invaders  to  retire,  but  not  be- 
fore they  had  extorted  a  contribution  of  one 
thoufand  marks  from  the  inhabitants,  who  were 

noftras  in  com.  prasdifto  ad  placita  coram  nobis  tcnenda 
quamdiu  noftrse  placuerit  voluntati  ordinaverimus,  vo- 
lumus  lamen  et  jubemus  quod  omnes  et  fmguli  refidentes 
et  habitantes  in  infula  Vefta,  cujufcunque  fuerint  flatus 
et  condition's,  falvationi  et  dcfenfioni  cjufdem  infular 
continue  intendant,  et  ibidem  rnoram  faciant  et  remaneant, 
abfque  eo  quod  ipfi  feu  eorum  aliquis  coram  nabis  in 
feflionibus  noftris  in  comitatu  prsedi&o  comparere  {eu 
v-entre,  vel  in  aflifis  juratis  feu  rccognitionibus  aliquibus 
ibidem  (quanquam  nos  fpecialitci"  tangant.)  poni  feu 
paneilari  non  compellatur,  aut  tencntur  quocunque  modo 
vcl  colore  qftoufque  aliud  inde  duxerimus  demandandum, 
&c.  Rymcr'«  Feed.  vol.  VII.  p.  147. 

gladr 


OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


glad,  by  thefe  means,  to  refcue  their  houfes  and 
property  from  fire  and  devaluation.* 

The  annalifts  have  tranfmitted  to  us  fome 
other  accounts  of  attempts  by  the  French  to  fur- 
prife  this  place.  One  of  thefe  occurred  in  the 
fifth  year  of  Henry  V.,  when  a  large  party 
of  them  landed,  for  the  purpofe,  as  they  aflert- 
ed,  of  keeping  Chrijlmas  .there  :  their  entertain- 
ment, however,  was  but  a  forry  one  ;  for  the 
iflanders  being  apprized  of  their  arrival,  fud- 
denly  attacked,  and  deftroyed,  a  grea.t  number 
of  them. 

Not  learning  prudence  from  their  ill  fuccefs, 
they  made  another  hoftile  vifit  a  fhort  time  after 
this  failure,  demanding  a  fubfidy,  in  the  name  of 
Richard  II.  and  Ifabella  his  queen.  The 
conduct  of  the  iflanders  on  the  occafion,  marks 

*  In  this  expedition  the  French  burned  the  towns  of 
Newtown  and  Yarmouth.  They  made  the  following 
ilipulation  alfo  with  the  inhabitants,  before  they  agreed 
to  retire,  which  is  ridiculous  enough,  from  the  im- 
probability of  its  being  regarded,  had  the  invaders  infilled 
on  its  obfervance  ;  That,  fhould  they  return  within 
twelve  months  after  their  departure,  the  inlanders  would  not 
attempt  to  interrupt  their  devaftatio>;s. 

G  2  ftrongly 


44  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


ftrongly  the  fpirit  of  the  times ;  and  gives  us 
very  favorable  impreffions  of  their  courage 
and  generofity.  They  denied  any  money  being 
due  from  them  to  the  French;  but  added,  if 
the  latter  had  any  inclination  to  try  their  prow- 
efs  in  battle,  they  mould  land  without  molefta- 
tion,  and  be  allowed  fix  hours  to  reft  and  re- 
frefh  themfelves;  after  which  interval,  the  men  of 
the  ifland  would  meet  them  in  fair  combat.  The 
invitation  was  declined,  however,  on  the  part 
of  the  Frsnch,  and  they  fpeedily  decamped. 

Henry  VIII.  was  the  firil  of  our  monarchs 
who  adopted  the  plan  of  building  forts  on  thofe 
parts  of  the  Britifh  coafts  which  were  moft  ex- 
pofed  to  the  infults  of  the  French.  He  ere&ed 
feveral  along  the  mores  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight. 
Perhaps  he  was  induced  to  this  by  fome  defcents 
made  by  that  people  during  his  wars  with  Francis 
I.,  whofe  marine  feems  to  have  been  more 
numerous  than  his  own.  In  the  thirty-fixth  year 
of  his  reign,  Annebout,  the  French  admiral, 
landed  two  thoufand  men  in  three  different  parts 
of  the  ifland,  with  an  intention  to  take  pofTeflion 

of, 


HfSTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  45 


of,  and  fortify  it  for  his  mafter,  the  King  of 
France.  But  a  council  of  war  having  deter- 
mined the  impracticability  of  this  fcheme,  the 
invaders  contented  themfelves  with  burning  and 
laying  wafte  the  villages ;  in  which  work  they 
were  bufily  employed,  when  Richard  Worfley, 
Captain  of  the  Ifland,  attacked,  and  drove  them 
to  their  fhips,  with  the  lofs  of  the  admiral,  and 
a  great  part  of  his  forces. 

The  powerful  naval  preparations  of  Spain 
againft  England,  ftimulated  Elizabeth  to  bend 
her  particular  attention  towards  the  increafe  of 
the  Britifh  Marine.  Her  exertions  were  fuch, 
that  flie  foon  put  it  upon  a  footing  fufficiently  re- 
fpe&able  to  brave  the  power  of  Philip,  and  to 
gain  that  afcendency  which  her  fuccefTors  have 
ever  fince  maintained.  Her  navies  were  found 
to  be  a  furer  defence  againft  the  attempts  of 
foreign  enemies,  than  all  the  fortrefles  which 
her  father  had  erected ;  and  the  neighbourhood 
of  Portfmouth,  that  now  became  the  rendezvous 
of  mips  of  war,  gave  additional  fecurity  to  the 
Jfle  of  Wight,  which,  from  this  time,  does  not 

appear 


46  HI$fOftY    OF    tHE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

appear  to  have  fuffercd  farther  by  French 
invafions. 

Early  in  the  civil  wars  of  the  laft  century,  the 
Parliament  became  'poflefled  of  the  Ifle  of 
Wight,  by  the  removal  of  Jerom,  Earl  of 
Portland,  (who  was  attached  to  the  caufe  of  the 
ill-fated  Charles,)  from  the  government  of  it. 
This  nobleman  had  rendered  himfelf  extremely 
popular,  during  the  exercife  of  his  authority,  by 
the  affability  of  his  manners,  and  his  generous 
hofpitality.  Infomuch  that,  when  the  Parliament 
fuddenly  imprifoned  him,  upon  the  abfurd 
pretences  of  his  being  a  favorer  of  popery,  and  a 
thoughtlefs  expender  of  the  ammunition  en- 
trufted  to  his  care,  the  chief  inhabitants  of  the 
ifland  drew  up  and  prefented  the  following 
petition  to  the  parliament  in  his  behalf. 

"  To  the  honourable  the  knights,  citizens,  and 
burgeffes,  of  the  houfe  of  commons,  aflembled 
in  parliament;" 

44  The  humble  petition  of  the  deputy- 
lieutenants  and  juftices  of  the  peace,  the  mayors 
arrd  corporations  of  Newport.  Newtown,  and 

Yarmouth  ; 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


Yarmouth  ;  and  of  the  reft  of  the  inhabitants  of 
the  Ifle  of  Wight." 

"  Prefenting  to  your  gracious  confideration 
our  general!  griefe  for  the  queftioning  of  Jerom, 
£arl  of  Portland,  our  noble  and  much  honoured 
and  beloved  captayne  and  governor." 

"  The  principal  imputation,  as  we  are  given  to 
understand,  being  a  jealoufy  of  his  iordfhip's 
inclination  to  popery." 

"  For  ourfelves.  we  have  a  pregnant  teftimony 
amongft  us  of  his  pious  affe&ion  and  love  to  the 
reformed  religion,  by  a  conftant  weekly  leQurq 
at  Newport,  to  which  his  lordfhip  is  a  principal 
benefaclor.  So  are  there  on  the  other  fide,  fo 
fmall  effe&s  to  be  feen,  of  his  lordfhip's  difcourfe 
or  pra&ife  that  way  tending,  that  amongft  all  the 
inhabitants  of  this  ifle,  we  have  not  one  profefled 
papift,  or,  to  our  knowledge,  popifhly  affe&edj 
Co  rare  a  bleffing,  in  thefe  times,  as  we  fuppofe 
cannot  be  boafted  in  any  trad  of  ground,  of  this 
extent,  in  all  the  kingdom  of  England." 

44  Some  other  weake  afperfions  uppon  bis 
lordfhip,  we  thought  not  worthy  of  our  owne 

regard, 


48  HISTORY    OK    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT* 

regard,  much  lefle  dare,  wee  prefume  to  re- 
member them  to  fo  grave  and  wife  a  fenate  ;  wee 
do  therefore,  at  once,  with  this  petition,  prefent 
our  humble  and  gratefull  acknowledgment  to 
this  greate  and  good  aflembly,  of  the  care  that  is 
taken  of  our  weale  and  fafety,  which  wee 
conceive  can  no  waye  be  better  advanced  and 
continued  uppon  us,  than  by  your  juft  ap- 
probation of  the  vigilance  and  fidelity  of  our 
prudent  and  able  governor."* 

The  above  reprefentation  being  difregarded 
by  the  parliament,  the  moft  refpeclable  gentlemen 
of  the  ifland  feemed  inclined  to  enforce  a  com- 
pliance with  what  they  had,  in  vain,  requefted ; 
ami  actually  entered  into  a  fpirited  declaration 
againft  the  proceedings  of  the  houfe  of  commons, 
ftating,  that  it  was  their  determination  to  fupport, 
with  their  lives  and  fortunes,  the  proteftant 
religion,  "  and  admit  no  forreyn  power  or  forces, 
or  new  government;  except  his  majefty,  by 
advice  of  his  parliament,  uppon  occafione  that 
may  arife,  (hall  think  itt  neceffary  to  alter  it  in 

*  Sir  R.  Worfley's  Hift.  p.  no. 

any 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  49 

any  particulars,  for  the  good  and  fafety  of  the 
kingdom ;"  this  was  fubfcribed  with  twenty-four 
names.* 

Notwithftanding,  however,  the  inclination  of 
the  Ifle  of  Wight  gentry,  to  befriend  the  caufe  of 
the  unfortunate  Charles,  the  populace,  whofe 
affections  are  as  uncertain  as  worthlefs,  inftigated 
by  the  feditious  fpirit  of  Mofes  Read,  Maycvr  of 
Newport,  declared  in  favor  of  the  parliament; 
and  a  reprefentation  was  tranfmitted  to  this 
affembly,  of  great  danger  accruing  to  the  ftate, 
from  the  Countefs  of  Portland  being  allowed  to 
continue  in  Carifbrooke  caftle,  and  Col.  Brett 
retaining  the  cuftody  of  it.  In  confequence  of 
this,  orders  were  fent  to  Read,  to  feize  im- 
mediately on  this  fortrefs;  and  to  fecure  the 
temporary  governor,  and  the  Earl  of  Portland's 
lady,  together  with  her  five  children,  and  other 
relatives,  who  had  flickered  themfelves  in  it. 
The  rebel  mayor  marched,  therefore,  with  the 
Newport  Militia,  and  a  body  of  four  hundred 

*  Sir  R.  Worfley,  p.  115  :  the  declaration  bears  date, 
Auguft  8th,  1642. 

H  {ailors 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLL    OF    WIGHT. 


failors,  to  attack  the  garrifon  of  Carifbrooke, 
which,  at  that  time,  did  not  confift  of  more  than 
twenty  men.  We  blufh  for  the  degeneracy  of 
our  kind,  when  we  relate,  that  Harby,  the  curate 
of  Newport,  who  was  bound  to  the  Earl  of  Port- 
land by  the  ftrongeft  ties  of  gratitude,  proftituted 
his  facred  office,  by  exhorting,  from  the  pulpit, 
this  rebellious  band,  to  fweep  from  the  earth 
the  unfortunate  Countefs,  with  her  innocent 
offspring. 

This  lady,  however,  animated  by  that  un- 
bending fortitude  which  fprings  from  confcious 
rectitude,  was  no  ways  diftrefled  at  the  prodigious 
difproportion  between  the  numbers  of  her 
aflailants  and  defenders.  She  knew  it  was  im- 
poffible  for  her  little  garrifon  long  to  refift  the 
enemy's  attacks,  but,  at  the  fame  time,  was 
determined  not  to  furrenderit,  without  affurance 
of  receiving  the  moft  honorable  terms  of  capitu- 
lation. She  roufed  the  fpirits  of  the  defponding 
foldiers,  by  her  animating  exhortations;  and 
added  the  force  of  example  to  the  perfuafion  of 
eloquence.  With  a  lighted  match  in  her  hand, 

fte 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  £i 

file  walked  deliberately  to  one  of  the  baftions, 
declaring  (he  would  difcharge  the  firft  cannon  at 
the  foe.  Read,  and  his  party,  unwilling  perhaps 
to  provoke  the  dangerous  efforts  of  defpair, 
offered  terms  of  capitulation,  which,  after  fome 
negociations,  were  accepted,  and  the  cattle  was 
furrendered  on  the  following  ftipulations;  That 
the  warder  of  the  caftle,  Col.  Brett,  together 
with  his  fervants,  and  the  garrifon,  fhould  be 
allowed  the  freedom  of  the  ifland,  under  the 
reftriftion  of  their  forbearing  to  vifit  Portfmouth, 
which  Goring  at  that  time  held  for  Charles. 
That  the  countefs,  with  her  family  and  friends, 
fhould  be  allowed  to  continue  her  refidence  in 
the  caftle,  till  fuch  time  as  the  parliament  had 
declared  its  pleafure  in  that  refpeft.  Her  ftay 
here  was  not  long  protracted;  the  houfe  of 
commons,  with  invidiousexpedition,  immediately 
iranfmittcd  an  order  for  her  to  remove  from  the 
ifland,  within  two  days  after  the  receipt  of  it. 
Ye_t  fuch  was  the  height  to  which  the  fpirit  of 
fanaticifm  had  already  arifen,  in  this  part  of 
England,  that  not  a  {ingle  iflander  could  be 
H  2  found, 


£2  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

found,  who  would  undertake  to  convey  to  the 
oppofite  more,  one,  whofe  confort  had  been 
fufpefted  of  favoring  popery  ;  and  it  is  probable 
the  unfortunate  countefs  might  have  been  com- 
pelled to  negleft  the  orders  of  the  council,  had 
not  the  feamen  of  a  trading  vefiel,  with  that 
generous  compaffion  which  characterizes  the 
maritime  profefiion,  taken  her  and  her  family  on 
board  their  fhip,  and  conveyed  them  fafely  to  the 
coaft  of  Hampfhire. 

From  this  period,  the  hiftory  of  the  Ifle  of 
Wight  ceafes  to  afford  further  military  anecdote. 
On  the  Earl  of  Pembroke  fucceeding  Col.  Brett, 
its  inhabitants  quietly  funk  under  the  control  of 
the  parliament;  and  witneffed,  without  an  effort 
to  prevent  it,   the   unnatural   imprifonment  of 
their  anointed  fovereign,  in  Carifbrook  caflle, 
and  the  forcible  abduftion  of  him  from  thence 
to  the  fcaffold  at  Whitehall.     On  the  reftoration 
of  his  fon,  they  as  patiently  and  willingly  received 
the  governor  appointed  by  the  court,  Thomas, 
Lord  Culpeper ;  and,  during  the  whole  trouble- 
Tome  period  of  the  civil  war,  occupied  entirely 

by 


HISTORY   OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  53 

by  their  agricultural  and  commercial  purfuits, 
kept  the  "  noifelefs  tenor  of  their  way ;"  with- 
out being  involved  in  thofe  convulfions,  which 
fhook  the  peace  of  almoft  every  other  part  of 
the  kingdom.* 

*  "  The  quiet  they  enjoyed  invited  many  from  the 
neighbouring  counties  to  retire  hither ;  which  raifed  the 
rents  of  the  farms  in  the  proportion  of  twenty  pounds  in 
the  hundred.  That  the  rife  originated  from  this  caufe 
only,  appeared  by  their  finking  again,  foon  after  the 
Reftoration."— Sir  R,  WorHey's  Hift.  Ifle  of  Wight, 


CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OP    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    VI. 


THE     ANCIENT     AND    PRESENT    DEFENCE    OF 
THE     ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


D 


URING  the  continuance  of  the  Roman 
government  in  Britain,  the  univerfal  empire  of 
that  people  precluded  the  neceffity  of  keeping  a 
military  force  in  the  ifland,  to  defend  it  from 
external  attacks.  The  few  legionaries  who 
dwelt  in  the  ftaiion  at  Carifbrook,  were  placed 
there  for  the  purpofe  of  preferring  internal  peace 
and  order;  which,  from  the  caufes  mentioned 
in  a  preceding  chapter,  were  eafily  maintained 
throughout  the  diftri£l.  Not  but  that  the 
iflanders  had  it  in  their  power  to  be  troublefomc 
to  their  conquerors,  provided  their  inclination 
had  been  fuch;  for  although  Claudius,  on  his 
fubduing  the  Southern  parts  of  Britain,  deprived, 

for 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  55 

for  a  time,  its  inhabitants  of  their  arms ;  yet  thefe 
were  again  reftored,  as  foon  as  their  minds  were 
reconciled  to  the  dominion  of  the  Roman 
power.* 

The  excellent  regulations  of  Alfred,  with 
whom  originated  the  idea  of  a  national  militia,  t 
enabled  the  Ifle  of  Wight  to  repel  the  repeated 
defcents  of  the  Danes ;  nor  could  they  effeft 
any  ferious  impreffions  on  it,  fo  long  as  thofe 
regulations  were  properly  obferved. 

From  the  time  that  William  Fitz-Ofborne 
received  the  abfolute  dominion  of  the  Ifle  of 
Wight,  the  defence  of  it  refted  entirely  with 
itfelf.  Being  totally  diftinft  from  the  crown,  it 
was  not  to  expe'61  the  interference  of  that  power, 
in  care  of  foreign  aflaults.  But  the  feudal 
fyftem  provided  ample  refources  for  its  pro- 
tection. According  to  the  fpirit  of  this  mingled 
mafs  of  wifdom  and  abfurdify,  each  land-holder 
was  a  foldierj  and  bound  to  attend  the  lord  of 
the  fee  in  his  wars.  A  principle  that  certainly 

*  Dio.  p.  959. 

t  Afferius  de  Vit.  jfclfredi,  p,  6. 

was 


,56  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLL    OF  WIGHT; 

was  not  without  its  advantages,  whilft  ftrictly 
adhered  to;  fince  it  furnifhed,  on  every  emer- 
gency, a  band  of  warriors  who  were  bound  by 
the  ftrong  tie  of  intcreft,  as  well  as  the  facred 
obligation  of  oaths,  to  exert  every  effort  in  the 
field  of  battle. 

Although  Richard  de  Redvers  did  not  receive 
the  Ifle  of  Wight  on  fuch  independent  and 
unfettered  terms,  as  William  Fitz-Ofborne  had 
it  from  the  Norman  on ;  yet,  with  refpeft  to  its 
defence,  he  alone  was  to  provide  the  means  of 
that;  And  we  find,  accordingly,  that  fo  long  as 
it  continued  in  his  family,  a  fupply  of  feventy- 
fix  men  at  arms  was  always  drawn  from  Devon- 
ftiire,  (of  which  county  the  Redvers  family  were 
earls,)  whenever  the  profpeft  of  external  hoftility 
rendered  fuch  fuccour  neceflary  for  the 
iflanders.* 

As  foon,  however,  as  Edward  I.  waspoflefled 
of  it.  the  means  of  its  fecurity  became  of  courfe 
the  care  of  the  crown.  The  following  lift  of  men 
at  arms,  furniftied  to  this  monarch,  for  its  defence, 

*  Inq.  Ann.  i6mo  Ed.  III. 

will 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ISLE  OF  WIGHT.        57 

will   difplay  the  nature  and  the  fources  of  its 
proteftion  at  this  time  : 

MEN. 

From  the  Bifhop  of  Salifbury  -        5 

From  the  Abbot  of  Glaftonbury  7 

From  John  Mandut       -  i 

From  Emmeline  Longefpey  -         t 

from   the   Abbot  of  Stanley           -  ,2 

From  Beatrice  de  Winter  mail        -  i 

From  the  Abbot  of  Gloucefler     -  i 

From  the  Abbefs  of  Godefknv     -  i 

From  Robert  de  Keynis  -                  i 

From  the  Abbot  of  Malmfbury     -  *         3 

From   the  Abbot   of  Cirencefter  .                  2 

From  Thomas  Warbiington  -                   i 

From  the  Prior  of  Hurle  i 

from  Thomas  de  Ambro(bury  i 

From  the  Abbot  of  Abyngdon      -  3 

Fiom  Elia  Molendinari      -  i 

From  John  Dandele               »•  i 

From  William  Pagham  i 

From  Richard  Winton                    -  i 

From  Peter  Coudray                       -  i 

From  Hugh  Taylor       -  i 

From  the  Abbot  of  Romele  -         i 

From  Lucia  de  Grey             -  t 

I  From 


58  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

::r:<. 

From  the  Abbot  of  Walton  -         1 

From  the   Preceptor  of  Shalford  -                   1 

From  the'  Preceptor  of  Conele  -                            1 

From  Nicholas  Burden  -                              i 

From  Roger  de  St.  Mardn  -                    i 

From  Mary   the   king's  daughter,    a   nun  at} 

f        2 

Ambrefbury       -  j 

From  the  Bifhop  of  Worcefter      -  i 

From   Hamon  de  Paries        -  1 

From  the  Bifhop  of  Bath  and  Wells             -  i 

From  Robert  Kingborne,  for  William  de  Coates  i 
John  Grey,  for  Walter  Skydemour       -         - 
John  Blaine,  for  the  Abbot  of  Thukefburgh    - 
Richard  Selby,  for  the  Hundred  of  Herewalkeden 
Henry  Hemenhall,  for  Chipham  and  Malmfbury 

Walter  Cornifey,  for  the  Hundred  of  Warham  i 

John  Carrile,  for  Chalk  and  Domerham  i 

GeofFry  de  Calne,  for  Heightfbury  i 

From  Roger  de   Coke,  for  Weftbury              -  i 

From  the  Abbefs  of  Whonvell  i 

From  Hugh  Feverell     -         -         -         .         .  i 

From  William  Ires,  for  the  Abb.  of  Shafton  i 

From  Maurice  de  Wileb,  for  Matthew  Fitz  John  i 

From  Sterne                    ...         .  i 

From  the   Community  of  Wilts  6 

From  Alife-  de  Bavent  j 

From 


HISTORY   OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  ,59 


MEN. 

From  the  Prior  of •  -  i 

From  Adam  de  Breton  i 

*From  Richard  dc  la  Rivere          -  i 

In  all — Men  at  Arms  -         -         -       73 


Exclufive  of  this  band  of  auxiliaries,  every 
free  land-holder,  to  the  amount  of  twenty  pounds 
per  annum,  was  obligated  by  his  tenure  to 
find  one  horfeman,  completely  armed  and  ac- 
coutred, at  his  own  proper  charges,  in  all 
times  of  aftual  danger.  It  appears  alfo,  that 
for  the  better  fecurity  of  the  ifland  againft 
furprizes,  various  beacons  and  watches  were 
eftablifhed  in  different  parts,  at  which  con- 
ftant  duty  was  performed  both  night  and  day. 
Of  thefe  there  were  thirteen  in  the  Eaftern 
divifion  of  the  ifland,  and  fixteen  in  the 
Weftern  divifion;  and  each  of  them,  (for  the 
moft  part)  had  four  men  to  watch  at  it  during 
the  night,  and  two  by  day.t  To  thefe  means 

of 

*  Prynne  on  the  4th   Inilitute,  p.  211. 

+  Inquifitio   anno   18.   Edw.  II.   num.  216.  in  Tur. 
Lend.        N.    B.    The    illand,    from   very    early    anti- 

I  2  quity 


60  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF  WIGHT. 

of  defence  were  added  one  hundred  {lingers 
and  bowmen  fent  by  the  king,  and  three  hun- 
dred by  the  city  of  London.* 

Early  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  we  find  the 
number  of  forces  furnifhed  by  the  land-holders 
of  the  ifland,  amounted  to  fifty-four  men  at  arms, 
and  one  hundred  and  forty-two  bowmen,  who 
were  produced  by  the  perfons,  and  in  the  pr<XT 
portions  which  follow : 

ARM.        SAG, 

The  Abbot  of  Quarr       -  -40 

The  Lord  of  Woodyton  6         o 

The  Abbefs  (of  Laycqck)  for  Sherwell  3         2 

The  Prior  of  Chriftchurch  -  -         2         g 

The  Lord  of  Yaverland  -  22 

The  Lord  of  Apuldurcomb  -.  22 

The  Lord  of  Kingfton  i         Q 

The  Lord  of  '\Yonflon  .        .         -         i         0 

quity,  has  been  divided  into  two  Hundreds,  called  Eaft 
and  Weft  Medine.— They  receive  thefe  names  from 
their  relative  fituations  to  the  river  Medina,  which 
like  rnoft  other  of  our  rivers,  has  preferved  its  Britifh 
appellation  ;  Med  in  the  Celtic  fignifying  water,  and 
in  being  the  Britifh  plural. 

*   Inquif.  16.  anno  Ed.  III.  in  Tur.  Lond, 

The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  6\ 

A*M.       IAS. 

The  Lord  of  Standen  and  Wode  j         o 

The  Manor  of  Whitefield  i         o 

The  Manor  of  Stenbury  »         -         i         o 

The  Lord  of  Niton  and  Chafe  o         i 

The  Manor  of  Bottebridge      -  ......      o         l 

The  Prior  of  St.  Helens           r  6         t 

The  Prior  of  Burton       -  x>         a 

The  Lord  of  Alverfton  -        o         2 

The  Manor  of  Milton       -  -03 

The  Vavafor          -  o         a 
John  Malterfon,  for  Wood  Anfterborn  ^ 

(Ofborne)  and  Chilling  Wood  -      J 

The  Manor  of  Pagham             -  02 

The  Manor  ot  Nettlefton  -                  o         a 

The  Abbot  of  Beaulieu  o        2 

John  Wyvill          -  -04 

John  Norreys                  ...  o         i 

Edward  Barnaby             -  o         i 

The  Manor  of  Nunwell          -  02 

Richard  de  Hale                       -  OB 

Ralf  Overtoil,  for  Horringford  o         i 

Thomas  Hacket      -  o        i 

William  Urry          -  •»         o         l 

The  Lady  Mary  Buteler,  for  Hale  o         l 

The  Prior  of  Portfmouth  o         a 

Geoffry  Rouelle        ...  -02 

The 


62  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


ARM. 

SAG. 

The  Manor  of  Bathingborne 

O 

2 

John  Palmer  of  Wotton,  and  John  Stone 

o 

1 

Roger  Baker                   .... 

o 

1 

William  Stouer 

o 

1. 

Ifabell  Keynis,  for  Niton         - 

0 

2 

John  Waite 

0 

1 

Henry  Pedder,  for  Weftbrooke 

o 

1 

Sir  Theobald  Gorges,  for  Chillingwood   - 

o 

1 

The  Temnt  of 

• 

Robert  Syngdone                     ... 

o 

1 
1 

Sir  John  de  Kyngfton,  for  Lucelo  and  l 

^ 

o 

I 

Priffloe                                     -               i 

The  Churches  of  Eajl  Medinc  : 

The  Church  of  Brading 

2 

• 

Yaverland 

o 

1 

New  church 

2 

O 

Arreton 

1 

3 

Whippingham 

0 

2 

Niton 

o 

1 

Benilede 

o 

I 

Shentlyn 

0 

t 

Bonechurch 

0 

I 

Wootton 

0 

1 

Wathe 

o 

1 

Appulderford 

o 

1 

$townam,  or  Standen 

o 

1 

The 

HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  63 

ARM.        SAG. 

The  Church  of  Knighton  o  i 

Alverfton  -  o  i 

The  Vicar  of  Brading  o  i 

Arreton  -  o  i 

Goddefhill  -  o  i 

The  Chapel  of  St.  Edmund,  at  Wootton  o  » 

The  Weft  Medine : 

The  Prior  of  Carifbrooke        ^  -  60 

The  Procurator  of  Lyra  i         2 

Giles  Beauchamp,  For  Frefhwater  '  20 

Gilbert  de  Spencer         -  12 

The  Lord  of  Affeton  -  -  i         o 

The  Erie  of  Salifbury  -  32 

Sir  John  de  Kingfton  -  -  12 

John  de  Compton         ~-  -  02 

Sir  Thomas  Langford  -  -  °         3 

The  Manors  of  Gatcomb,  Whitwell, 

Caulborn,  and  Merften 
Thomas  Rale  -  i         o 

Sr.  Lawrence  de  St.  Martin     -  i         i 

The  Lord  of  Motteflon  -  «•  i         o 

Ralph  de  Woolverton  -  -02 

Nicholas  deWoolverton          -  -  o         i 

Ralf  DiBon  and  Tho.  Hacket,  for  Hatherfield  o         2 
Sr.  John  Tychborn         -  -  02 

Thomas 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


Thomas  le  Wayte  -  - 

William  Paflelew  and  Geoffiry  Ronele 

John  Berle  ... 

John  Fauterby 

Lady  liabella  Hunfton 

Henry  Tailour  - 

The  Abbefs  of  Lay  cock 

Park 

Lawrence  Ruflel 

The  Churches  of  the  Weft  Medine 

The  Church  of  Frefhwater 

Schaldeflet 

Caulborn 

Brixton 

Shorewell     - 

Gatecomb     - 

Chale 

Mottefton     - 

Broke 

Lemerfton     - 

Kingfton 

Yarmouth     - 
The  Vicar  of  Shorewell 
Shaldeflet 
Thorley 


ARM.       SAG. 

O  2 


I 
1 
1 
1 

O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  6,5 


ARM.        SAO. 

The  Vicar  of  Cirefbrook  o 


The   Prior  of  Chriftchurch,    who  is 
Reaor  of  Thorley* 


I 


.  In  all,  fifty-four  men  at  arms,  and  one  hun- 
dred and  forty-two  bowmen.  Thefe,  however, 
by  no  means  conftituted  the  whole  force  of  the 
ifland  at  this  period,  fince  a  kind  of  general  militia 
was  furnifhed  by  the  feveral  parifhes  and  tyth- 
ings,  in  cafes  of  external  aflault,  which  was  dif- 
tributed  into  companies,  and  commanded  by 
fuch  lords  of  manors  as  were  of  the  moft  approved 
military  fkill  :  and  if  thefe  refources  were  in- 
fufficient  for  its  protection,  the  warden  had  frill  a 
difcretionary  power  veiled  in  him,  of  levying 
new  forces  throughout  the  ifland,  and  of  im- 
prefling  men  for  its  defence  from  the  County  of 
Southampton.t 

To  thefe  regulations  for  its  fafety,  the  Ifle  of 
Wight  continued  fubje6t  for  the  fpace  of  many 

*  Sir  R.  Worfley's  Hiil.  Ifle  of  Wight,   Append.  No.  II. 
•f  Rot.  Franc.  26.  Ed.  III.  m.  13. 

K  years. 


66  HISTORY    Of    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHl. 

years,  till  Henry  VIII.  incenfed  by  fome  recent 
defcents  of  the  French  on  the  Britifh  coaft, 
adopted  the  plan  of  building  a  number  of  forts 
and  block-houfes  on  the  parts  moft  expofed  to 
their  infults.  Thofe  ere&ed  at  this  time,  on  the 
ifland,  were  the  following  :* 

Sandown  Fort,  fituated  at  the  bottom  of  a 
bay  of  that  name,  in  the  South-eaftern  part  of 
the  ifland.t 

Yarmouth  Co/lie,  intended  to  defend  the  en- 
trance of  the  riveryizr,+  on  the  north-weftern  part. 

Wor/leys  Tower^  (long  fince  demolished)  built 
on  a  point  of  land,  about  a  mile  to  the  Weft  of 
Yarmouth. 

*  Thefe  were  all  built  about  the  g6th  Hen.  VIII. 

+  This  fortrefs  is  ftill  kept  in  repair,  and  has  the  fol- 
lowing eftablifhment : — A  captain,  twelve  warders,  one 
mailer  gunner,  three  .  othsr  gunners.  It  is  a  regular 
quadrilateral  building  ;  having  a  baftion  at  each  angle, 
and  furrounded  with  a  wet  ditch. 

£  Yar,  is  a  corruption  of  yr,  a  Britifh  appellative  for 
water.  The  eflablifhment  of  this  caftle  is  ftill  prefervcd  ; 
though  its  ufes  have  long  fmce  ceafed.  It  has  a  captain, 
one  mailer  gunner,  and  five  other  gunners. 

Weft 


HISTORY   OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  67 


Weft  Cowes  Caftle,  ereaed  on  the  Weft  fide  of 
the  river  Medina,  on  the  North  fhore  of  the 
ifland,  and  Eajl  Cowes  Co/lie,  on  the  other  fide  of 
the  fame  river,  of  which  no  veftige  now  remains.* 

The  eftablifhment  of  Sandham  and  Weft- 
Cowes  caftles,  will  appear  from  the  underwritten 
account  of  fees  paid  to  their  refpe&ive  garrifons : 

Sandham  Ca/lk.  Sandham  Bay. 

PXR  DIEM. 

45.    Captain 

as.   Under  ditto 

6d.  Soldiers,  thirteen  £.     :•    d. 

8d.  Porters,  one  Fee   363    6    8 

8d.  Matter  Gunner 

6d.  Other  Gunners,  feven 

Weft  -  Cowes  Fortrefs.    • 

is.  Captain 

6d.  Soldiers,  two  £.    ,.    4-. 

8d.  Porter,  one  ("Fee  103    8'   4* 

6d.  Gunners,  fix 

% 

*  Weft  Cowes  caftle  is  alfo  utterly  ufelefs ;  but  ftill 
has  a  captain,  one  mafter  gunner,  and  five  other  gunners. 

t  Sir  R.  Worflcy's  Hift.  Append,  No.  XXXVI. 

Ka  The 


68  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF  WIGHT. 


The  nature  and  proportions  of  the  military 
ftores  kept  in  the  different  caftles  of  the  ifland, 
at  the  period  of  Henry's  death,  are  ftill  preferved 
to  us,  and  may  be  deemed  fufficiently  curious 
to  be  laid  before  the  reader. 

The  IJlc  of  Wight* 

The  Cajlell  at  1  Ordenaunce,  artillery,  and 
Yarmouthe.  J  other  munycions  of  warre  re- 
maynyng  at  the  faide  caftell  in  the  cuftody  and 
chardge  of  Richard  Edwall,  captaine  there,  the 
a6th.  of  Decembre,  anno  regni  regis  nunc 
Edwardi  fexti  primo. 

Curtail  Cannon  of  Brafle  furnyfhed  Gone 

Demy  Culveryne  of  BrafTe  furnyfhed  Gone 

Demy  Culveryne  of  caile  Irene  fur-  ? 

Gone 
nymed  3 

Fowlers  of  Irone  with  4  chambers  7 

ij°. 
flocks  broken  3 

Sacres  of  Cafte  Irone  furnyfhed       -  ij°. 

*  Extracted  from  a  MS.  formerly  in  the  povTeffion  of 
Gufliivus  Brander,  Efq.  (now  in  the  Britifh  Mufeunv, 
being  ';  An  inventory  of  the  plate,  Jewells,  ordenaunce. 
&c.  of  Henry  VIII."  dated  i^th  September,  1547. 

Doblc 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  69 


Doble    barces    of   yrone    with    iiijl 
chambers  j 

Single  bafes  of  yrone  with  iiij  chambers  ijo. 

Demy  culveryne  of  cafte  yrone          -  Gone  broken. 
Cannon  fhot  of  yrone  -       .      -  xv. 

Demy  culveryne  Shott  of  yrone  xlvj. 

Sacre   (hotte  of  yrone  C. 

Fowler  fliotte  of  ftone  -  -  lli' 

Shotte  of  doble  bafes  of  diece  and  lead  !*'• 

Shott  of  fmgle  bafes  •»  *          xxxti- 

viii  di.  bar.  iii 


Serpentyne  powder  - 

Hagbuttes  furnyflied                             -  xix. 

Corne  Powder  for  the  fame                 -  di°.  Bar. 

Bowes           -  cxlti- 

Sheiffs  of  Arrows      -  ccxlviij. 

Bowftrings  oone  firkyne,  conteyning  ij   GrofTe. 

Billes             -  ccxxiij. 

The   Block-houfe  at   Sharpnode   within  -the 
faid  Ifle  of  Wight,  in  the  charge  of  Nicholas 

Cheke. 

Demy  Culveryns  of  Brafle  furnyfhed  Oone 

Sacres  of  Brafle  furnyftied    •             -  Oone 

Demv  cnlveryne  fhotte  of  yronc         -  xxj. 

Sac  re 


70  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


XX11J. 
Gone  doble  Bar. 


The  Ca/lell  of  1        Ordenaunce,  artyllery,   and 

Cary/brooke.    j   other  munycions  of  warre  re- 

mayninge  at  the  faid  Caftell  in  the  cuftody  and 

charge  of  Richard  Worfley  gentilman,  Captayne 

of  the  faid  ifle. 

Slynges  of  yrone  furnyfhed    .-  ij°. 

Fowler  of  yrone  furnyfhed     -  Gone. 

Doble  baffys  of  yron  furnyfhed  -  ij°* 

Hoole  culveryne  fhotte  r    ' 

Demy  Cannon  Shotte 

Yron  for  divers  peices 

Demy  culveryne  Shotte  of  yrone 

Sacre  fhotte  of  Yrone  -  -          cciiij. 

Fawcon  fhotte  of  yrone  clx*'* 

Doble  bafis  fhotte        -  xlti- 

f    xxiij  doble 
Serpentyne  powder 

i  bar.  iij.  firk. 

Hagbuttes    furnyfhed,     lacking    xxl 

r  cxl. 

flafks  and  xx  touch-boxes  j 

Coilles  of  Lyntte       -  DC. 

Corne  Powder  -    iiij  doble  bar. 

Cheftes 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


Cheftes  of  Arrowes 

Cheftes  of  Bowes 

Bow  firings 

Morifpickes 

Javelyns 

Billes 


lix. 

xxi. 

iij  Bar. 

D. 

XX 

C.  iiij.  iiij. 
Dccl. 


The  Cajlell  of  Sandham  baye. 

Ordenaunce,  artillery,  and  other  munycions 
of  warre  remaynyng  at  the  faid  caftell  in  the 
cuftody  and  charge  of  Peter  Smythe  Cap- 
tayne  there. 


Demy  culveryns  of  brafle  furnyfhed    - 

Saker  of  brafle  furnyfhed 

Fawcone  of  brafle  furnyfhed 

Porte  pieces  of  yrone  with  ii  cham-7 

beis  furnyfhed  j 

Hoole  flynges  of  yrone  furnyfhed 
Demy     flynges    of    yrone   with   vil 

chambers  3 

Quarter  Slynges  of  yrone  with  oone  1 

chamber  J 

Demy  Culveryn  fhotte  of  yrone 
Demy  culveryn  fhotte  of  dice  and  lead 


Oone. 
Oone. 
Oone. 

Oone. 
Oone. 

v. 

Oone. 

XX 

iiij. 
xv. 
Hollo* 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLt    OF    WIGHT. 


Hollow  fhottes  for  wild  fier     - 
Sacre  fhotte  of  yrone 
Sacre  fhotte  of  Dice  and  Leade 
Fawcon  fhotte  of  yrone 
Fawcon  fhotte  of  Dice  and  leade 
Shotte  of  ftone  for  port  pieces 
Cafes  of  haile  fhotte  for  the  fame 
Slynge  fhotte  of  Dice  and  leade 
Demy  flyng  fhotte  of  Dice  and  Leade 
Quarter  flynge  fhotte  of  dice  and  leade 

Serpentyne  powder 

Hagbufhes  wanting  flafks  and  touch- 
boxes 

Corne  powder 
Bowes  - 

Sheiff  Arrowes 
Pickes 
Billes 


i 


xij. 
Ixij. 

XX 

iiij.xiiij* 

xxxvj. 

cxvj. 

xxiiii. 

xxvijij. 

xij. 

c. 

xlvj. 

iij   doble    bar. 
j  firk. 

Ixxviij. 

Gone  firk. 
Gone  cheft. 
Gone  cheft. 

cl. 
cxx. 


The  Cajlell  at  the  Wefte  Cowe. 
Ordenaunce,  artillery,  and  other  munycions 
of  Warre  remaynyng  in  the  faid  caftell  in  the 
charge  or  cuftody  of  Robert  Raymonde  Cap- 
tayne. 

The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

The  Barbycan. 

Curtoll  cannon  of  Brafle  furnyflied   -          Gone 
Baftard  Culveryne  of  Braffe  furnyfhed         Gone 
Porte  pieces  of  y rone  i'urnyfhed  with! 
iiij  chambers  j 

Three  Quarter  Slynges  with  ij  cham- 


Gone. 

bers 

Porte  pieces  not  able  to  ferve  -          Gone. 
Cannon  Shotte  of  yrone  xvij. 

Baftard  Culveryn  Shotte  of  yrone  -  xiij. 

Baftard  Culveryn  Shotte  of  leade  Ivj. 

Shotte  for  port  pieces  of  Stone  xxx. 

Slinge  Shotte  of  Irone  xxxij. 

The  Wcjlc  Wynge. 

Doble  bafes  with  ij    chambers   not  7 

>•         Gone. 

hable  to  ferve  J 

Single  bafes  with  iij  chambers  not] 

hable  to  ferve  ^ 


The  Eaftc  Winge. 

h 
hable  to  ferve 


Doble  bafes  with  iij  chambers  not  1 


The 


74  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


The  maynt  Towre. 

Doble  bafes  with  ii  chambers  furnyfhed         Oonc. 
Three  quarter  Slinges  with  ii  cham-  "1 

bers  apiece,  whereof  oone  is  not  S  iij. 

hable  to  ferve  •» 

Single  Bafes  with  viij  chambers  not  7 

hable  to  ferve  J 

Three  quarter  fling  fhott  of  leade       -          cxlvj. 
Shotte  for  doble  bafes  Ixiiij. 

c  Ji  doble  Bar.  it 

Serpentyne  Powder  -  g^ 

Hagbutts  not  hable  to  ferve  x. 

Corne  Powder            -  iiij  Ib. 

Bowes            -             -  xix. 

Chefts  of  Arrowes  -          xxxij. 

Pickes             -  xxij. 

Billes              -             -  xx. 

In  the  year  1558,  a  very  confiderable  ad- 
dition was  made  to  the  means  of  defence  in 
the  Ifle  of  Wight,  by  the  introduction  of  Jire 
arms  there.  Richard  Worfley,  Efq.  who  was 
that  year  reinftated  in  his  office  of  captain  of 
the  ifland,  received  orders  to  put  the  com- 
mon 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  75 

mon  mufket  of  the  times  into  the  hands  of 
the  militia,  and  to  fettle  an  armourer  at  Carif- 
brooke  caftle,  for  the  purpofe  of  fabricating 
them.  Thefe  directions  were  executed,  and  the 
foldiers  received  their  new  arms ;  which  although 
they  were  the  rude  and  clumfy  harquebufles 
of-  the  fixteenth  century,  with  the  match  lock, 
and  reft,  yet  they  might  be  confidered  as  much 
more  formidable  inftruments  of  deftruclion  than 
the  weapons  before  in  ufe  amongft  them.* 

It  was  in  confequence  of  thefe  new  regu- 
lations, and  the  vigilant  care  with  which  they 
were  inforced,  that  the  militia  of  the  Ifle  of 
Wight  wore  a  very  refpe6table  appearance  to- 
wards the  clofe  of  the  fixteenth  century.  Cam- 
den  fpeaks  of  the  inhabitants  at  that  time,  as 

*  About  the  fame  time,  the  iflanders  voluntarily  put 
themfelves  to  the  trouble  and  expence  of  providing  a 
train  of  artillery  for  their  defence.  Each  parifh  found 
•me,  which  was  either  kept  in  a  fmall  houfe  built  for  the 
purpofe,  or  in  fome  part  of  the  church.  About  eighteen 
of  thefe  remain.  Ihe  carriages  and  ammunition  were 
provided  at  the  expence  of  the  garifhes,  and  particular 
farms  were  charged  with  the' duty  of  finding  horfes  to 
draw  them.  Sir  R.  Worfley,  p.  •  i  - 

L  2  excelling 


76  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

excelling  greatly  in  military  {kill.  u  They  are 
brave  and  courageous,"  fays  he, "  and  fo  con- 
flantly  trained  by  the  captain  of  the  ifland,  as 
to  underftand  completely  all  the  operations  of 
war.  They  excel  in  firing  at  a  mark ;  can 
keep  their  ranks ;  march  compact  and  orderly ; 
or  extend  their  files  if  need  be  ;  are  inured  to 
hardfhip,  fatigue,  heat  and  duft,  and  can  per- 
form every  office  of  a  foldier.  The  ifland,"  he 
continues,  "  can  raife  four  thoufand  foldiers  of 
its  own  ;  and  can  have,  at  a  ftiort  notice^  three 
thoufand  well  difciplined  men  from  Hampfhire, 
and  two  thoufand  from  Wiltfliire.*" 

In  the  year  1625,  the  ifland  could  bring 
into  the  field,  two  thoufand  and  twenty  ef- 
fective men ;  the  following  ftatement  mews  in 
what  manner  they  were  armed,  and  how  divi- 
ded into  companies. 

A  true  Noate  of  the  Strenght  of  the  ifland, 
taken  by  Sir  John  Oglander,  liftennant,  the  iath 
of  May  1625,  and  by  him  delivered  to  the 
Counfell. 

*   Cam.  Brit.  Edit.  1607. 

In 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  77 


In  Sir  John  Oglandtrs  Band. 

Officers          -                                 -  7 

Mulketieres                    ."*             .  -           60 

,  * 

Corflettes                          ^  21 

Bare  Pickes                   -  9 

Soom  97 

In  Sir  Edward  Dennis  Bandt. 

Officers  10 

Mufkettes      -  -         103 

Corflettes                                           .  .           13 

Bare  Pickes  .           23 

Men  unarmed                -  61 

Som                  -  210 

Appcldorcoombc  Bandf. 

Officers                                            -  9 

Mulkettes       -  -         150 

Corflettes       -  25 

Bare  Pickes  37 

Men  unarmed  -           40 

Som  261 

Mr.  Dillingtoris  Band. 

Officers                                            _  .           12 

Mufkettes  -           60 

Corflettes 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


Corflettes 
Bare  Pickes 
Men  unarmed 


Som 


Sir  John  Richardcs  Bande. 

Officers 
Mufkettes 
Corflettes 

Bare  Pickes  and  men  unarmed 
Som 


Mr.  Ckeekes  Band. 


Officers 
Mufkettes 
Corflettes 
Bare  Pickes 


Som 


Sir  William  Meux. 


Officers 

Mufkettes 
Collivors 
Corflettes 
.Men  unarmed 


20 
*5 


122 


6 

61 

28 


109 


21 


12 


44 
.20 


Som 


261 


Mr. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  79 


Mr.  Ltyghes  Band. 

• 

Officers 

6 

Mufkettes 

63 

Corflettes 

16 

Bare  Pickes       - 

10 

Som 

95 

Mr.  Barman's  Band. 

Officers 

13 

Mufkettes 

65 

Corflettes 

17 

Bare  Pickes 

20 

Som 

"5 

Mr.  Hobfon's  Band. 

Officers 

18 

Mufkettes 

83 

Corflettes 

-          38 

Men  unarmed 

31 

Som 

170 

Mr.  Urric's  Band. 

Officers 

11 

Mufkettes         ^ 

80 

Corflettes 

80  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

Corflettes         -                -                -  22 

Bare  Pickes                     -  9 

Soom  122 

Nuport  Band. 

Officers          -                                 -  -          «2 

Mufkettes  -          94 

Collivors      •  -  4 

Corflettes       -                -  12 

Bare  pickes  32 

Holberdes       -                                 -  10 

Men  unarmed  130 

Som  304 

Mufkettes              -  -       1088 

Collivors               -                -  33 

Corflettes  263 

Bare  Pickes           -  196 

Holberdes  10 

Men  unarmed       -  297 

Officers  133 

Som  totoll  of  all  the  ablei 

men  within  the  Ifland  is.  3 


2020 


Since  they  arr  all  armed.* 

*  Sir  Richard  Worfiey's  Hift.  Append.  No.  XIV. 

Three 


HISTORY   OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  8l 

Three  years  after  the  return    of  this  ftate-  • 
ment,  the  above  force  was  new-modelled,  and 
formed  into  fixteen  companies,  which  were,  in 
the  year   1638,  commanded  and  appointed  to 
the  ftations  as   under. 

The  Watches  and  Wardes  that  ar  now  kept 
in  our  I  (land.     Sep.  20-  1638. 

Eafl  Medcn. 

{At  St.  Caterons,  a  Ward  with 
*  Men. 
On  the  Hatton  Nyghtonfyld,  a 
watch  with  2  men. 
A  Watch  at  Lanes,  2  Men. 
A  Ward  at  Roxall  Down, 
f  Aflien  Down,  a  Ward  one  Man 

and  a  Watch  2  Men. 
Sir  J.  Oglander      < 

At  St.  Helen's  poynt,  a  watch, 

\_      2  men. 

f  On  Knyghton,  a  Watch,  2  Men. 
Sir  R.  Dilhngton    •{ 

I  At  Ryde,  a  Watch,  2  men. 

r  At  Apeldercombe,  a  watch  z  men 
Sir  Hen.  WorfeleyJ  At  Criple  at  Nyghton,  a  watch, 
(,      2  men. 

M  Cap. 


Sir  Ed.  Dcnnys      .) 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


Cap.  Cheeke 
Cap.  Bafkett 

Sir  Wm.  Liflie 

Wtjl  Mcden. 
Mr.  Mewx 

Sir  John  Leygh 
Cap.  Urry 


Cap.  Harvyc 


At  St.  George's  Down,  a  Watch 

9.  men. 
On   Binbridge    Down,   a  ward, 

one  Man,  and  a  Watch,  2  men. 
At  Eaft  Cowes,  Wootton  poynt, 

and  at  Fifchowfe,  a  Watch,  2 

men  a  peece. 


Cap,  Booreman      ^ 


!At  Ramfe  Down,  a  watch  2  men. 
At  Chale  Down,  a  watch,  2  men. 
r  At  Lardon  Down,  a  watch,  2  men. 
i  At  Atherfylde,  a  watch,  2  men. 
fOn  Hearberoe  Down,  a  Ward, 

2  Men 

j  On  the  feae  more  at  Brixton,  a 
[_     watch,  2  men. 
f  On  Avington  Downe,  a  Watch, 
I      2  Men. 

At  Northwood,  a  Watch,  2  Men, 
On  Gatecombe  Downe,  a  watch, 
_     2  Men. 
f  On  Frefchewaltor  Downe,  a  ward 

and  Watch,  two  men  apeece. 
On  Motfon  Downe,  a  Watch,  2 
Men. 

Cap, 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  83 

Cap.  Hobfon  At  Hamftede,  a  Watch,  2  Men. 

Newport  2   Com-  7 

i  1  hey  only  watch  in  the  towne. 
panics.  j 

The  internal  ftrength  of  the  ifland,  however, 
feems  to  have  fallen  off  confiderably  in  the  courfe 
of  a  very  few  years  after  this  arrangement  of  its 
militia ;  for  on  the  appointment  of  the  Earl  of 
Pembroke  to  the  government  of  it,  in  1642,  a 
reprefentation  of  its  ftate  was  tranfmitted  by 
Sir  John  Dingley  (who  had  been  deputy-gover- 
nor) to  that  nobleman,  which  affirms  that  the 
train-bands  were  very  much  weakened  and  de- 
cayed, and  if  there  were  not  a  fpeedy  courfe 
taken,  would  be  daily  worfe  and  worfe ;  on 
account  of  the  lords  of  the  manors  taking 
their  copyholds  into  their  own  hands  as  quickly 
as  they  fell  in ;  and  the  rich  farmers  laying  to- 
gether all  the  farms  they  could  put  their  hands 
upon;  caufes  which  occafioned  a  fenfible  de- 
creafe  in  the  population  and  ftrength  of  the 
ifland. 

Further  regulations  were  adopted  foon  after 

the  above  reprefentation,  and  in  the  year  1651 

M  2  a  fet 


84  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF  WIGHT. 

a  fet  of  inftru&ions  was  delivered  to  the  militia 
of  the  ifland,  of  a  very  fenfible  nature ;  com- 
prizing a  long  lift  of  precautions  to  be  taken, 
for  the  prevention  of  an  enemy's  landing,  or 
for  refilling  him  if  he  did  land.  A  copy  of 
thefe  inftruftions  was  fent  to  eveiy  captain, 
with  orders  to  have  them  read  at  the  head  of 
his  company  whenever  it  was  muttered.* 

Immediately  on  the  reftoration  of  Charles 
the  Second,  Lord  Culpeper  was  appointed  gover- 
nor of  the  ifland;  whofe  inattention  with  re- 
fpe6l  to  the  means  of  its  defence,  and  arbitrary 
proceedings  in  civil  matters,  induced  the  in- 
habitants to  prefent  a  petition  to  the  king  for 
his  removal ;  in  which  they  ftate,  that  the  an- 
cient magazines  and  ftores  of  the  ifland,  were 
neither  fo  full,  nor  in  fo  good  repair  as  in 
former  times;  nor  the  militia  in  fuch  a  con- 
dition as  was  confident  with  the  fafety  of  the 
place. 

In  the  lord  chancellor's  anfwer  to  this  peti» 
tion,  it  is  promifed,  that  Lord  Culpeper  mould 

*  Sir  R.  Worfley's   Append.  No.  XVIII. 

be 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  85 

be  forthwith  difpatched  to  the  ifland  to  regu- 
late its  militia,  and  order  matters  for  its  better 
fecurity.  This,  however,  he  had  not  an  oppor- 
tunity of  doing,  as  he  fhortly  after  refigned 
his  poft  of  governor;  in  which  he  was  fuc- 
ceeded  by  Sir  Robert  Holmes. 

In  the  year  1757  the  prefent  militia  of  the 
Ifle  of  Wight  was  firft  raifed;  and  drawn  out, 
embodied,  and  formed  into  an  independent 
company  in  1770.  It  confifts  of  fixty  men, 
and  is  commanded  by  a  captain  under  the 
governor. 

This  ifland  has  alfo  lately  evinced  its  patriot- 
ifm,  in  the  formation  of  a  cavalry  corps,  confift- 
ing  of  fifty  men  (officers  included)  denominated 
The  Loyal  I/Is  of  Wight  Yeomanry  Cavalry ;  a 
corps  raifed  for  the  repullion  of  foreign  attack, 
and  the  fuppreffion  of  domeftic  confufion. 


THE 


ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY 


O  F    TH  E 


ISLE  OF  WIGHT. 


CHAP.    I. 


•  F    THE   ANCIENT  RELIGION    OF    THE    ISLE   OF 

WIGHT,    AND   THE    INTRODUCTION    OF 

CHRISTIANITY     THERE. 

.L/RUIDISM  was  the  ancient  religion  of 
the  Ifle  of  Wight.  Both  its  original  Celtic 
inhabitants,  and  their  Belgic  fucceffors,  pro- 
fefled  this  mode  of  worfhip. 

The  Druid  doctrine,  in  its  primeval  ftate, 
was  fublime  and  fimple.  It  taught  the  exift- 
ence  of  one  eternal,  almighty  God,  the  Creator 
and  Ruler  of  the  univerfe,  to  whom  all  things 
were  fubjeft  and  obedient.*  It  taught  alfo 

*  Regnator  omnium .  DEUS,  caetera  fubjefta  atque 
parcntia.— Tacit. 

the 


88  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

the  immortality  of  the  foul;  that  great  principle, 
which  is  the  moft  effectual  fpur  to  virtue,  the 
greateft  check  to  vice,  and  happieft  antidote 
to  defpair.t  It  further  inculcated,  the  belief 
of  a  future  ftate,  in  which  the  fpirits  of  the 
departed  were  to  be  cloathed  with  incorruptible 
bodies,  unfading  youth,  and  perpetual  beauty; 
and  invited  its  followers  to  reftitude  in  peace, 
and  gallantry  in  war,  by  profpe&s  of  an  un- 
ceafing  repetition  of  thofe  pleafures  (though  in- 
finitely exalted  and  refined),  in  the  ifland  of 
the  Weft,*  which  they  had  moft  efteemed  and 
delighted  in,  during  their  refidence  on  earth.* 


•f"    Etio-%vti  yacq  wag  avrois  o  TIvQotyogov  foyos,   on  vets 
Y£»  avOgwrrui  a.9acva.Tovf  ctvxt  crv/jJceGviKe.      Diod.  Sic.  lib.  V. 

Imprimis  hoc  volunt  perfuadere,  non  interire  animas. 
—  Csef.  lib.   VI.  c.  xiv. 

*   Celebratze  illas    beatorum  iniula?   dicuntur   elle   in 
Occidental  oceano.  —  Euftathius  ad  Dion.     Perieg. 

t  Vobis   au£loribus,   umbrae, 
Non  tacitas  Erebi  fedes,   Ditifque  profundi 
Pallida  Regna  petunt  ;  regit  idem  fpiritus  artus 
Orbt  alia:  longae   (canitis  ft  cognita)  vitae 
Mori  media  eft. 

Lucani  Pharf.  lib.  1. 

Thus 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


Thus  fimple  and  noble  was  the  Druidical 
religion  originally;  before  the  ignorance,  the 
errors,  and  the  fears  of  the  multitude,  had  cor- 
rupted and  diftorted  its  philofophical  tenets. 
The  policy  of  its  minifters,  the  Druids,  how- 
ever, involved  thefe  truths  in  wilful  obfcurity, 
and  in  order  to  preferve  iheir  empire  over 
the  public  mind,  they  wrapped  themfelves  and 
their  docirine  in  the  mantle  of  myftery.  This 
conduft  naturally  increafed  their  own  impor- 
tance and  the  veneration  of  their  followers; 
but  at  the  fame  time,  left  the  latter  to  the  wild 
wanderings  of  gloomy  fuperftition ;  to  the 
frightful  confequences  of  affociated  folly,  igno- 
rance, and  vice.  The  effects  were  fuch  as 
might  be  expected ;  the  people  degenerated 
into  the  groffeft  Polytheifim  ;*  immoralities  of 
the  impureft  nature  were  univerfally  praftifed 

*  JDeorum  maxime  Mercurium  colunt,  cui  certis  diebus 
humanis  quoque  hoftiis  litarc  fas  habent. — Tacit,  dc 
Mor.  Germ.  c.  ix. 

Et  quibus  imn}itis  placatur  fanguine  diro 
fentates,  horrenfque  feris  altaribus  Hefus, 
Et  Taranif  Scythicae  non  mitior  ara  Dianae. 

I  ucan.  lib.  i. 

N  amongft 


90  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

amongft  them  ;*  and  they  hefitated  not  at  ap- 
peafing  their  multifarious  deities  by  human  fa- 
crifices.t 

Such  was  the  ftate  of  religion  in  the  Ifle 
of  Wight  when  the  Romans  arrived  there  ;  a 
fyftem  which  it  would  be  one  of  their  firft 
objefts  to  overturn,  for  they  wifely  concluded 
that  whilft  its  priefts  retained  that  dominion 
over  the  minds  of  the  people,  which  the  terrors 
of  their  do£trine  had  acquired  to  them,  patient 
fubmiffion,  quiet  government,  and  public  order 
could  never  be  expected.  They  therefore 
(with  refpeft  to  Britain]  departed  from  their 
eftablifhed  maxim,  of  adopting  the  deities  of  the 
conquered  nations,  and  never  ceafed  from  re- 
ligious perfecution,  till  not  a  veftige  of  Druidifm 
remained.  + 

*  Uxores  habent  deni  duodenique  inter  fe  communes, 
et  maxime  fratres  cum  fratribus,  et  parentes  cum  li- 
beris. — Catfar,  p.  89. 

t  Caefar,  p.  1 20. 
%  Tacit.  Ann.  lib.   XIV.  c.  xxx. 

The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLK    OF    WIGHT.  91 

The  fplendid  and  motley,  but  more  humane 
religion  of  Rome,  was  now  introduced  into  the 
Ifle  of  Wight;  and  we  may  fuppofe  fome  tem- 
ples would  neceflarily  be  reared  there,  by  a 
people,  who  animated  every  virtue  and  vice, 
every  paffion  and  attribute  of  the  mind,  and 
even  every  abftracled  idea,  into  a  living  divinity. 

But  the  happy  period  now  approached, 
when  the  refulgence  of  the  Gofpel  was  to  dif- 
perfe  the  moral  darknefs  of  the  Britifh  em- 
pire ;  to  illuminate  the  underftandings,  and 
purify  the  hearts  of  thofe,  who  had  hitherto 
been  wrapped  in  the  gloom  of  Pagan  fuper- 
flition.  Towards  the  conclufion  of  the  firft 
century  after  our  Saviour's  birth,  the  religion 
of  Chrift  was  received  in  England,  and  in  the 
courfe  of  a  few  years,  traverfed  a  great  part 
of  the  Southern  coaft ;  fo  that  we  may  fairly 
conclude,  by  the  beginning  of  the  fecond  cen- 
tury, the  bleffings,  advantages,  and  comforts 
of  Chriflianity  were  offered  to,  and  accepted 
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight. 

When,  however,  this  diftricl  yielded  to  the 

fury  of  a   new  invader,  and  became    the   ac- 

N  2  quifition 


93  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

quifition  of  the  Saxons,  it  changed  its  religion 
with  its  inhabitants,  and  once  more  witneffed 
the  follies  of  Paganifm. 

The  religion  of  the  Saxons  was  that  of  a 
barbarous,  fierce,  and  fenfual  people  •  grofs  and 
gloomy.  Their  deities  were  clothed  with  ter- 
rors and  vengeance,  and  only  to  be  appeafed 
by  the  blood  of  human  offerings.  The  fancied 
pleafures  of  Odin's  Hall  too,  the  feat  of  the 
departed  warrior,  were  fuch  as  fuited  the  de- 
praved conceptions  of  an  illiterate,  unenlightened 
people,  whofe  fole  delights  were  feafting,  {laugh- 
ter, and  the  chace.  In  this  manfion  of  happi- 
nefs,  the  chief,  who  perifhed  in  battle,  quaffed 
his  favorite  ale  from  the  fkulls  of  his  enemies.* 
He  appeafed  his  hunger  with  the  fat  of  the 
inexhauftible  wild  boar  Serimncr,  which  was 
renewed,  as  foon  as  carved  from  the  immortal 
animal. t  Again  he  experienced  the  extacy  of 

*  In  craniis  inimicorum  brevi  bibam  in  praeflantis 
Odini  aula. — Epiced.  Reg.  Lodbrog  apud  Bartholin. 

•f  Mallet's  Northern  Antiquities,  vol.  II.   Edda,  Fable 

the 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  93 

the  chace  in  the  purfuit  of  airy  ftags;+  and 
had  the  daily  felicity  of  mingling  in  battle, 
and  falling,  together  with  his  opponent,  tranf- 
fixed  by  mutual  wounds.}  A  death,  however, 
which  was  only  to  be  temporary;  for  when 
dinner  was  announced,  the  fpiritual  forms  of 
the  flaughtered  warriors  were  once  more  ani- 
mated ;  they  again  mounted  their  fteeds,  and 
rode  unhurt  into  Valhalla,  where  frefh  recruits 
of  fat  and  ale  invited  them  to  the  diurnal  de- 
bauch.* . 

Thus  vicious,  wild,  and  abfurd,  were  the 
religious  fancies  of  our  Saxon  anceftors^  be- 
fore the  rays  of  Chriftianity  had  enlightened 
their  darkling  reafon,  and  purified  their  grofs 
conceptions. 

It  muft  be  confeficd,  however,  that  depraved 
as  thefe  notions  were,  they  were  probably  the 

|  Offian.  v.   I.  p.  54. 
§   Mallet's   North.   Antiq.     ut  fupra. 

*  InH-anti  vero  prandii  tempori  omnes  incolumes  in 
aulam  equitant,  et  ad  potandum  confident.  Edda, 
Mythog.  xxxv.  Apud  Mallet,  ut  fupra. 

foundation 


94  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT: 

foundation  of  that  enthufiaftic  valor  and  con- 
tempt of  death,  which  ftrongly  marked  their 
character,  and  rendered  their  conqueft  of  Britain 
complete.  Men  who  could  firmly  perfuade 
themfelves,  that  deftruclion  in  the  field  of  battle 
would  be  followed  by  an  endlefs  fruition  of  de- 
light, would  rather  court,  than  fhun  the  enemy's 
fword.  Their  religious  prejudices  would  teach 
them  to  defpife  danger  in  all  its  Ihapes,  and  con- 
vert death,  which  moft  other  fyftems  of  religion 
involve  with  terrors,  into  a  defirable  event — a 
paffport  to  immortality  and  joy.* 

Towards  the  latter  end  of  the  feventh  century, 
the  Ifle  of  Wight  was  once  more  liberated  from 
Pagan  fuperftition  ;  though  the  circumftances  of 
its  converfion  to  Chriftianity  were  fomewhat 
harfh  and  cruel.  Bede  thus  relates  the  parti- 
ticulars :  "  As  foon  as  Ceadwalla  had  poffeffed 

*   Certe   populi  quos  defpicit   Arftos 
Felices  errore  fuo !    quos  ille  timorum 
Maximus  baud  urget  lethi   metus ;  inde  rucndi 
In  ferrum  mens  prona  viris,   animaeque  capaces 
Mortis ;  et  ignavum   rediturac    parcere  vitae. 

Lucan,  Pharf.  lib.  I. 

himfelf 


HISTORY    OF  -THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  95 

himfelf  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Geviflii,  he  took 
alfo  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  which  hitherto  (i.  £.  fmce 
it  had  been  in  the  polTeflion  of  the  Saxons)  had 
been  devoted  to  idolatry.  He  formed  a  refolu- 
tion  to  maffa,cre  all  its  inhabitants,  and  place  in 
their  room  people  of  his  own  province,  binding 
himfelf  by  a  vow,  (though  he  himfelf  was  not  yet 
converted  to  Chriftianity,)  if  he  gained  the  ifland, 
to  devote  a  fourth  part  of  it,  and  its  fpoils  to  the 
Lord.  This  he  performed,  by  granting  it  to 
Bifhop  Wilfred,  who  happened  to  be  here  at  the 
time  from  his  own  country.  The  extent  of  this 
ifland,  according  to  the  eftimation  of  the  Englifh, 
ist  equal  to  the  fupport  of  one  thoufand  two  hun- 
dred families.  The  Bifhop  had  the  land  of  three 
hundred  given  him.  This  portion  he  committed 
to  one  of  his  clergy,  named  Bernwin,  his  fitter's 
fon,  allowing  him  a  prieft,  named  ffildila,  to 
inftrufcl  and  baptize  all  that  offered  themfelves. 
I  muft  not  here  omit,  that  among  the  firft  fruits 
of  thofe  who  were  faved  by  their  faith  here,  two 
infant  brothers  ofArvandus,  king  of  the  ifland,  ob- 
tained the  crown  of  martyrdom,  by  the  fpecial 

grace 


96  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

grace  of  God.  On  the  enemy's  approach  they 
efcaped  out  of  the  ifland,  and  were  conveyed  to 
the  adjoining  country,  where  being  conducted  to 
the  place  called  Ad  Lapidemf  and  thinking  there 
to  conceal  themfelves  from  the  victorious 
monarch,  they  were  betrayed,  and  ordered  to  be 
put  to  death.  A  certain  abbot  and  prieft  named 
Cynbreth,  who  had  a  monaftery  not  far  off,  at  a 
place  called  Reodford,t  or  the  Ford  of  Reeds, 
hearing  of  it,  came  to  the  king  (who  was  concealed 
in  the  fame  neighbourhood,  to  have  his  wounds 
dreffed,  which  he  had  received  in  battle  in  the  Ifle 
of  Wight,)  and  befought  him  that  if  the  lads  muft 
die,  they  might  firft  receive  Baptifm.  The  king 
granted  his  requeft ;  and  he  inftru&ing  them  in 
the  word  of  truth,  and  warning  them  in  the  foun- 
tain of  life,  fecured  their  admiflion  into  the  king- 

*  Probably,  Stone,  a  manor  in  the  parifh  of  Fawley  ; 
near  the  fea  fhore,  and  immediately  oppofite  the  Ifle  of 
Wight. 

+  The  ancient  name  of  Red-bridge  ;  where,  in  the 
Saxon  times  was  a  religious  houfe.  — Tanner's  Not. 
Monaftica. 

dom 


HISTORY   OF    THK    ISLE    OF    WIGHJ.  97 

dom  of  Heaven.  When  the  executioner  came, 
they  gladly  fubmitted  to  temporal  death,  by  which 
they  doubted  not  to  pafs  to  eternal  life.  In  this 
manner,"  continues  Bede,  "  after  all  the  pro- 
vinces of  Britain  had  embraced  Chriftianity,  the 
Ifle  of  Wight  received  it  alfo."* 

*  Bede,  lib.  VI.  16.  Cough's  Camden,  vol.  I.  p.  124. 


O  CHAP. 


HISTORY    Of    THE    IbLE    OF     WIGHT. 


CHAP.    II. 


OF     THE     RELIGIOUS     FOUNDATIONS     IN     THE. 
ISLE     OF     WIGHT. 

AT  is  feldom  found  that  any  religion  receives 
improvement  from  time ;  but  on  the  contrary, 
that  as  it  gains  age  it  acquires  corruption. 
Being  an  univerfal  concern,  it  is  in  the  hands 
of  all;  and  the  follies  and  fuperftitions  of  fome, 
the  vices  and  prejudices  of  others,  will,  in  the 
natural  courfe  of  things,  loon  vitiate  and  deform 
it.  Such  was  the  cafe  with  the  pureft,  fimpleft, 
and  beft  of  all  religions;  and  Chri/lianity  in  a 
very  few  ages  after  the  apoftolical  times,  had, 
by  the  ignorance  or  perverfenefs  of  its  profef- 
fors,  been  ftripped  of  almoft  all  thofe  divine 
graces,  which  adorned  it  when  firft  promulgated 


HISTORY    OF    TH&    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  99 

to  mankind.  Errors  innumerable,  both  in 
doftrine  .  and  praftice,  darkened  the  whole 
Chriftian  world.  Monftrous  and  impious  ab 
furdities  difgraced  its  worfhip.  The  fpirit  of 
religion  entirely  evaporated,  and  rifelefs  ridicu- 
lous ceremonies  were  fubftituted  in  the  room  of 
real  piety.*  In  this  ftate  of  religious  depravity, 

*  The  following  is  the  pifture  of  a  good  chrijlian,  in 
the  feventh  century,  as  drawn  by  a  faint  of  that  age; 
by  which  we  difcover  that,  in  the  opinions  of  thofe 
times,  a  man  might  be  deemed  extremely  pious,  and 
reckon  himfelf  fure  of  heaven,  without  the  trouble  of 
fulfilling  one  angle  duty  towards  God  or  his  neighbour. 
"  Bonus  Chriftianus  eft  qui  ad  ecclefiam  frequenter 
venit,  et  oblationem,  quae  in  altari  Deo  offeratur, 
exhibet ;  qui  de  fruftibus  fuis  non  guftat,  nifi  prius  Deo 
^liquid  ofFerat ;  qui,  quoties  fanftas  folemnitates  ad- 
veniunt,  ante  dies  plures  caftitatem  etiam  cum  propria 
uxore,  nt  fecura  confcientia  Domini  altare  accedere 
nofiit ;  qui,  poftremo,  fymbolum  vel  orationem  Domini- 
ram  numeriter  tenet.  Redimite  animas  veftras  de  poena, 
dum  habetis  in  poteftate  remedia :  oblationes  et  decimas 
ecclefiac  ofFerte ;  luminaria  fan£tis  locis,  juxta  quod 
habetis,  exhibete  ;  ad  ecclefiam  quoque  frequentius  con- 
venite  ;  fanftorum  patrocinia  humiliter  expetite  :  quod 
ii  obfen'averitis,  fecuri  in  die  judicii  ante  tribunal  aeterni 
judicjs  venientes,  dicetis,  '  Da,  Domine,  quia  dedimus,' 
&c." — Vita  Sanfti  Eligii  in  Dacherii  Spicileg.  Vet. 
Sqrip.  vol.  II, 

O  2  the 


100  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

% 

the  obligations  of  morality  would  of  courfe  be 
but  little  attended  to  ;  and  in  fa6l  we  find,  that, 
during  the  middle  ages,  as  they  are  called,  (from 
the  ninth  to  the  twelfth  century,  when  this  mantle 
of  mental  darknefs  was  moft  clofely  drawn 
over  Chriftendom)  the  different  offices,  relations, 
and  duties  of  life  were  lefs  underftood,  and  worfe 
fulfilled,  than  at  any  other  period  of  time. 
During  this  gloomy  interval,  many  ftrange  opi- 
nions arofe,  and  amongft  the  reft,  that  the  prayers 
of  others  might  be  as  efficacious  in  averting  the 
wrath  of  Heaven  from  a  finner,  as  his  own  devo- 
tions ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  it  was  poflible  to  be 
pious  by  proxy.  A  principle  like  this,  which  re- 
conciled temporal  licentioufnefs  with  eternal  fe- 
licity, and  permitted  a  free  fcope  to  the  paffions 
without  annexing  the  terrors  of  future  punifli- 
ment  to  their  indulgence,  met  with  a  welcome 
reception ;  and  finners  of  affluence  and  rank 
immediately  began  founding  religious  houfes  for 
the  reception  of  thofe  who  were  thus  to  be  their 
proxies  in  the  works  of  prayer  and  godlinefs. 
Hence  arofe  the  numerous  monafteries  which 

\vere 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  101 

were  thickly  fprinkled  in  every  country  through- 
out the  Chriftian  world,  before  the  clofe  of  the 
feventh  century ;  and  for  feveral  ages  afterwards 
increafed  with  a  rapidity  only  to  be  accounted 
for  by  the  natural  of  the  opinions  which  gave 
them  birth  originally. 

The  Normans,  a  fierce  and  profligate 
people,  were  deeply  tinftured  with  thefe  fu- 
pedtitions  and  delufive  notions ;  and  as  foon 
as  they  had  acquired  England,  began  with 
all  expedition,  founding  abbies  and  monaf- 
teries  throughout  the  kingdom.  William  Fitz- 
Ofborne,  on  whom  the  Ifle  of  Wight  was 
beftowed,  followed  the  example  of  his  country- 
men, and  founded  the  priory  of  Carifbrook. 
The  hiftory  of  this  religious  houfe  is  very  concife. 
Baldwin  de  Redvers,  Earl  of  Devon,  in  the 
reign  of  King  Stephen,  grants  the  church  of 
Carifbrook  (after  the  death  of  two  perCbns 
mentioned  in  his  deed)  to  the  abbot  and  con- 
vent of  Lyra  (in  Normandy),  to  be  freely  by 
them  enjoyed,  either  as  demefne,  or  they 
might  fend  monks  to  the  faid  church. 

A  grant 


102  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

A  grant  and  confirmation  of  William  dc 
Vernun,  in  the  reign  of  king  John,  occurs, 
by  which  the  church  of  Carifbrook  is  to  re- 
ceive two  marks  per  annum,  out  of  the  toll 
of  the  ifland;  on  the  condition  of  the  monks 
performing  daily  fervice  in  the  chapel  of 
Newport. 

A  general  charter  of  confirmation  ratifies 
to  the  abbot  and  convent  of  Lyra  in  Nor- 
mandy, the  church  of  Carifbrook,  with  divers 
other  chapels  and  churches  in  the  ifland. 

Edward  III.  when  he  made  his  ill-founded 
claims  to  the  crown  of  France,  feized  upon 
Carifbrook,  and  all  its  churches,  as  an  alien 
priory ;  and  granted  it  to  the  abbey  of  Mont 
Grace,  in  Yorkfhire.  Henry  IV.  however, 
immediately  on  coming  to  the  crown,  reftored 
it  with  many  others  to  the  former  pofleflbrs. 

Henry  V.  again  refumed  it,  and  granted  it 
to  the  monaftery  of  Shene  in  Surry,  where 
it  continued  till  the  diffolution.  In  the  reign 
of  Henry  VIII.  this  monaftery  was  leafed  to 
Sir  James  V/orfley ;  from  the  widow  of  whofe 

fon, 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  103 

fon,  it  came  to  Sir  Francis  Walfingham.  Sir 
Thomas  Fleming  afterwards  made  a  purchafe 
of  it;  and  through  his  defcendents  it  devolved 
to  the  prefent  poflefTors;  the  vicarage  remain- 
ing in  the  crown  till  the  time  of  Charles  I. 
who  gave  it  to  Queen's  College,  Oxford.  The 
chapels  of  Northwood,  Weft  Cowes,  and  New- 
port, belong  to  the  church  of  Carifbrook.* 

The  abbey  of  Quarr,  or  De  Quarreirat  as 
it  was  anciently  called,  owes  its  origin  to 
Baldwin  Earl  of  Devon,  who  in  the  thirty- 
fecond  year  of  Henry  I.  gave  the  manor  of 
Arreton  to  Geoffry,  abbot  of  Savigny  in  Nor- 
mandy, for  the  building  of  this  monaftery, 
which  was  dedicated  to  St.  Mary.  This  abbey 
appears  to  have  been  richly  endowed,  and 
that  too,  by  perfonages  of  the  firft  confequence  ; 
feveral  of  whom  made  it  the  place  of  their 
interment.  Amongft  thefe  were  its  founder, 
Earl  Baldwin,  Adeliza  his  countefs,  and  Henry 

*  Sir  Rich.  Worfley's  Hid.  p.  163,  et  infra. 

t  Probably  from  its  neighbouring  ftone  quarries.  It 
was  of  the  Ciftertian  order. 

their 


104  HISTORY    OF    THE     ISLE    OF   WIGHT. 

their  fon  ;  William  de  Vernun,  who  bequeathed 
three  hundred  pounds  (a  prodigious  fum  in 
the  thirteenth  century)  for  the  ere&ion  of  a 
monument  to  himfelf,  his  lady;  and  the  lady 
Cicely,  fecond  daughter  of  Edward  IV. 

In  the  fifteenth  century  the  lands  of  Quarr 
Abbey,  were  taxed  as  follows: 

"  De  Redditu  affis.  taxat.  ad              -  viij  marks. 

**  Apud  Newnham  ad  xv  m. 

*'  Apud  Sambele  (Combley)  ad  xvj  m. 

"  Apud  Arreton,  ad                 -  xviij  m. 

"  Virga  de  Bykeburie  (Bugbury)  ad  lx  s. 

"  Apud  HafTeley,  ad                             ,  xviij  m. 

"  Apud  Lovecomb,  ad                        -  xij  m. 

"  Apud  Staplehurft  et  Claybrooke  -  xl  s. 

"  Apud  Roweburg                               -  1  s. 

"  Apud  Schete                                       .  vij  m. 

"  Apud  Shalcomb  &   Compton         -  x  m. 

"  Apud  Beneftede                                 -  xl  s. 

"  Apud  Foxore                        -             -  Iviij  s. 

"  Apud  Schrob  &  Goy,  ad                -  xlij  s. 
"  De  duobus  molendinis  apud  x1'  ecclefiam  xij  s. 

"  De  4  Molendinis  in  Ins.  Vefta      -  xv  s. 

"De 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


"  De  Proventu  tannaria          -  .  xl  s. 

XX 

"  Sm.  iiij.  x\'}!.  iijj.  iiij</.  Inde  decima  ix/.  xijj.  iiij^." 


After  the  diffolution  of  Quarr  Abbey  it  was 
purchafed  by  a  Mr.  George  Mills  of  South- 
ampton, who,  for  the  fake  of  its  materials,  fo 
completely  dilapidated  it,  that  very  few  of  the 
remains  have  reached  our  time. 

The  fituation  of  this  religious  houfe  is  a  very 
pleafing  and  fecluded  one ;  commanding  a 
charming  view  of  the  water,  and  deeply  em- 
bofomed  in  woods. 

Towards  the  clofe  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
the  oratory  of  Burton  was  founded  by  John  de 
Infula,  Re&or  of  Shalfleet,  and  Thomas  de 
Winton,  Reclor  of  Godfhill ;  and  regulated  by 
the  following  ftatutes  : 

1.  That  there  mall  be  fix  chaplains  and  one 
clerk  to  officiate  both  for  the  living  and   the 
dead  under  the  rules  of  St.   Auguftine. 

2.  That  one  of  thefe  {hall  be  prefented  to 
the   Bifhop   of  Winchefter,    to    be    the    arch- 

*    SirR.  WorQey,  176. 

P  prieft ; 


106          HISTORY    OF    THE    1BLL    OF    WIGHT. 


prieft;  to  whom  the  reft  mall  take  an  oath  of 
obedience. 

3.  That  the  arch-prieft  fhall  be   chofen  by 
the   chaplains  theref  refiding,  who  fhall  prefent 
him    to  the    bifhop    within   twenty   days    aftei' 
any  vacancy  fhall  happen. 

4.  That  they  fhall  be  fubjeft  to  the  immediate 
authority  of  the  bifhop. 

5.  When  any  chaplain  fhall  die,  his  good* 
fhall   remain  to  the  oratory. 

6.  They  fhall   have  only  one   mefs,    with   a 
pittance,  at  a  meal,    excepting  on  the  greater 
feftivals,  when  they  may   have   three    mefTes. 

7.  They    mail    be    diligent  in    reading  and 
praying. 

8.  They  fhall   not  go  beyond  the  bounds  of 
trie    oratory,    without   licence    from  the    arch- 
prieft. 

9.  Their  habit  (hall   be  of  one  colour,  either 
black   or    blu^;    they    fhall    be    cloathed  pallio 
Hibernienf?,  de  nigra  boneia  cum  pileo. 

10.  The  arch-prieft  fhall  fit  at  the  head  of 
the   table;  next  to  him  thofe  who  have  cele- 
brated 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          I OJ 

brated  magnam  mifTam ;  then  the  prieft  of  St. 
Mary;  next  the  prieft  of  the  Holy  Trinity; 
and  then  the  prieft  who  fays  mafs  for  the  dead. 

11.  The  clerk  fhall  read  fomething  edifying 
to  them  while  they  dine. 

12.  They  fhall  deep  in    one   room. 

ig.  They  fhall  ufe  a  fpecial  prayer  for  their 
benefaftors. 

14.  They  fhall  in  all  their  ceremonies,  and 
itt  tinkling  the  bell,  follow  the  ufe  of  Sarum. 

15.  The  arch-prieft  alone  fhall   have  charge 
of  the  bufinefs  of  the  houfc. 

16.  They  fhall.    all    of   them,    at  their  ad- 
miffion  into  the  houfe,  fwear  to  the  obfervance 
of  theTe  ftatutes. 

As  foon  as  the  fociety  was  eftablifhed,  the 
founders  granted  the  patronage  of  the  oratory 
to  John,  Bifhop  of  Winchefter,  and  his  fuc- 
ceflbrs.  that  he  might  become  a  prote6lor  and 
defender  of  them,  the  arch-prieft,  and  his 
fellow-chaplains. 

In  the  Eighteenth  of  Henry  VI.  this  religious 

houfe  was  entirely  furrendercd  into  the  hand? 

P  2  of 


108         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

of  the  Bifhop  of  Winchefter;  and,  together  with 
its  lands,  granted  to  Winchefter  College ;  under 
which  fociety,  the  file  and  demefnes  of  the 
oratory  are  ftill  held.* 

There  appears  to  have  been  a  fmall  priory 
at  St.  Helen's,  belonging  to  fome  abbey  in 
France,  of  the  Cluniac  order.  It  is  fuppofed 
to  have  been  founded  foon  after  the  conqueft ; 
but  by  whom  is  not  known.  It  was  one  of 
the  alien  priories  given  by  Henry  VI.  to  his 
college  at  Eton,  of  whofe  pofleflions  it  is  {till 
a  part.t 

The  Priory  of  Appuldurcombe  was  founded 
and  made  a  cell  to  the  Abbey  of  Montfburg 
in  Normandy,  by  Richard  de  Redvers,  founder 

*  Worfley,  177   et  infra. 

•f  There  was  a  fmall  church  at  St.  Helen's  built  by  the 
convent,  who  fupplied  it  from  their  own  community,  till 
fuch  time  as  the  canons  required  refident  vicars.  In 
Cardinal  Beaufort's  valuation  the  church  is  rated  at  thirty 
marks.  The  old  church  was  fituated  fo  near  the  fea, 
that  the  waves  carried  off  part  of  the  building.  A  brief 
was  obtained  in  1719  and  a  new  church  erefted  in  a 
more  convenient  fpot. — St.  Helen's  is  a  vicarage  ;  pa- 
fron,  Eton  College.  Church  dedicated  to  St.  Helena. 

Of 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          1O$ 

of  that  abbey.  The  latter  monaftery  placed  a 
prior  and  two  monks  here,  to  receive  the 
profits  of  their  lands.  King  Henry  IV.  du- 
ring a  war  with  France,  prefented  the  priory 
and  its  demefnes,  which  were  Appuldurcombe, 
Sandford,  and  Week,  to  the  nuns  without 
Aldgate,  London;  who  afterwards  obtained  a 
confirmation  of  the  lands  from  the  abbey  of 
Montfburgh.  The  Bilhop  of  Winchefter  being 
ordered,  tempore  Edward  III.  and  during  the 
war  with  France,  to  remove  the  religious  be- 
longing to  the  alien  monasteries,  to  Hyde 
Abbey  near  Winchefter;  the  prior  and  two 
monks  were  fent  thither  from  Appuldurcombe.* 

The  priory  of  St.  Crofs,  near  Newport,  was 
a  cell  to  the  abbey  of  Tyrone  in  France,  and 
probably  an  hofpital.  Its  founder  is  unknown. 
Being  an  alien  priory,  it  was  feized  by  the 
crown,  and  given  to  the  college  of  Winchefter, 
which  ftill  poffeffes  it. 

In  the  parifh  of  Northwood,  alfo,  was  a 
religious  houfe,  confiding  of  "  Brothers  and 

*    \Vorfley,  181. 

Sifters 


110         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

Sifters  of  the  Fraternity  of  St.  John  the 
Baptift ;"  and  under  the  control  and  regulation 
of  certain  officers  called  Senefchallesjor  ftewards. 
It  was  founded  at  the  latter  end  of  Henry  the 
Seventh's  reign,  and  fupprefled  by  his  fucceffor. 
There  were  alfo  feveral  other  fmall  charitable 
and  religious  foundations  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  of 
many  of  which  fcarcely  more  than  the  names 
remain.  They  were  as  follow  : 

1.  A  chapel  dedicated  to  St.    Auftin,  be- 
longing to  Carifbrook  priory,  for  lepers. 

2.  A  chapel  for  the  infirm,  licenfed  by  the 
bifhop,     who    gave    the    appointment    of   the 
chaplain  to  the  abbot  of  Lyra. 

3.  A   chapel  was  built  at  Knighton,  in  the 
year  1301,  by  Sir  Ralph  de  Gorges,   Lord  of 
that  manor;   and  was  often  prefented  to  by  his 
family. 

4.  The    Lifle  family,   Lords  of  Appleford, 
erected  a  chapel  on  that  manor.     Sir  John  Lifle 
prefented  fo  it  in  the  year  1331.  and  Sir  Bar- 
tholemew  Lifle  in-  the  year  1344. 

5.  Walter 


H1STOP.Y    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  Ill 

5.  Walter  de  Godyton  founded   St.  Cathe- 
rine's, a  chapel  on  Chale  Down,  in  the  year 


6.  The  chantry  at  Gatcombe  was  a  chapel  in 
the    church    at    Whitwell,    dedicated    to    St. 
Radigund;  founder  unknown. 

7.  Brennew  was  a  fmall  chapel  in  the  parifh 
of  Frefhwater.    In  a  valuation  of  the  fpiritualities 
in  the  Diocefe  of  Winchefter,  made  in  the  time 
of  Cardinal   Beaufort,  this  chapel  is  taxed  at 
one  mark. 

8«  Woolverton,  -\       Thefe  three  chapels  be- 

9.  Middleton,     I  longed  to  the  lordfhip  of 

10.  La  Wode,     |    Bimbridge,  wherein  they 
were  fituated  ;   which,  with  the  advowfon  of  the 
chapels,  were  granted  away  in  the  forty-fixth  year 
of  Edward  III.      They  do  not  appear  to  have 
been  endowed. 

u.  A  chantry  at  Newport,  dedicated  to  the 
Virgin  Mary,  and  founded  by  John  Garfton  of 
that  town. 

12.  A  chapel  de  SanQo  Licio,  mentioned  in 
Cardinal  Beaufort's  valuation,  but  exempted  as 
infignificant. 

We 


11*'          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

We  {hall  conclude  this  fummary  of  the 
Ecclefiaftical  Hiftory  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  with  a 
concife  account  of  its  exifting  churches.* 

Brading  church,  the  oldeft  in  the  ifland,  was 
built  in  the  Saxon  times.  Its  advowfon  being 
contefted  at  law,  in  the  thirty-feventh  year  of 
Henry  III.  between  the  abbot  of  Wenlock, 
and  Walter  Lifle  and  Maud  his  wife,  the  point 
was  tried,  and  a  decifion  patted  in  favor  of  the 
convent. 

Shortly  after  this  event,  the  prior  and  con- 
vent of  Wenlock  being  difturbed  in  the  pof- 
feflion  of  the  advowfon,  refigned  it  to  the 
Bifhop  of  Winchefter;  in  which  fee  it  con- 
tinued till  the  epifcopacy  of  John  de  Pontiflera; 
who  at  the  requeft  of  Edward  I.  appropriated 
the  church  to  the  convent  of  Breamore.  At 
the  diffolution  it  was  granted  to  Henry  Court- 
ney, Marquis  of  Exeter ;  but  on  his  attainder, 
was  given  to  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.t 

*    Sir  Richard  Worfley's  Hi  ft.  p.  191  to  p.  274. 

•f  Year-tenths  of  this  vicarage  are  2!.  8s.  It  is  dedi- 
cated to  St.  Mary. 

The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  113 

The  church  of  Yaverland  was  built  towards 
the  clofe  of  the  thirteenth  century,  probably 
by  one  of  the  Ruflel  family.  It  pays  a  fmall 
penfion  to  the  mother  church  of  Brading.  It 
is  called  a  chapel  in  Cardinal  Beaufort's  valu- 
ation, and  exempted  from  taxation  on  account 
of  its  inability.* 

The  chapel  at  Shanklin  is  annexed  to  Bon- 
church.  The  inhabitants  of  this  pariih,  how- 
ever, bury  their  dead  in  that  of  Brading,  and 
pay  an  annual  penfion  of  ten  fhillings  to  the 
Re£tor  of  Brading,  as  an  acknowledgment  for 
the  fame.  The  chapel  was  built  and  endowed 
by  one  of  the  Lifle  family. t 

The  parifh  church  of  St.  Boniface,  or  Bon- 
church,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  was  built  in 
the  early  Anglo-Norman  times;  but  when,  is 
uncertain.* 

*  Patron  of  this  reftory  is  the  Rev.  Mr.  Wright ; 
the  valuation  in  the  King's  books,  61.  6.  io.J ;  and  its 
year-tenths,  ias.  8£. 

+  The   patrons  of  this  vicarage  are  Hill,  Efq. 

and  Mr.   Popham. 

J  Patrons,  Kill,  Efq.  and  Mr.  Popham;  year- 

tf.nths,  as.  81. 

Q  The 


114  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

The  church  of  New-church  is  a  very  an- 
cient fabric,  built  prior  to  the  general  Domef- 
day  furvey ;  William  Fitz-Ofborne  on  receiving 
the  I  fie  of  Wight,  prefented  this  church,  and 
five  others,  to  the  abbey  of  Lyra  in  Normandy, 
which  he  founded.  It  continued  part  of  the 
poffeffions  of  that  monaftery,  till  the  duchy  of 
Normandy  was  loft  to  England,  when  it  was 
given  to  Beaulieu  Abbey  in  the  New  ,Foreft.£ 

The  parim  of  New-church  includes  within 
it  the  village  of  Ryde,  where  there  is  a  chapel, 
built  by  Thomas  Player,  Efq.  in  1719;  who 
charged  the  manor  with  an  annual  rent  of  ten 
pounds,  payable  to  the  Vicar  of  New-church,  to 
officiate  therein,  or  provide  a  minifter.* 

The  church  of  Whitwell  is  properly  a 
chapel  belonging  to  Godfhill ;  but  having  fe- 
parate  parochial  rates,  it  is  deemed  a  diftinB 

|  This  is  a  reftory  ;  church  dedicated  to  St.  John 
the  Baptift  ;  united  to  Cari (brook. 

*  Adjoining  this  parifti  is  that  of  St.  Lawrence,  the 
church  of  which  is  the  fmallefl  in  the  ifland.  It  is 
*  redory  ;.  patron  Sir  R.  Worflry.  Bart. 

parifla. 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  11^ 

parifh.  The  chapel  of  St.  Radegund,  which  is 
now  the  chancel  of  the  church,  was  built 
and  endowed  by  De  Eftur,  Lord  of  Gatcombe. 
The  Reftor  of  Gatcombe  receives  the  rent  of 
the  lands  with  which  the  chantry  was  endowed, 
for  which  he  ought  lo  officiate  in  the  church 
at  certain  times  during  ihe  year.t 

The  parifh  church  of  Niton,  formerly 
Niweton,  and  now  commonly  Crab-Niton, 
was  one  of  the  churches  given  by  William 
Fitz-Ofborne  to  his  abbey  of  Lyra.  It  came 
to  the  crown  at  the  diflblution,  and  was  pre- 
fented  by  Charles  I.  (with  five  other  churches 
in  Hampfhire)  to  Queen's  College,  Oxford,  in 
exchange  for  their  plate.* 

Godfhill  church  is  an  ancient  Sa'xon  edifice, 
and  was  one  of  the  churches  beftowed  by 
William  Fitz-Ofborne  on  the  abbey  of  Lyra. 
It  afterwards  became  the  property  of  Sheene 
Convent  in  Surry;  and  is  now  jointly  veiled 

t  This  is  a  vicarage ;  patrons,  Queen's  Coll.  Oxford. 

*  It  is  a  reftory ;  dedicated  to  St.  John  Baptift ;  iw 
King's  books  20!.  7.  i  ;  year-tenth  -I.  o.  8'. 

Q  2  i« 


Il6  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

in  Queen's  College,  Oxford;  and  the  Worfley 
family.* 

The  parifh  church  of  Arreton  was  inclu- 
ded in  the  fix  churches  given  by  William  Fitz- 
Ofborne  to  the  abbey  of  Lyra.  Afterwards 
Baldwin  de  Redvers  beftowed  the  manor  of 
Arreton  together  with  its  church,  on  his  new 
foundation,  Quarr  Abbey;  in  which  they  re- 
mained till  the  diffolution.t 

The  parifh  church  of  Binftead  was  probably- 
built  by  one  of  the  Bifhopsof  Winchefter,  having 
always  belonged  to  that  fee,  and  paid  an  annual 
penfion  of  two  millings  to  the  facrift  of  the 
monaftery  there.  It  is  fubjecled  to  the  reftor 
of  Calbourn,  who  formerly  claimed  archidiaco- 
nal  jurifdiftion  over  Binftead  and  Brixton.J 

The  fmall  parifh  of  Woctton  was  taken  out 
of  Whippingham  parifh  in  the  reign  of  Henry 

*  The  church  is  dedicated  tox  All  Saints ;  its  year- 
tenths  arc  gl.  15.  n.  It  is  a  vicarage. 

+  This  church  is  dedicated  to  St.  George  ;  patron, 
John  Fleming,  Efq.  yeai-tenths.  al.  2. — It  is  a  vicarage. 

j  Binflead  is  a  reftoiy  dedicated  to  the  Holy  Crofs : 
patron,  Bifhop  of  \Vinchelle>.  ^'ear-tenths.  2s.  8?. 

III. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  117 

III.  when  Walter  dc  Infula  built  the  chapel, 
and  endowed  it  with  glebe,  arable,  pafture,  and 
wood  lands;  adding,  at  the  fame  time,  certain 
other  tithes.  This  church  was  afterwards  con- 
fumed  by  fire,  when  the  one  now  Handing  was 
creeled  upon  the  fame  file.  Adjoining  to  the 
original  church,  was  a  chapel  dedicated  to  St. 
Edmund  the  King,  which  had  an  independent 
endowment,  and  a  chaplain  diftinft  from  the 
reftor  of  the  church.* 

The  church  of  Northwood  is  a  chapel  of  eafc 
to  Carifbrook,  but,  fince  the  reign  of  Henry 
VIII.  has  enjoyed  all  parochial  privileges,  and 
is  exempted  from  contributing  to  the  repairs  of 
the  mother  church.  When  the  priory  of 
Carifbrook  obtained  the  re6lory,-and  endowed 
the  vicarage,  the  tithes  of  Northwood,  both 
great  and  fmall,  were  afligned  to  the  vicar.  The 

*  Wootton  is  a  reftory  dedicated  to  St.  Edmund. — 
Patron,  Rev.  Mr.  Walton ;  valuation  in  King's  books, 
7!.  16.  o^  >  Year-tenths,  ics.  y4.  Adjoining  to  this 
pavifh  is  that  of  Whippingham  ;  it  is  a  rectory  ;  patron, 
the  King.  Val.  King's  books.  19!.  i.  5'.  Year-tenths, 
»1.  a8.  i*. 

Vicar 


Il8  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF   WIGHT. 

Vicar  of  Carifbrook  is  Reftor  of  Northwood.t 
Northwood  parifh  includes  Weft  Cowes,  the 
chapel  of  which  place  was  creeled  in  1657, 
confecrated  in  1662,  and  endowed  in  1671  by 
Mr.  Richard  Stephens,  with  five  pounds  per 
annum  for  ever.  It  was  farther  endowed  in  the 
year  1679,  by  Bifhop  Morley,  with  twenty 
pounds  per  annum ;  provided  the  inhabitants 
paid  the  minifter  (who  is  always  appointed  by 
them)  an  additional  forty  pounds  per  annum ; 
otherwife  the  faid  endowment  to  be  forfeited 
for  ever. 

Newport  church  is  fuppofed  to  have  been 
erefted  towards  the  latter  end  of  Henry  the 
Second's  reign.  The  inhabitants,  however,  had 
no  burial-place  here  till  the  time  of  Queen 
Elizabeth,  when  they  were  indebted  to  one  of 
the  heavieft  of  God's  vifitations,  for  the  privi- 
lege of  interment.* 

i  The  church  is  dedicated  to  St.  John  the  Baptift. 

*  The  plague  was  fo  heavy  at  Newport,  that  the 
burial-place  of  Carifbrook,  the  mother  church,  was  not 
fufficiently  large  to  receive  the  number  of  the  dead. 

Carifbrook 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  11$ 

Carifbrook  being  the  mother  church,  the 
appointment  of  the  curate  of  Newport  is  ftriBly 
in  the  vicar  of  that  parifh.  But  as  the  ftipend 
paid  to  the  officiating  minifter  arifes  from  a  rate 
levied  on  the  town's-people,  they  feem,  in  juftice, 
entitled  to  have  their  inclination  confulted  in 
the  appointment.  The  prefent  incumbent,  how- 
ever, appears  not  to  be  of  this  opinion;  and 
has  actually  given  a  nomination  contrary  to  the 
wifhes  of  the  parifh.  The  confequence  of 
this  is  an  univerfal  difcontent,  extremely  pre- 
judicial to  the  interefts  of  religion;  for  the 
larger  part  of  the  congregation,  difgufted  at 
having  a  minifter  forced  upon  them,  contrary  to 
their  choice,  have,  for  fome  time  paft,  difcon- 
tinued  their  attendance  on  divine  worfhip. 
Whether  the  pertinacity  of  the  curate  in  holding 
the  appointment  under  thefe  circumftances,  or 
that  of  the  congregation  in  continuing  to  teftify 
their  difguft  in  this  manner,  be  moil  blamable, 
muft  be  left  for  others  to  determine. 

St.  Nicholas  chapel,  in  Carifbrook  caftle,  was 
built  either  by  William  Fitz-Ofborne,  or  his  fon 

Roger, 


120  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

Roger,  Earl  of  Hereford  ;  and  given  by  Baldwin 
de  Redvers  to  Ouarr  Abbey,  together  with  its 
lands.  The  parifh  of  St.  Nicholas  has  no  other 
place  of  worfhip  than  this  chapel,  at  which,  for 
many  years,  no  fervice  has  been  performed; 
hence  its  little  living  is  ^finccurt,  in  the  gift  of  the 
Governor  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight.  The  crown 
pays  for  this  chapel  three  pounds  a  year  to  the 
Vicar  of  Carifbrook,  as  an  acknowledgment  to 
the  mother  church.* 

The  parifh  church  of  Carifbrook  is  a  pile  of 
great  antiquity,  ere&ed  before  the  Domefday 
furvey,  as  appears  by  its  being  mentioned 
therein,  and  called  The  Church  of  the  Manor. 
It  was  formerly  of  much  greater  extent  than  it 
is  at  prefent ;  Sir  Francis  Walfingham  (in  the  ' 
reign  of  Elizabeth)  having  robbed  it  of  its 
chancel.  He  was  led  to  do  this  by  a  parfimony 
not  very  juftifiable;  for,  having  the  leafe  of  the 
priory,  and  by  that  being  obligated  to  repair 
this  part  of  the  edifice,  he  avoided  the  expence 
foon  after  he  became  the  leflee,  by  perfuading 

*  It  is  a  vicarage. — Year-tenths,  145. 

the 


HISTOKY    Ot     T!i::     ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          121 

the  parifhioners  that  the  body  of  the  church 
would  be  fufficiently  large  for  them.  To  his 
perfuafions,  he  added  the  magic  of  one  hun- 
dred marks,  and  by  the  united  force  of  both, 
the  devoted  chancel  fell.*5 

It  does  not  appear  when  Catcombe  church 
was  creeled.  The  manor,  however,  is  as  old 
as  Edward  the  ConfcfTor's  time  ;  to  which  the 
patronage  of  the  church  was  always  annexed. 
The  chantry  called  Cantaria  Manerii  de  Gat- 
combci  was  at  Whitwell,  and  dedicated  to  St. 
Radigund.  The  land  adjoining  to  that  chapel, 
which  was  the'  endowment  of  the  chantry,  is 
efteemed  to  be  in  the  parifh  of  Gatcombe,  and 
pays  a  penfion  to  it  as  the  mother  church.  The 
Vicar  of  Godfhill  officiates  in  the  chapel  of  Whit- 
well,  where  the  Re&or  of  Gatcombe  is  bound 
to  affiil  him;  but  the  diftance  rendering  it  in- 
convenient for  him  to  difcharge  that  duty,  he 

*  This  is  a  vicarage  ;  patron.  Queen's  Coll.  Oxford ; 
valuation  in  King's  books,  23!.  8.  i£.  year-tenths,  si. 
6s.  9|.  Church  dedicated  to  St.  Mary. 

R  pays 


122          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT: 

pays  four  nobles  per  annum  to  the  Vicar  of 
Godfhill  to  perfonn  the  whole.t 

The  church  of  Kingfton  (which  is  the  fmalleft 
parifh  in  the  ifland)  was  built  by  one  of  the 
Kingfton  family,  who  long  poflefled  the  manor. 
They  alfo  appear,  by  the  regifters  of  the  Bifhops 
of  Winchefter,  to  have  enjoyed  the  prefentation 
to  it.* 

Chale  church  was  built  by  Hugh  Vernun, 
in  the  reign  of  Henry  I.  and  dedicated  to 
St.  Andrew.  This  parifh  being  originally  in- 
cluded in  that  of  Carifbrook,  the  prieft  of 
the  latter  claimed  the  new  church  of  Chale 
as  foon  as  it  was  ere&ed ;  a  claim  which  the 
founder  endeavoured  to  difprove.  To  termi- 
nate, however,  all  animofities,  Hugh  Vernun 
agreed  to  aflign  to  the  church  of  Carifbrook  a 
moiety  of  the  glebe  land,  and  tithes  of  burials 

+  This  is  a  reftory  ;  patron,  Edward  Meux  Worflcy, 
Efq.  valuation  in  King's  books,  25!.  18.  9.  year-tenths, 
zl.  it.  1 1. 

*  It  is  a  reftory  ;  patron, Worfley,  Efq.  val.  in 

King's  books,  5!.  6.  8.  year-tenths,  ics.  8. 

and 


HISTORY    Of    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  123 

and  oblations,  excepting  thofe  of  his  own  houfe, 
which  he  referved  entire,  for  maintaining   the 
lervice  and    repairs   of  the    church    of  Chale. 
The  Parfon  of  Chale,  alfo,  was  to  perform  the 
whole  fervice  of  his  church ;  and  on  thefe  con- 
fiderations,  the  Prieft  of  Carifbrook  teftificd  his 
confent  to  the  new  church  having  a  cemetery; 
an  agreement  which  the  Bifhop  of  Winchefter, 
William  Gifford,  confirmed  under  his  anathema.^ 
The  church  of  Shorwell,  (formerly  a  chapel) 
was  built  ihortly  after  the  foundation  of  Carif- 
brook priory ;  and  confirmed  to  it  by  the  char- 
ter of  William  de  Vermin.      It  was  included 
in  the  parifh  of  Carifbrook    till  the   reign   of 
Edward  III.  when  the  inconvenience  of  carry- 
ing its  dead  to  be  buried  fuch  a  diftance,  oc- 
cafioned  its  feparation   from  that   parifh,   and 
having  parochial  rights  of  its  own.+ 

^  It  is  a  re&ory;   patron,  Sir  R.  Worfley,  Bart.  val. 
in  King's  books,  14!.  3.   n£.  year-tenths,   il.  8.  4!. 

|  Shorwell  is  a  reclory ;  valuation   in  King's  books, 
aol.  o.  2~.  year-tenths,  2!.  o.  o|.  dedicated  to  St.  Peter. 

R  2  The 


124         HISTORY    OP    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

The  parilh  of  Brixton  was  taken  out  of 
that  of  Calbourn  by  one  of  the  Bifhops  of 
Winchefter,  who  built  its  church,  and  endowed 
it  with  parochial  privileges.  The  former  rec- 
tory anciently  claimed  archidiaconat  jurifdi&ion 
over  that  of  Brixton,  to  which  the  reftors  of 
the  latter  refu-fing  to  fubmit,  the  conteft  rofe 
to  aclual  violence.*  The  claim,  however,  was 
probably  accommodated  by  the  bifliop,  the  pa- 
tron of  both  churches.t 

Mottefton  church  was  built  in  the  twelfth 
century.  In  the  fourteenth,  we  find  it,  to- 
gether with  the  manor,  in  the  poiTeflion  of  the 
L-angford  family;  for  Dionyfia,  widow  of  Mr 
John  de  Langford.  prefented  to  it  in  1364.  Ed- 
ward Cheke,  Efq.  prefented  to  k  in  1374; 

*  There  was  anciently  a  dean  of  this  ifland,  to  fuper- 
intend  ecclefiarftical  affairs  ;  we  find  alfo,  by  the  regifters' 
of  Winchefter,  that  William  of  Vv'ykeham  fubilituted 
a    fuffragan    bifhop    here,  as  was    afterwards    done    by 
Henry  VIII. 

i  Brixton  is  a  reftory ;  patron,  Bifhop  of  Winchefter ; 
vil.  in  Km-'s  books,  32!.  3.  4.  year-tenths,  3!.  ^.  /. 
Church  ce^icdted  to  St.  Mary. 

and 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          12£ 

and  with  his  defcendents  it  continued  for  above 
three  centuries.* 

Calbourn  church  appears  to  have  had  thirty 
(hillings  from  the  manor  of  that  name,  in  the 
time  of  Edward  the  Confefljrj  a  circumftance 
which  proves  its  remote  antiquity.  The  ad- 
yowfon  of  it,  remained  in  the  fee  of  Winchefter 
till  the  time  of  Edward  I.  who  in  the  twelfth 
year  of  his  reign,  deprived  the  bilhop  of  that 
diocefe  (in  confequence  of  a  perfonal  pique.) 
both  of  the  church  and  manor  of  Calbourn. 
They  were  however  afterwards  returned,  in 
confequence  of  a  heavy  fine  paid  by  the  bilhop 
to  Ed  ward /£ 

There  is  a  chapel  at  Newtown,  a  manor 
within  this  parifh,  which  belongs  to  Calbourn 
church ;  and  the  glebe  with  which  it  is  endowed, 
is  enjoyed  by  the  reftor.  In  the  furvey  of  the 

*  It  is  a  reftory  ;  valuation  in  King's  books,  ill.  16. 
3d.  year-tenths,  il.  3.  -j\.  Dedicated  to,  irt.  Peter  and 
St.  Paul. 

J  It  is  a  re&ory;  patron,  Bi-fhop  of  Winchefter; 
valuation  in  King's  books,  19!.  17.  8j-,  year-tenths, 
il.  19.  9.  Dedicated  to  All  .Sarnts. 

iflanci 


126  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

ifland  taken  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  the 
Parfon  of  Calbourn  is  laid  to  hold  a  grant  of 
forty  acres,  called  Magdalen's  land,  belonging 
to  the  chapel  of  Newtown,  for  which  land  he 
provided  a  reader  for  the  chapel. 

The  church  of  Shalfleet  is  mentioned  in  the 
Domefday  furvey,  and  probably  was  built 
ftiortly  before  that  general  cenfus.  Edward 
III.  granted  it  to  William  Montecute,  Earl  of 
Salifbury;  who  gave  it  to  his  new-founded 
abbey  of  Bifham  in  Berkfhire.  The  impro- 
priation,  after  the  diffolution  of  the  monafteriesj 
was  purchafed  by  Lord  Chief  Juftice  Fleming, 
and  devifed  by  him  to  a  younger  branch  of  his 
family.  It  is  now  in  the  crown,* 

It  is  not  known  at  what  period  the  church  of 
Brook  was  creeled.  Some  years  fince  a  difpute 
occurred  relative  to  the  patronage  of  it,  between 
St.  John's  College,  Cambridge,  which  claimed  it 
as  a  chapel  belonging  to  Frefhwater,  and  the 
JBowerman  family,  who  pofleffed  the  manor  of 
Brook.  The  caufe  was  tried,  and  determined  in 

*  Shalfleet  is  a  vicarage;  year-tenths,   tl.   17.  a|. 

favor 


HISTORY    OF     THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  127 

favor  of  the  latter;   which  family  has  ever  fmce 
prefented  to  it.* 

The  church  of  Thorley  was  probably  built- 
by  Amicia,  Countefs  of  Devon,  who  gave  it 
to  the  priory  of  Chriftchurch,  in  Hampfhire. 
where  it  remained  till  the  difiblution.  It  was 
then  exchanged  (with  other  eftates  of  the 
priory)  with  Thomas  Hopfon,  Efquire,  in  1546, 
for  his  manor  of  Marybone  in  Middlefex.t 

The  prefent  church  of  Yarmouth  was  built  in 
the  thirty-fifth  year  of  Henry  VIII.  This  is  not, 
however,  its  original  one.  In  the  thirteenth 
century,  a  fmall  chapel  was  erected  at  the  Eaft 
end  of  the  prefent  town,  which  the  French,  in 
one  of  their  defcents  on  the  ifland,  deftroyed. 
A  fecond  place  of  worfhip  was  then  built  at  the 
Weftern  extremity,  and  this  too  fell  a  facrifice 
to  the  fame  people,  in  a  vifit  which  they  made 
in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  A  third  time  the 

*  It  is  a  reftory ;  year-tenths,  35.  10^.     Dedicated  to 
St.  Mary. 

i  It  is  a  vicarage  ;  year-tenths,  133.  10*.     Dedicated 
to  St.  Svvithin. 

inhabitants 


1?8  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLK    OF    WIGHT. 

inhabitants  rebuilt  their  church,  and  placed  it  in 
the  middle  of  the  town,  where  it  at  prefent 
{lands.  The  endowment  of  this  church  being 
extremely  fmall,  it  was  augmented  by  the  bounty 
of  Queen  Anne;  to  which  was  added  a  fum  of 
money  given  by  Colonel  Henry  Holmes,  for 
that  purpofe.* 

The  church  of  Frefhwater  was  given  by 
William  Fitz-Ofborne  to  his  abbey  of  Lyra; 
•where  it  continued  till  the  alien  monafteries  were 
feized  on  by  the  crown.  It  was  afterwards 
repeatedly  granted  to  the  captains  of  the  ifland 
for  the  time  being ;  but  at  length  given  to  St. 
John's  College,  Cambridge,  where  it  now 
remains. t 

*  It  is  a  reftory ;  patron,  the  King.  Dedicated  to  St. 
James. 

4-  It  is  areftory;  valuation,  King's  books,  19!.  8.  4. 
year-tenths,  il.  18.  10.  Dedicated  to  All  baints. 


THE 


CIVI  L    HISTORY 


ISLE  OF  WIGHT. 


CHAP.    I. 


OF   THE  BOROUGHS  OF  NEWPORT,  NEWTOWN, 
AND  YARMOUTH. 

IKE  Ifle  of  Wight  fends  to  the  Houfe  of 
Commons,  fix  members ;  two  for  Newport,  two 
for  Newtown,  and  the  fame  number  for  Yar- 
mouth. 

Of  thefe  boroughs,  Newport  and  Yarmouth 
returned  reprefentatives  to  parliament  as  early 
as  the  twenty-third  year  of  Edward  I.  a  period, 
according  to  antiquaries,  when  the  reprefenta- 
tives of  the  commons  were  firft  legally  convened.* 
S  The 

*  Willis's  Not.  Parl.  Preface. 


130         HISTOR7    OF    fHE    ISLE    Of    WIGHT. 


The  incorporation  of  Newport  by  charter 
took  place  in  the  firft  year  of  James  I.  when 
the  bailiff  and  burgeffes  of  the  place  were  con- 
ftitutcd  a  body  politic ;  the  corporation  to  con- 
fift  of  a  mayor,  and  twenty -four  burgefles.  By 
this  charter,  the  mayor,  recorder,  or  his  deputy, 
with  two  of  the  burgefles,  are  impowered  to 
hold  a  court  on  every  Friday,  for  the  trial  of 
all  fmall  caufes  arifing  within  the  borough ;  to 
take  recognizances  of  debts  according  to  the 
ftatutes  merchant,  and  of  the  ftaple ;  and  to  have 
a  gaol  for  the  reception  of  fuch  perfons  as  they 
fhould  commit  for  debts,  felonies,  or  other  of- 


fences. 


Cliarles  II.  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  his 
reign,  granted  another  charter  to  Newport ; 
in  which  the  ftyle  of  the  corporation  is  altered 
from  its  origmal  one,  to  that  of  Mayor^  Alder- 
mrn,  and  Burgfffes.  By  this  charter,  the  may- 
or is  to  be  chofen  from  among  the  aldermen, 
who  are  twelve  in  number ;  thefe  are  to  be 
chofen  out  of  the  chief  burgefles,  by  the  mayor 
and  aldermen ;  and  the  mayor  is  to  be  fworn 

into 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT*  13* 

into  his  office  before  the  governor  of  the 
ifland  or  his  fteward.*  Amongft  other  privileges 
granted  or  confirmed  by  this  charter,  it  is  men- 
tioned, that  the  mayor,  aldermen,  and  chief 
btirgefles  are  exempted  from  ferving  on  juries 
at  the  aflizes,  or  general  quarter  fcffions. 

From  the  twenty-third  of  Edward  I.  to  the 
twenty-feventh  year  of  Elizabeth,  Newport  does 
not  appear  to  have  fent  any  reprefentatives  to 
parliament;  but  iince  the  latter  period,  its  re- 
turns of  two  members  to  each  parliament  have 
been  very  regular. 

Newport  was  conftituted  a  borough  almoft  as 
foon  as  it  came  into  the  pofleffion  of  the  De 
Redvers  family;  Richard,  the  fon  of  the  firft 
grantee,  bellowing  on  its  inhabitants  thofe  va- 
rious liberties  which  in  early  days  formed  a 
borough.t  Thefe  liberties  confided  of  a  per- 
S  2  miffion 

*  This  ceremony  is  now  performed  in  the  old  chapel 
of  St.  Nicholas,  in  Carifbrook  caflle. 

\  It  is  difficult  to  afcertain  precifely,  the  origin  df 
burghs  in  this  kingdom ;  though  v/c  find  them  men- 
tioned in  the  laws  of  Ina  Kir.g  of  the  Weft  Saxons, 

which 


132 


miffion  to  trade  under  the  protection  of  the  lord 
of  the  demefne  :  a  right  of  exafting  a  toll  for 
all  goods  brought  to  be  difpofed  of  within  the 
limits  of  the  borough  :  a  privilege  of  having 
a  market,  and  holding  fairs  in  the  fame ;  and 
various  others  of  the  like  nature :  liberties  -which 
were  generally,  either  purchafed  originally  of 
the  lord  by  thofe  on  whom  they  were  conferred, 
or  paid  for,  by  a  regular  annual  rent  levied  on 
every  burgefs.* 

A  fecond 

which  gives  them  an  antiquity  of  nearly  eleven  hun- 
dred years.  Among  the  municipal  conflitutions  of 
this  wife  monarch,  for  the  internal  peace  and  govern- 
ment of  his  kingdom,  we  find  an  ordinance  to  this  effeft  ; 
that,  "  whoever  {hall  be  guilty  of  a  violation  of  the  peace 
in  a  borough  under  the  protection  of  the  king  or  biihop, 
he  fhall  pay  one  hundred  and  twenty  {hillings. "  Leges 
Inae  apud  Lambarde  Archaionom.  p.  ix.  c.  46.  Vide  my 
"  Topographical  Remarks  relating  to  Hampfhire."  Bla- 
mire,  1792,  vol.  II.  p.  51. 

*  Boroughs,  we  have  feen  in  the  lafl  note,  were  of 
Saxon  origin.  They  were  intended  for  the  promotion  of 
induftry  and  commerce  ;  and  their  inhabitants  were 
encouraged  to  exertion  by  particular  privileges,  im- 
munities, and  laws.  Here  markets  were  eftablifhed ; 
imports  and  exports  of  various  merchandife  carried  on, 

under 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  133 

A  fecond  charter  of  immunities  and  privileges 
was  granted  by  Jfabella  de  Fortibus,  in  the 
thirteenth  century,  to  the  burgeflcs  of  Newport ; 
by  which  fhe  invefts  them  with  the  power  of 
taking  toll  throughout  the  -whole  ifland^  in  all  vil- 
lages and  roads ;  on  the  fea,  and  in  the  har- 

undcr  the  Prepofitus  Burghi,  or  bailiff  of  the  borough, 
appointed  by  the  prince  or  lord  of  the  fee  to  refide  in 
the  place,  and  gather  the  tolls,  duties,  and  impofitions, 
arifmg  from  the  trade  of  it.  Notwithstanding,  however, 
the  various  regulations  thus  made  in  favor  of  thofe  who 
inhabited  boroughs,  their  ftate,  for  the  moft  part,  in  the 
Saxon  times,  feems  to  have  been  nothing  more  than  a 
certain  qualified  flavery.  Repeated  r.otices  occur  in 
Domefday  book,  of  towns  whofe  b  urge  fifes  were  confined 
to  a.  refidence  on  the  fpot  where  they  traded  ;  who  were 
io  completely  under  the  dominion  of  their  lord,  th»t  they 
could  not  do  homage  to,  nor  receive  protection  from  any 
other  fuperior.  In  this  (late,  it  is  probable,  the  boroughs 
remained  till  the  Anglo-Norman  kings  took  polfefiior.  of 
the  Engli(h  crown  ;  who,  finding  that  commerce  was 
cramped  by  the  refit iclions  under  which  the  buigeffcs 
labored,  relaxed  by  degrees  the  fsrvile  ties,  and  remitted 
the  numerous  imports  that  had  arifen  in  the  Saxon  times ; 
granting  them  liberty  of  perfon,  and  accepting,  in  lieu  of 
the  duties  formerly  received,  a  fixed  rodditus,  called  a 
fee-farm  rent,  which  was  proportioned  to  the  amount  of  the 
original  impofitions.  A.t  the  Tame,  time  alfo  we  may  look 
tor  the  origin  of  chartered  cornfratiois,-  -Topog.  Remarks, 
vol.  11.  p.  54. 

bour  ;* 


134  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

hour;*  in  fairs,  and  at  markets;  in  all  places, 
and  on  all  commodities.  She  further  grants,  an 
exemption  to  the  burgeffes  from  attending  the 
hundred  and  county  courts;  a  privilege  of  de- 
pafturing  their  cattle  in  her  foreft  of  Parkhurft ; 
a  power  of  trying  all  pleas  arifing  within  the 
borough,  and  fixing  the  quantum  of  fines  on 
conviction ;  and  a  liberty  of  retaining  and  di- 
viding amongft  themfelves  all  fuch  fines  as  mould 
fo  arife.  All  which  immunities  and  privileges 
were  to  be  held  by  the  faid  burgeffes,  in  con- 
fideration  of  their  paying  to  her  and  her  heirs, 
eighteen  marks,  annually ;  and  to  the  prior  and 
monks  of  Carifbrook,  two  marks,  annually.t 
This  charter  was  confirmed  by  Edward  III. 
Richard  II.  Henry  VII.  Edward  IV.  Henry 
VIII.  Edward  VI.  and  Queen  Elizabeth;  fome 
of  whom,  particularly  Edward  IV.  added  other 
grants  and  privileges  to  the  borough,  fuch  as  the 

*  This  is  the  foundation  of  a  duty  even  now  paid  at 
Cowes,  by  all  fhips  which  cafl  anchor  in  that  road. 

t  Carta   Ifabellz   Corn.  Alb.      Sir    R.    Worfley's 
Append.  No.  XXL 

for- 


HISTORY    OF   THE    ISLE    Of    WIGHT..         135 


forfeitures  of  outlaws,  felons,  and  fuicides,  with- 
in  the  borough ;  and  the  petty  cuftoms  of  any 
port  or  creek  in  the  ifland. 

This  town  has  given  title  to  four  earls :  Lord 
Mountjoy  Blount,  natural  fon  of  the  Earl  of 
Devonfhire,  created  by  Charles  I.  Baron  of 
Thurflfton,  and  Earl  of  Newport.  He  died  in 
the  year  1665,  and  his  three  fons  fucceffively 
enjoyed  the  title.  On  the  deceafe  of  Henryj 
the  laft  furviving  one,  unmarried,  it  became 
extinft.  Lord  Windfor  was  alfo  Baron  New- 
port in  Queen  Anne's  reign. 

The  borough  of  Newtown  (which  changed  its 
ancient  name  of  Francheville,  on  being  rebuilt 
when  burnt  by  the  French  in  the  reign  of 
Richard  II.)  is  a  prescriptive  borough,  and  firft 
fent  members  to  the  fenate  in  the  twenty-feventh 
year  of  Queen  Elizabeth.  It  was  formerly  a 
place  of  confiderable  confequence  ;  and  traces 
of  its  magnitude  are  Rill  difcernible  in  four 
lanes,  which  interfeft  each  other  at  right  angles, 
and  are  faid,  formerly  to  have  been  covered  with 
houfes. 

The 


136  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    CF    WlGHf. 


The  firft  liberties  and  franchifes  granted  to 
the  burgefTes  of  Newtown  are  contained  in  a 
charter  of  Aymer,  Eifhop  of  Winchefter,  lord  of 
the  place ;  who  invefts  his  town  of  Francheville, 
with  all  fuch  immunities  and  privileges  as  were 
enjoyed  by  the  inhabitants  of  Taunton,  Alesford, 
and  Farnham.  This  charter  bears  date  at 
Swanifton :  and  afterwards  received  the  feveral 
confirmations  of  Edward  II.  Edward  IV.  and 
Queen  Elizabeth.  Edward  II.  alfo  granted  to 
the  burgefifes  of  Newtown,  a  charter  in  the 
eleventh  year  of  his  reign;  in  which  is  beftowed 
the  liberty  of  a  market  to  be  holden  on  the  Wed- 
nefday  in  every  week  ;  and  of  a  fair  annually,  on 
the  feaft  of  St.  Mary  Magdalene,  on  the  eve  pre- 
ceding, and  on  the  day  following. 

The  elective  franchife  in  this  borough  was  de- 
termined by  the  Houfe  of  Commons  in  1729,  to 
be  confined  to  the  mayor  and  burgefles,  having 
borough  lands.  Previous  to  this  final  adjuft- 
ment  of  the  right,  perpetual  contefts  arofe  re- 
lative to  the  exertion  of  it,-  The  moft  ancient 
books  of  the  corporation  prove,  that  the  quali- 
fications 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          1.^7 

fication  of  a  burgefs  was  formerly  the  holding 
of  a  borough  land^  paying  rent  to  the  mayor  and 
chief  burgeffes  ;  but  in  the  time  of  Charles  1 1. 
the  right  of  voting  was  confined  to  the  burgeffes 
alone,  and  the  number  of  thefe  limited  to  twelve. 
This  limitation  however  was  pronounced  illegal 
by  the  corporation,  in  the  reign  of  William  III. 
which  met  on  the  twentieth  day  of  September, 
1698,  and  came  to  the  following  refolutions : 

"  At  this  aflembly,  upon  examining  the  ancient 
records  of  the  faid  corporation,  (Newtown,  alias 
Francheville)  and  taking  the  depofitions  on  oath 
o,f  James  Overy;  as  alfo  upon  the  averment  of 
fome  of  the  chief  burgeffes  there,  then  prefent ; 
it  is  refolved,  that  the  reftraint  of  the  chief  bur- 
geffes  of  this  corporation,  to  the  number  of 
twelve,  or  any  lefs  number  than  are  freeholders  of 
borough  lands  is  againft  law,  and  contrary  to  the 
ancient  ufage  of  this  corporation." 

"  Alfo  'tis  ordered  and  agreed^  that  whofoever 

mail  prove  himfelf  to  be  a  freeholder,  of  any 

borough  land  in  fee,  either  by  the  rent-roll  now 

produced  in   this   aflembly,   bearing  date  and 

T  beginning 


13&  HISTORY    OF    TliE    1SL£    OF    WIGHT. 

beginning  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1685,  (where- 
of a  true  copy  fhall  be  kept  by  the  mayor  for 
the  time  being)  or  otherwife  efFe&ually  in  lawj 
fhall  upon  demand,  be  fworn  a  chief  burgefs." 

This  meeting   had  been  convened  in  confe- 
quence  of  an  agreement  entered  into  during  the 
preceding  year,  between  Lord  Cutts,  the  then 
governor,  and   the  principal  gentlemen   in  the 
ifland ;  the  object  of  which  was,  to  reftore  that 
harmony,  good  fellowfhip  and  neighbourhood  of 
the  diftnft,  that  had  been  mightily  interrupted 
by   conftant  difputes   relative  to  the  right   of 
voting  in  the  three  corporations  of  Newport, 
Newtown,  and  Yarmouth.     In  thefe  articles  of 
agreement  it  was  ftipulated,  that  the  governor 
fhould  call  a  hall  at  Newtown,  examine  witnefles 
concerning  the  ancient  method  of  choofing  mem- 
bers to  fepve  in  parliament  for  that  corporation, 
and  effectually  reftore  the  {aid  corporation,  and 
all  who  have  a  juft  pretence  to  be  members  of  it, 
to  their  ancient  rights  of  burgage -tenure;  pro- 
vided always,  that  the  faid  governor  be  firft  put 
in  poffeffion  of  a  qualifying  burgage-tenure,  Aif- 

ficient 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


ficient  to  enable  him  to  be  a  member  and  eleftof 
of  the  faid  corporation  :  he  paying  for  the 
fame. 

The  meeting  was  called,  and  the  regulations 
above  detailed  entered  into  at  it.* 

In  the  courfe  of  a  few  years,  however,  after 
this  adjuftment,  the  right  of  voting  became 
again  the  occafion  of  controverfy.  The  cor- 
poration, on  infpecting  the  old  books  of  the 
borough,  difcovered  that  the  arrangement  of 
1698  was  contrary  to  the  ancient  ufage;  the 
minutes  of  that  meeting  were  therefore  erafed 
from  the  town-book,  and  thofe  who  enjoyed 
a  freehold  in  a  borough  land  were  once  more 

*  The  Corporation  at  that  time  confided  of, 

John,  Lord  Cults,  Mayor. 
Jofeph  Dudley,  Efq.  Deputy-Mayor. 


Henry  Dore 
Col.  David  Urry 
Mr.  John  Chiverton 
Major  Henry  Holmes 
Mr.  John  Philips 
Mr.  David  Urry 


James  Worfley,  Efq. 
Col.  Richard  iriolmes 
Mr.  Edward  Hayles 
Sir  Rob.  Worfley,  Bart. 
William  Stephen,  Efq. 
William  Bowerman,  Efq. 


John  Leigh,  Efq. 

T  2  invefted 


140  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


invefted  with  a  right  of  voting  for  a  reprefcntative 
for  Newtown. 

We  have  feen  that  this  regulation  was 
reverfed  by  the  Houfe  of  Commons  in  1729, 
which  lodged  the  privilege  in  the  mayor  and 
burge/fts  having  borovgh  lands. 

The  borough  of  Yarmouth  fent  its  repre- 
fentatives  to  the  parliament  convened  in  the 
twency-third  of  Edward  I.  It  had  a  fecond 
fummons  in  the  twenty-feventh  of  Queen 
Elizabeth,  from  which  period  its  returns  of  two 
members  to  the  Britifh  fenate  have  been  very 
regular. 

Its  firft  charter  appears  to  have  been  granted 
by  Baldwin  de  Redvers,  Earl  of  Devon,  brother 
of  Tfabella  de  Fortibus ;  which  comprized  nearly 
the  fame  rights  or  privileges  as  the  grants  to 
Newport  and  Newtown.  James  I,  who  re- 
incorporated  a  multitude  of  the  boroughs,  formed 
this  alfo  into  a  regular  corporation,  by  a  char- 
ter bearing  date  the  firft  of  September,  in  the 
feventh  year  of  his  reign,  which  in  effe6l  is  as 
follows : 

"  Whereas 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          14* 

"  Whereas  the  borough  of  Eremuth,  alias 
Yarmouth,  in  the  I  fie  of  Wight,  is  an  ancient 
borough,  and  the  mayor  and  burgefles  have 
prefcribed  to  have  and  ufe  diverfe  liberties  and 
privileges,  which  they  claim  alfo  under  colour  of 
charters  of  confirmation  from  feveral  kings  and 
queens  of  this  realm,  confirming  an  ancient 
grant  made  to  this  borough  by  Baldwin  dc 
Redvers,  fome  time  lord  of  this  ifle;  viz.  the 
charter  of  confirmation  under  the  great  feal,  in 
the  eighth  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Edward  I. 
a  like  charter  granted  in  the  eighteenth  of  Henry 
VI.  another  charter  of  the  fixth  of  Edward  IV. 
and  another  charter  of  the  fecond  of  Elizabeth: 
And  whereas  the  faid  mayor  and  burgefles,  and 
their  predeceflbrs,  have  always  paid  to  the  king 
and  his  predeceffors,  for  the  faid  privileges, 
immunities,  and  liberties,  the  fee-farm  of  twenty 
millings  yearly ;  and  whereas  it  appears  by  the 
records  in  the  Remembrancer's  office  in  the 
Exchequer,  in  the  fecond  year  of  Richard  II. 
that  the  town  of  Yarmouth  was  entirely  burned 
by  the  enemy,  and  its  inhabitants  greatly  im- 

poveriflied  • 


142         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLB    OP    WIGHT. 

««WMM*^MMMl^aMi^MHMWHVM«HMHML^H^M^^VW^ta^M*MM^M«I^MMMMMMMiiMMft^aMHMHiH^MMill& 

poverifhed  ;  and  whereas  the  faid  town  lies  near 
to  a  good  harbour  for  ihipping,  and,  for  that 
reafon,  King  Henry  VIII.  caufed  a  caftle  to  be 
built,  fince  which  the  town  is  better  inhabited 
than  before ;  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  it  will 
yet  be  more  filled  with  people,  for  increafing  the 
ftrength  of  the  ifland,  and  guarding  the  faid 
caftle,  if  his  majefly  would  vouchfafe  to  regrant 
them  their  liberties  and  immunities :  that  the 
faid  mayor  and  burgefles,  efteeming  the  charters 
before -mentioned  inefficient  to  authorize  them 
in  the  ufing  and  enjoying  the  faid  liberties  and 
immunities,  have  petitioned  the  king,  to  make, 
confirm,  and  new  create  them  a  body  politic 
and  corporate,  with  fuch  franchifes  as  mail  be  by 
the  king  thought  expedient :  that  the  king 
therefore  being  willing  to  fettle  the  rules  for  the 
government  of  the  faid  borough  and  the  people 
there,  declares  it  to  be  a  free  borough ;  and  that 
they  mail  be  a  body  politic  and  corporate,  by  the 
name  of  mayor  and  burgeffes  of  Yarmouth,  in 
the  Ifle  of  Wight,  with  capacity  to  purchafe,  &c. 
to  grant,  &c.  to  plead  or  to  be  impleaded,  and  to 

have 


HISTORY    OF    THE    IStE    OF    WIGHT.  143 

have  a  common  feal ;  that  there  fhall  be  twelve 
chief  burgefles  to  be  the  common  council  of  the 
borough;  that,  out  or  thefe,  one  fliall  be  chofen 
mayor  of  the  borough ;  that  they  fhall  have 
power  to  make  laws,  ftatures,  and  orders,  for  the 
government  of  the  borough  and  its  officers ;  that 
the  burgeffes  of  the  faid  borough  mall  continue 
for  life,  excepting  any  of  them  fhall  be  removed 
for  reafonable  caufe  ;  and  on  the  death  of 
removal  of  a  chief  burgefs,  the  mayor  and  major 
part  of  the  burgeffes  then  living  fhall  eleft  another 
in  his  place,  who  fhall  be  fworn  before  the 
mayor  and  major  part  of  the  chief  burgeffes ; 
that  the  mayor  and  fteward  of  the  borough  fhali 
hold  the  courts  of  the  faid  borough ;  that  they 
fhall  hold  a  view  of  frank  pledge  of  all  in- 
habiting and  refident  in  the  faid  borough, 
and  to  redrefs  abufes  in  the  fame ;  the 
mayor  and  burgeffes-  are  empowered  to  ele&  and 
conftitute  a  fteward,  a  common  clerk,  and  a 
fergeant  at  mace,  to  continue  during  the  pleafure 
of  the  mayor  and  burgeffes ;  that  the  mayor  and 
burgeffes  fhall  have  all  the  fines,  forfeitures,  and 

profit* 


144         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

profits  of  the  courts,  which  they  lhall  have  power 
to  levy,  by  their  own  officers  by  diftrefs  :  they 
have  alfo  a  grant  of  ftrays,  and  the  goods  of 
felons,  within  the  limits  of  the  borough  :  a  mar- 
ket is  granted  to  the  town,  to  be  kept  every 
Wednefday ;  and  a  fair  to  be  held  yearly,  viz.  on 
St.  James's  day,  the  eve  before,  and  the  day  after, 
together  with  a  court  of  pie-powder,  &c.  with  all 
the  profits  and  emoluments  belonging  to  fuch 
markets,  fairs,  and  courts :  a  fpecial  licence  and 
authority  are  given  to  the  mayor  and  burgeffes, 
to  purchafe  and  hold  to  them,  and  burgefles  for 
ever  any  manors,  lands,  &:c.  not  holden  of  the 
king  in  capite,  or  by  knight's  fervice,  not  ex- 
ceeding the  value  of  twenty  pounds  per  annum, 
the  ftatute  of  mortmain  notwithftanding ;  and 
licence  is  alfo  given  for  any  perfon,  &c.  to  grant 
and  alien  to  the  faid  mayor  and  burgefles,  under 
the  like  reftridion,  all  liberties,  privileges,  fran- 
chifes,  and  immunities,  which  the  borough  has 
held  and  enjoyed,  by  reafon  or  colour  of  grants 
by  the  king  or  any  of  his  predeceflbrs,  or  by  any 
other  perfons  made  heretofore,  are  confirmed; 

faving 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          145 

faving  and  referving  out  of  this  grant,  the  caftle 
of  Yarmouth,  its  ditches,  trenches,  and  limits, 
wherein  the  faid  mayor  and  burgefles  have  no 
power  or  authority  to  enter :  they  are  to  pay  the 
fee-farm  of  twenty  Jhillings  yearly,  at  the  feaft  of 
St.  Michael ;  a  claufe  is  added  to  indemnify 
them  from  all  profecutions  for  any  liberties  or 
franchifes  ufed,  had,  or  ufurped  by  them,  before 
the  date  of  this  charter,  and  no  fine  is  to  be  paid 
to  the  Hanaper  office  for  it.* 

Yarmouth  had  the  honor  of  entertaining 
Charles  II.  in  the  year  1671.  He  fpent  a  fhort 
time  in  this  town,  at  a  houfe  built  entirely  for  his 
accommodation,  by  Sir  Robert  Holmes  ;  it  has 
many  years  fince  been  converted  into  an  inn ; 
and,  blending  the  memorial  of  its  having  lodged 
a  royal  vifitor,  with  a  compliment  to  the  reigning 
family,  is  now  called  the  George.  The  monarch 
in  this  excurfion  landed  at  Gurnard's  Bay,  and  in 
his  way  to  Yarmouth  pafled  through  the  foreft  of 
Parkhurft,  over  a  road  which  Sir  Robert  Holmes 
had  formed  on  purpofe  to  accommodate  him. 

*   Sir  Richard  Worfley's  Hift.  p.  159. 

U  The 


146          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

The  circumftances  of  this  vifit  are  tenacioufly 
remembered  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  ifland, 
\vhofe  beautiful  refidence  has  had  the  pleafure 
of  receiving  only  three  of  its  monarchs  fince 
the  conqueft, — King  John,  Henry  VIII.  and 
Charles  II. 


CHAP. 


HISTORY   OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.   II. 


OF  THE   LORDS  OF   THE   ISLAND;    THEIR  POWER, 

RIGHTS,    AND    FRANCHISES;    AND     OF 

THE    KNIGHTON    COURT. 

A  HE  barons  of  the  feudal  ages  enjoyed  on 
their  own  demefnes  an  authority  almoft  regal. 
The  lords  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  by  the  grant 
of  Henry  I.  became  poflefled  of  all  thofe 
rights  in  the  ampleft  degree,  with  which  the 
higher  fees  were  endowed.  They  had  their 
own  courts  of  judicature  for  the  trial  of  all 
offences,  fave  thofe  of  treafon  and  murder. 
They  nominated  their  own  bailiffs,  conftables, 
and  all  other  petty  officers.  They  executed 
the  office  of  coroner  throughout  the  whole 
ifland.  They  had  the  return  of  all  the  king's 
writs.  They  poflefled  a  chacc,  now  called 
U  a  Parkhurft 


148  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

Parkhurft  Foreft;  a  fence-mouth  there,  and 
in  other  places;  and  a  free  warren  on  the 
Eaft  fide  of  the  river  Medina ;  together  with 
wrecks,  waifs,  and  ftrays.  The  tenants  of  the 
ifland  were  chargeable  in  aid  to  them  alone;i 
and  held  their  lands  as  of  the  caftle  of  Carif- 
brooke.  By  the  regulations  of  their  tenure, 
the  tenants  were  bound  to  aflift  (diftinft  from 
their  cuftomary  aids)  in  the  charge  of  making 
the  eldeft  fon  of  the  lord  a  knight;  of  marry- 
ing his  daughter;  and  of  paying  the  ranfom 
for  his  liberation  mould  he  be  made  a  prifoner. 
They  were  alfo  obligated  to  defend  the  caftle 
of  Carifbrooke  for  forty  days,  at  their  own 
coils  and  charges,  whenever  it  might  be  at- 
tacked; and  to  attend  the  lord  both  on  his 
coming  to  the  ifland,  and  departing  from  it. 
Moreover,  the  lord  enjoyed  the  right  of  ward- 
fhip  over  the  whole  ifland ;  a  right  which  pla- 
ced every  heir  that  was  a  minor  under  his 

+  They  paid  no  regular  arnual  tax  to  the  lord  ;  but 
as  often  as  the  king  levied  a  {"outage  upon  him  fof 
the  iflandj  fo  often  his  feudatories  contributed  each 
his  fettled  proportion  towards  the  payment  of  it. 

protection ; 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          149 

protection;  that  conferred  on  him  the  rents 
and  profits  of  the  eftate  during  the  minority, 
and  enabled  him  to  give  the  ward  in  marriage 
to  whomfoever  he  pleafed. 

Many  are  the  traces  of  this  feudal  govern- 
ment, which  fubfift  to  the  prefent  day,  both 
in  the  Ifle  qf  Wight,  and  every  other  part  of 
the  kingdom ;  one  remnant,  however,  deferves 
particular  mention,  as  it  formerly  conftituted 
one  of  the  greateft  privileges  which  the  lord 
of  this  diftrid  enjoyed. 

This  is  the  Knight's  Court,  or  Knighton  Court<, 
as  it  is  now  called,  or  the  Curia  Militum,  as  it 
yas  anciently  ftiled.  It  received  this  appella- 
tion from  the  circumftance  of  thofe  who  held 
a  knight's,  or  part  of  a  knight's  fee  in  capite, 
being  the  judges  in  this  tribunal;  where  they 
gave  judgment  according  to  the  Norman  mode 
of  trial,  without  a  jury.  This  principle  of  de- 
cifion,  fo  contrary  to  the  fpirit  of  Anglo-Saxon 
jurifprudence,  leads  one  to  apprehend  the 
Kpighten  Court  had  its  origin  during  the 
.period  of  William  Fitz-Ofborne's  poffefling  the 

me 


1,50         HISTORY     OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

Ifle  of  Wight,  who  modelled  it  after  the  court 
of  judicature  in  his  own  country. 

In  the  year  1626  an  attempt  was  made  to 
improve  and  enlarge  the  jurifdi&ion  of  this 
court,  when  the  following  reprefentation  of  its 
form  and  extent,  was  tranfmitted  to  Lord 
Conway,  then  governor  of  the  ifland. 

Knighten  Court. 

"  i.  It  hath  been  always  kept  by  the  cap- 
tain's fteward  of  the  ifland,  or  his  fubftitute,  by 
virtue  of  the  captain's  patent,  and  by  no  other 
particular  patent,-  for  aught  we  know." 

"  2.  It  hath  been  always  kept  in  the  town- 
hall  of  Newport,  on  the  Monday  every  three 
weeks,  unlefs  that  day  happen  a  feftival  day,  and 
then  it  is  adjourned  for  fix  weeks." 

"  3.  It  hath  jurifdi&ion  throughout  the  whole 
ifland,  the  corporation  of  Newport  excepted." 

"  4.  It  holdeth  plea  of  all  aftions  of  debt  and 
trefpafs,  under  the  value  of  forty  millings,  and 
upon  replevins  granted  by  the  fteward  or  his  fub- 
ilitute  that  keeps  the  court." 

*  5.  The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          15! 

66  5.  The  procefs  in  a&ions  of  debt  and  tref- 
pafs,  are  fummons,  attachments,  and  diftringas,  to 
bring  the  defendant  to  appear,  which  if  he  do  in 
perfon,  he  muft  confds  the  aftion,  or  elfe  he  is 
condemned  by  default ;  if  by  an  attorney,  he  is 
admitted  one  eflbine,  if  he  prays  it,  and  the  next 
court  muft  appear,  or  be  condemned  by  default. 
And  in  actions  upon  replevins,  if  the  defendant 
appear  not  in  the  three  firft  courts,  he  is  con- 
demned by  default :  and  in  thefe  aftions  upon 
replevins,  noeflbine  is  admitted." 

"  6.  The  pleadings  are  Englifh  bills  and  an- 
fwers ;  and  if  the  cafe  require,  replications  and 
rejoinders." 

"  7.  All  the  actions  are  entered,  profecuted, 
and  pleaded,  by  certain  attornies  allowed  in  that 
court." 

"  8.  The  aftions  of  debt  are  tried  by  proof  of 
plaintiff  or  defendant,  or  the  defendant's  wager 
of  law  with  two  hands,  if  he  pray  it,  and  in  tref- 
pafs  by  proof  only." 

"  9.  All  the  actions  are  adjudged  by  the 
court,  without  jury;  which  it  will  be  conceived 

will 


1^2  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLP,    OF    WIGHT. 

will  be  better  with  jury,  as  in  other  courts  of  re- 
cord, if  the  value  of  actions  be  increafed." 

"  10.  The  judges  are  freeholders,  which  hold 
of  his  majefty's  caftle  of  Carifbrooke ;  whereof 
there  are  known  to  the  fteward  not  above 
eighteen.  The  which  freeholders,  for  their  better 
eafe,  have  been  appointed  by  the  captain  of 
the  ifle  to  fit  by  four  or  five  at  a  court  by 
turns ;  but  fome  being  aged  and  impotent,  one 
under  age,  fome  living  out  of  the  ifle,  and 
fome  of  the  reft  being  negligent  of  that  fervice, 
there  hath  been  much  defecl  in  their  atten- 
dance; which  is  to  the  great  prejudice  of  the 
court,  and  hindrance  of  the  people,  by  delay 
of  trials." 

"  Therefore,  under  favor,  we  conceive,  that 
a  certain  form  of  election  of  a  certain  number 
of  judges,  of  other  fufficient  men  of  the  coun- 
try, fhall  be  added;  and  a  ftricl;  order  taken 
for  their  due  attendance  will  be  very  neceffarv, 
efpecially  if  the  value  of  aftions  be  raifed : 
and  that  if  there  be  not  an  efpecial  reftraint 
of  removing  actions  in  that  court  triable  from 

thence 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  153 

thence  into  higher  courts,    that  court  will  do 
little  more  good  than  it  doth  already." 

This  ftatement  being  delivered  to  the  privy 
council,  orders  were  immediately  ifTued  by  the 
Lord  Treafurer^  Vifcount  Grandifon,  to  the 
attorney-general,  to  prepare  forthwith  a  grant 
for  extending  the  jurifdiftion  of  the  Knighten 
Court,  "  to  all  cafes  whatfoever,  civil  or  crimi- 
nal, under  the  value  of  twenty  pounds,  provided 
that  the  fame  extend  not  to  the  life,  member, 
or  freehold  of  any  of  the  inhabitants.".  Not- 
withitanding  this  mandate^  however,  the  bufmefs 
was  not  proceeded  in ;  and  the  jurifdi&ion  of 
the  Knighten  Court,  and  mode  of  decifion 
therein,  continue  the  fame  as  before.t 

i  Sir  R.  Worfley's  Hift.  p.  81.  et  infra. 


X  CHAP. 


1,54         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    III. 


OF     THE    WARDENS,    CAPTAINS,     AND    GOVER- 
NORS   OF    THE     ISLAND. 


tS  foon  as  the  Ifle  of  Wight  became  the 
property  of  the  crown,  Edward  I.  appointed  a 
warden  to  regulate  its  concerns. 

Indeed,  during  its  continuance  in  the  De 
Redvers  family,  the  reigning  monarch  had 
twice,  when  the  owner  was  a  minor,  and  his 
property  therefore  (according  to  the  feudal 
lyftem)  became  temporarily  veiled  in  the  crown, 
appointed  a  warden,  who  exercifed  the  rights 
of  the  lord,  during  the  nonage  of  the  heir. 
The  firft  inftance  of  this,  happened  in  the 
firft  of  Henry  III.  when  Walleran  de  Ties  re- 
ceived 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  1£$ 

ceived  the  cuflody  of  the  ifland  in  the  minority 
of  Baldwin  the  third,  grandfon  of  William 
de  Vernon,  The  fecond  took  place  in  the 
thirteenth  of  Henry  III.  when  Savery  de 
Mauleon,  or  de  Malo  Leone,  was  appointed  to 
die  office  in  the  minority  of  Baldwin  the  fourth. 

In  the  year  1293*  Edward  I.  conftituted  John 
Fitz-Thomas  warden  of  the  ifland;  who  en- 
joyed alfo  the  ftewardfhip  of  New  Foreft. 

Richard  de  Affeton  appears  to  have  held  this 
office  in  the  twenty- fecond  year  of  Edward  I. 
And  in  the  enfuing  year,  the  Bilhop  of  Win- 
chefter,  and  Adam  de  Gordon,  were  included 
with  him  in  another  commiflion  for  the  fame 
appointment.  A  record  of  the  fame  year  mews 
that  William  Rufiel  alfo  was  warden  at  this 
time. 

Sir.  John  Lifle  of  W^ootton  was  appointed 
to  the  wardenfhip  of  the  ifland  in  the  thirtieth 
of  Edward  I.  and  made  captain  of  Carifbrooke 
Caftle.  On  the  acceffion  of  Edward  II.  he 
was  fuperfeded,  and  his  brother  appointed  in 
his  ftead;  but  the  latter  being  murdered  by 

X  2  one 


J.5&  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

one  Robert  Urry,  in  the  third  of  Edward  II.  Sir 
John  Lifle  was  reftored  to  his  dignity  and  office. 

Sir  Henry  Ties  was  appointed  warden  under 
Prince  Edward,  in  1321 ;  the  fame  perfon  pro- 
bably who  was  beheaded  in  the  enfuing  year,  for 
being  concerned  in  rebellion  with  Thomas,  Earl 
of  Lancafter,  who  alfo  loft  his  head. 

In  the  eighteenth  of  Edward  II.  John  de  la 
Hufe  and  John  Lifle  were  wardens  of  the  ifland. 
Nicholas  de  la  Felde  occurs  as  cvftos  during'the 
fame  year. 

In  the  ninth  of  Edward  III.  1336,  John  de 
Langford  of  Chale,  was  warden  of  the  ifland, 
and  captain  of  Carifbrooke  Caftle. 

In  the  eleventh  of  the  fame  king,  Theobald 
RufTel  occurs  as  captain  general  of  the  ifland. 

The  abbot  of  Quarr  was  appointed  warden 
of  the  ifland  in  1 340 ;  to  whom  was  directed 
a  writ  to  aft  in  the  capacity  of  a  general  officer, 
by  arraying  men,  fupplying  arms,  and  erecting 
beacons. 

Three  commiflioners  wtrc.  defied  by  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  ifland,  to  aft  as  wardens,  in  1341 3 

Sir 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.         157 

Sir  Bartholomew  Lifle,  John  de  Langford  Lord 
of  Chale,  and  Sir  Theobald  Ruflel  Lord  of 
Yaverland. 

In  1353,  three  other  wardens  are  found  a&- 
ing  at  one  time ;  Bartholomew  Lifle,  John  de 
Kingfton,  and  Henry  Romyn. 

John  de  Gatefden  received  a  commiffion,  as 
warden  of  the  ifland,  to  array  the  inhabitants, 
in  the  year  1353. 

'  In  1360,  the  abbot  of  Quarr,  Theobald  dc 
Gorges,  and  William  Dale,  were  appointed 
wardens. 

In  1377,  the  firft  of  Richard  II.  the  gallant 
Sir  Hugh  Tyrril,  who,  as  we  have  before  feen, 
defended  the  caftle  of  Carifbrooke  againfl  the 
French,  was  conftable  of  that  fortrefs. 

In  the  feventeemh  year  of  Henry  VI.  Hum- 
phrey, Duke  of  Gloucefter,  fon  of  Henry  IV. 
fucceeded  to  the  lordlhip  of  the  ifland,  after 
the  deceafe  of  the  Duchefs  of  York,  (grantee 
of  it  under  the  crown).  He  died  in  the  twenty- 
fifth  of  Henry  VI.  and  on  his  deceafe,  that 
king  immediately  appointed  Henry  Trenchard 

to 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


to  the  office  of  conftable  of  the  caftle  of  Carif- 
brooke,  with  a  falary  of  -twenty  pounds  per 
annum ;  ten  pounds  as  keeper  of  the  foreft  of 
Parkhurft  j  and  four-pence  per  day  for  the 
pay  of  the  porter  of  the  caftle. 

In  the  reign  of  Henry  VI.  the  lordfhip  of  the 
ifland  was  conferred  on  Richard,  Duke  of  York ; 
who  appointed  one  John  Newport  his  lieutenant 
and  fteward.  The  behaviour  of  this  deputy  was 
fo  oppreffive,  that  Richard  removed  him  from 
the  office,  and  appointed  John  Bruin  in  his  ftead. 

In  1461,  the  firfl  of  Edward  IV.  the  captain- 
fliip  of  the  ifland  was  conferred  on  Sir  Geoffry 
Gate,  for  life.  He  furrendered  it,  however,  in 
1467,  and  it  was  given  to  Anthony,  Lord  Schales, 
the  uncle  of  the  king. 

Early  in  the  year  1483,  Sir  William  Berkley 
was  made  captain  of  the  ifland ;  and  towards 
the  clofe  of  it,  Sir  John  Saville  was  appointed 
to  the  fame  office. 

Sir  Edward  Woodville  was  entrufted  with  the 
command  of  the  ifland  at  the  acceffion  of 
Henry  VII, 

In 


-'HISTORY  or  THE  ISLE  OF  WIGHT.       159 

In  the  tenth  of  Henry  VII.  Sir  Reginald  Bray 
received  a  grant  of  the  ifland,  on  leafe,  with  the 
caftle  and  honor  of  Carifbrooke,  &c.  (late  in  the 
pofleflion  of  George,  Duke  of  Clarence)  at  the 
annual  rent  of  three  hundred  and  feven  marks. 
On  his  death  Sir  Nicholas  Wadham  fucceeded 
him  ;  anceftor  to  the  founder  of  Wadham  Col- 
lege, Oxford. 

Early  in  the  third  year  of  Henry  VIII.  Su 
Nicholas  Wadham  died,  and  was  fucceeded  by 
Sir  JamesWorfley,  keeper  of  the  king's  wardrobe, 
and  matter  of  the  robes.  He  was  conftituted  cap- 
tain of  the  ifland  for  life,  with  a  falary  of  fixfhillings 
and  nine-pence  per  diem  for  himfelf,  two  fhillings 
for  his  deputy,  and  fixpence  each  for  thirteen 
fervants ;  added  to  this  was  a  reverfionary  grant 
of  the  office  of  conftable  of  Carifbrooke  caflle^ 
when  it  mould  become  vacant,  and  the  command 
of  all  the  forts  in  the  ifland.  He  was  likewife 
eonftituted  keeper  of  Carifbrooke  foreft  and 
park,  with  a  fee  of  two  millings  per  day.  He 
was  empowered  too,  to  leafe  any  of  the  king's 
houfes,  demefne  lands,  &c.  within  the  ifland ; 

to 


t6<3  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    QT    WIGHT. 

'  -  •^-••r 

to  return  all  writs ;  to  execute  all  procefles;  to  re- 
gulate the  markets ;  and  take  inquefts  as  coroner. 

In  the  year  of  1538,  Richard  Worfley,  Efq. 
fucceeded  his  father  in  the  office  of  captain  of 
the  Ifle  of  Wight.  He  held  it  till  1553,  when 
finding  himfelf  obnoxious  to  Queen  Mary,  whofe 
principles  he  difliked  and  oppofed,  prudence 
dictated  to  him  to  refign  his  appointment;  in 
which  he  was  fucceeded  by  Mr.  Girlingj  a  man 
of  low  extraction,  and  a  favorer  of  popery.  On 
Mary's  death,  however,  Richard  Worfley  was 
reinftated  in  his  office.  In  the  commiflion  which 
he  received  on  this  occafion  inftru&ions  were 
contained-,  to  indraft  the  inhabitants  of  the  ifland 
in  the  ufe  of  harquebufles,  and  to  introduce 
them  there;  orders  which  he  immediately  obeyed. 

In  1565  the  command  of  the  ifland  was 
beftowed  on  Edward  Horfey,  Efq.  afterwards 
knighted.  His  memory  is  held  in  fome  efteem 
by  the  fportfmen  of  the  ifland,  who  attribute 
the  great  plenty  of  hares,  and  other  game  found 
there  at  prefent,  to  the  attention  beftowed  on 
them  during  his  government. 

Sir 


iJlSTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          l6  L 

Sir  George  Carey  fucceeded  Sir  Edward 
Horfey.  He  appears  to  have  been  the  firft 
captain  of  the  ifland  who  affumed  the  name  of 
governor;  a  circiunftance  that  gave  great  dif- 
guft  to  the  inhabitants,  who  conceived  the  title 
to  be  an  arbitrary  and  improper  one,  in  a  free 
country. 

Henry,  Earl  of  Southampton,  fucceeded  Sir 
George  Carey  in  the  firft  year  of  James  I. 
His  patent  ftyles  him  Captain  of  all  the  Ifle 
of  Wight;  Captain  of  the  caftle  of  Carifbrooke, 
and  all  other  caftles  and  forts  within  the  faid 
ifle  ;  alfo  Conftable  of  the  caftle  of  Carifbrooke, 
Warden  of  the  foreft  of  Parkhurft;  Steward, 
Surveyor,  and  Receiver  of  all  the  lands,  woods, 
revenues,  &c.  of  the  crown,  within  the  ifland. 
His  affability,  attention,  and  hofpitality,  gave 
extraordinary  fatisfa&ion  to  the  inhabitants,  and 
raifed  the  ifland  to  an  enviable  and  flourifhing 
(late.  He  won  the  affections  of  the  gentry  by 
mixing  in  their  diverfions;  and  twice  every 
week  threw  off  the  cumbrous  ftate  of  the  go- 
vernor at  a  public  bowling-green  and  ordinary, 
Y  where 


l62  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

where  the  knights  and  gentlemen  met  for  amufe- 
ment  and  relaxation. 

This  popular  nobleman  died  in  December 
1625,  and  was  fucceeded  by  John,  Lord  Con- 
way  ;  who  was  afterwards  made  Secretary  of 
ftate  and  Prefident  of  the  council. 

On  his  deceafe  in  1631,  Richard,  Lord 
Wefton,  afterwards  created  Earl  of  Portland, 
was  conftituted  Captain  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight; 
an  office  which  was  vacated  by  his  death  in 
1634. 

Jerom,  Earl  of  Portland,  fucceeded  his  father. 
The  parliament,  as  we  have  before  feen,  re- 
moved this  nobleman  in  1642,  and  appointed 
in  his  place  Philip,  Earl  of  Pembroke. 

In  1647,  Colonel  Hammond  was  Governor  of 
the  Ifle  of  Wight,  and  held  it  for  two  years. 
It  was  during  this  interval,  that  the  unfortu- 
nate Charles  I.  took  refuge  here,  vainly  flat- 
tering himfelf  he  mould  find  a  friend  in  the 
governor,  as  his  uncle  Doctor  Henry  Hammond 
was  at  that  time  his  confidential  chaplain.  But 
the  fpirit  of  fanaticifm,  the  vice  of  the  times, 

and 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  163 

and    the  fuggeftions   of   intereft,  prevailed   on 
the   colonel  to  forget  the  ties  of  duty  and  of 
gratitude;    and   to   give  himfelf  up   implicitly 
to  the  republican  party.     Inftead  therefore  of 
finding  a  refuge  in  the  ifland,  as  he  expecled, 
Charles  foon  after  his  arrival  there,  began  to  feel 
the  reftri&ions  of  confinement;  which  gradually 
became  more  fevere  and  ignominious,  until  he 
was  feized  by  the  army,  on  the  twenty-ninth  of 
November  1648,  and  conduced  to  the  fcaffold 
that  clofed  his  unmerited  fufferings. 

In  1649,  Colonel  Sydenham  fucceeded  Ham- 
mond in  the  government  of  the  ifland.     He  was 
brother  to  the  celebrated  phyfician  of  that  name. 
In  1660,  when  Charles  was  reftored  to  the 
throne  of  his  anceftors,  Thomas,  Lord  Culpeper, 
received  the  government  of  the  ifland ;   we  have 
before   feen  that  he  rendered  himfelf  very  un- 
popular in  this  office,  which  he  refigned  in  1 667, 
and    was   fucceeded   by   Admiral    Sir    Robert 
Holmes,  a  gallant  naval  officer.      He  is  ftyled 
Governor  and  Captain  of  the  ifland,  in  his  patent, 
and  of  the  caftles  and  forts  therein".     He  died  in 
Y  2  1692, 


1$4  HISTORY    OF    THE   ISLE    OF   WIGHT. 

1692,  and  was  interred  in  a  vault  in  Yarmouth 
church,  where  a  very  elegant  marble  monument 
is  raifed  to  his  memory. 

John,  Lord  Cutts,  one  of  the  moft  gallant 
foldiers  of  his  time,  and  a  great  favorite  of  King 
William,  fucceeded  Sir  Robert  Holmes  in  the 
government  of  the  ifland.  He  refided  much  at 
Carifbrooke,  where  he  gave  very  fuperb  and 
frequent  entertainments.  He  died  in  17075 
and  was  fucceeded  by 

Charles,  Marquis  of  Winchefter.  afterwards 
Duke  of  Bolton  ;  Warden  of  the  New  Foreft; 
and  Lord  Lieutenant  of  the  counties  of  South- 
ampton and  Dorfet.  As  this  nobleman  refided 
very  little  in  the  ifland,  it  was  judged  prudent 
to  appoint  a  lieutenant-governor,  under  him, 
by  royal  com  million,  with  a  falary  of  twenty 
millings  per  diem ;  an  office  that  was  conferred 
on  Colonel  Morgan. 

The  Duke  of  Bolton  was  removed  in  1710, 
and  General  John  Richmond  Webb  appointed 
governor  in  his  room.  This  officer  immortalized 
his  name,  by  defeating  with  a  hand  of  feyen 

thoufand 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  16,5 

thoufand  men,  upwards  of  twenty  thoufand 
French,  at  Wynendale,  under  the  command 
of  General  La  Motte. 

William,  Lord  Cadogan,  afterwards  an  ear], 
fucceeded  General  Webb  in  1716.-  He  tco 
was  a  gallant  jfoldier  of  the  great  Duke  of 
Marlborough's  fchool ;  and  after  the  death  of 
that  commander,  was  appointed  General  and 
Commander  in  Chief  of  His  Majefty's  Forces, 
Mafter-general  of  the  Ordnance,  and  Colonel  of 
the  firft  regiment  of  foot  guards.  On  his  de- 
ceafe,  in  Auguft  1726, 

Charles,  Duke  of  Bolton,  was  appointed 
Governor  and  Vice-admiral ;  but  being  removed 
from  his  offices  in  1733?  he  was  fucceeded  by 

John,  Duke  of  Montagu;  who  fcarcely  held 
the  office  a  twelvemonth,  and  was  fucceeded 

by 

John,  Lord  Vifcount  Lymington,  (foon  after 
created  Earl  of  Portfmouth)  in  1734. 

Charles,  Duke  of  Bolton  was  reinftated  in 
1742,  but  foon  afterwards  reiigned  his  offices, 

when 

John, 


l66          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

John,  Earl  of  Portfmouth,  was  again  made 
Governor  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight ;  this  happened 
the  twenty-fecond  of  February  1745. 

Thomas,  Lord  Holmes,  on  the  death  of 
Lord  Portfmouth  in  1762,  fucceeded  to  this 
office ;  which  he  enjoyed  but  a  fhort  time, 
dying  in  July  1764.  He  was  fucceeded  by 
Hans  Stanley,  Efq.  who  was  removed  in 
1766,  and  . 

Harry,  Duke  of  .Bolton,  appointed  governor 
in  his  room ;  but  owing  to  a  fluctuation  in 
the  cabinet,  this  nobleman  was  difmifled  from 
the  appointment,  and  in  the  year  1770, 

The  Right  Honorable  Hans  Stanley  was  again 
nominated  to  it.  He  died  in  1780,  when  the 
Right  Honorable  Sir  Richard  Worfley,  Bart, 
one  of  his  Majefty's  moft  honorable  privy  coun- 
cil, fucceeded  to  the  offices  of  Governor,  Vice- 
admiral,  &c.  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight.  In  the 
year  1787,  thefe  were  conferred  on 

The   Right  Honorable  Thomas   Orde,    the 
prefent  governor. 


THE 


NATURAL    HISTOPvY 


ISLE  OF  WIGHT. 


t:  A  man  need  not  to  fay,  What  is  this  ?  Wherefore  is 
that  ?   for  He  hath  made  all  things  for  their  ufes."* 


yxii)s 


CHAP.    I. 


GENERAL    D  ESCRIPT1ON   OF    THE    ISLAND;    CLI- 
MATE;  SOIL;  TIMBER ;   RIVERS  ;   SPRINGS; 

IXHABITAKTS;    DOWNS;    AND  CURIOUS 
PARTICULARS  RELATING  TO  THEM. 

1  HE  Ifle  of  Wight  is  fituated  on  the  coaft  of 
Hampfhire,  nearly  midway  between  the  two 
counties  of  Dorfet  and  SufTex.  It  is  feparated 
from  the  main  land,  by  a  {trait,  or  arm  of  the  fea, 
of  unequal  breadth ;  being  not  more  than  one 
mile  over  at  the  narrowed  part,  towards  the 

*  Ecclefiaaicus,  +  Horn.  Odyff. 


HISTORY    OF    THi:    ISLE    O  :•'    WIGHT. 


Weftern  extremity;  and  nearly  fevcn  miles 
acrofs  at  the  Eaftern  end.  The  form  of  the 
ifland  is  rhomboidal;  meafuring  twenty-two 
miles  and  an  half  from  the  Eaftern  to  the 
Weftern  angle;  and  thirteen  miles  from  the 
Northern  to  the  Southern  one :  its  fuperficial 
contents  may  be  computed  at  one  hundred  and 
five  thoufand  acres.  It  is  divided  into  two 
Hundreds,  called  Eaft  and  Weft  Medine;  and 
contains  thirty  parifhes.  Its  inhabitants  we  may 
eftimate  at  eighteen  thoufand  feven  hundred. 
The  face  of  the  country  is  in  general  very 
beautiful,  as  it  poffeffes  all  thofe  ingredients, 
.•which,  properly  combined,  form  piclurefque 
fccnery ;  wood,  rocks,  fwelling  hills,  winding 
rivers,  and  rich  vales. 

The  climate  is  pleafcnt  and  falubriotis,  highly 
favorable  to  vegetation,  which  is  here  generally 
forwarder  than  in  any  other  parts  of  England,  If 
we  except  the  Southern  coaft  of  Cornwall.  The 
profufion  of  myrtles  to  be  feen,  for  the  pro- 
duction of  which  it  has  been  long  famous,  evince 
there  is  a  genial  mildnefs  in  the  air,  approaching 

to 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.         169 

to  the  foftnefs  of  more  Southern  climates ;  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt,  that  fome  of  the  hardier 
plants  of  thofe  parts  might  be  cultivated  here 
with  fuccefs,  would  the  inhabitants  bend  their  at- 
tention to  the  rearing  of  fuch  exotics.  It  might 
then  literally  exhibit  the  riches  of  the  Italian  foil. 

"  Hie  ver  purpureum,  varies  hie  flumina  circum 
Fundit  humus  floras :  hie  Candida  populus  antro 
Imminet,  et  lentse  texunt  umbracula  vites." 

Being,  however,  very  hilly^  the  ifland  is  fub- 
je6i  to  that  frequent  rain  which  is  one  of  the 
mofl  unpleafant  circumftances  attending  moun- 
tainous countries.  The  vapours  are  attracted 
by  the  long  range  of  lofty  hills  which  ftretch 
from  Eaft  to  Weft  the  whole  length  of  the 
ifland,  and  in  the  colder  months,  involve  the 
parts  beneath  them  in  almoft  perpetual  gloom 
and  moifture.  Yet  this  circumftance  does  not 
appear  to  afFe£l  the  general  health  of  the  in- 
habitants refiding  in  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood of  thefe  elevations ;  notwithftanding  the 
vapours  thus  accumulated  teem  with  putrefcent 
Z  qualities. 


1/0  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

qualities,  which  I  am  informed,  are  fometimes 
fo  powerful  as  to  taint,  in  a  very  few  hours, 
any  kind  of  meat  in  the  houfes  immediately 
under  the  hills.  This  fad  is  moft  frequently 
experienced  in  the  vicinity  of  St.  Boniface 
and  Steephill. 

The  foil  of  the  ifland  differs  extremely  in 
different  parts;  but  generally  fpeaking,  is  a 
ftrong  and  loamy  earth,  admirably  adapted  to 
the  purpofes  of  agriculture.  It  often  exhibits 
a  remarkable  variety  in  a  fmall  diftri 61  of  ground; 
as  in  the  parifh  of  Brading,  (towards  the  Eaftern 
extremity),  where  the  following  diverfities  ap- 
pear ;  in  the  South  part,  a  free  kind-working 
earth,  mixed  with  a  fmall  proportion  of  fand; 
in  the  Weft,  a  light  loam  mixed  with  chalk; 
and  in  the  North  and  Eaft  parts,  a  ftiff  clay, 
fcarcely  yielding  to  the  operations  of  hufbandry. 
The  fertility  of  the  ifland  is  almoft  proverbial; 
it  having,  long  fince,  been  faid  to  produce 
more  in  one  year,  than  its  inhabitants  could 
eonfume  in  eight.  An  improved  hufbandry 
has  inereafed  this  fertility;  and  from  what  I 

have 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  IJ 

have  been  able  to  colleft,  we  may  fairly  efti- 
mate  its  annual  produce  to  be  at  leaft  twelve 
times  as  much  as  its  yearly  confumption. 

Timber  was  formerly  extremely  plentiful  in  the 
ifland,  but  the  inhabitants  have  had  fo  good  a 
market  for  it,  at  Portfmouth  Dock,  and  the  other 
different  yards  in  its  neighbourhood,  that  few 
extenfive  woods  are  now  to  be  feen.*  Improvi- 
dent of  the  future,  they  have  omitted  to  plant,  in 
proportion  to  their  cutting  down ;  and  confe- 
quently,  there  being  no  young  trees  to  fupply 
the  place  of  the  old  ones,  in  a  few  years  the 
Ifle  of  Wight  will  be  entirely  robbed  of  its 
timber,  and  a  great  part  of  its  prefent  beauty 
alfo.  The  powerful  reafon,  which  perhaps  has 
prevented  the  proprietors  of  land  in  this  fpot 
(and,  indeed,  operates  with  moft  individuals 
throughout  the  kingdom)  from  encouraging  the 
growth  of  oak  on  their  eflates,  is,  the  more 
profitable,  and  quick  returns  made  to  them  by 
keeping  land  in  an  arable  ftate.  To  bring  this 
noble  tree  to  maturity,  no  lefs  than  one  hun- 

*  Of  what  remains,  the  oak  and  elm  flourifh  moft. 

Z  2  dred 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHTi 


dred  years  are  required ;  and  it  can  hardly  be 
expefted,  that  the  man  of  fmall  property  mould 
forego  the  intermediate  profits  arifmg  from  his 
land,  in  an  uncertain  expectation  of  advantage 
to  his  family,  at  a  diftance  of  time  to  which 
he  can  fcarcely  extend  his  ideas  of  intereft. 
Befides,  it  is  well  known  that  the  oak  requires 
the  ftrongeft,  fineft,  and  deepefl  foil  for  its 
culture;  which  being  the  moft  lucrative  for 
hufbandry,  it  is  not  exfraordinary,  that  indi- 
viduals not  burthened  with  'affluence,  mould 
apply  it  to  other  purpofes  than  railing  timber. 
Thefe  reafons,  however,  for  neglecting  the 
plantation  of  oak,  though  applying  forcibly 
enough  to  the  fanner,  or  landlord  of  fmall 
property,  certainly  lofe  great  part,  of  their  effeft 
with  refpect  to  poffeffors  of  extenfive  eftates. 
To  them,  the  inconvenience  of  appropriating 
a  few  acres  to  the  purpofe  of  planting  timber, 
•would  fcarcely  be  felt ;  the  expences  attending 
it  would  not  be  regarded;  the  lofs  of  the 
intermediate  profits  arifmg  from  the  land,  would 
be  trifling;  and  as  large  eflates  are  frequently 

entailedj 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


entailed,  or  continued  in  the  fame  family  for 
a  long  feries  of  years,  the  planter  of  the  pre- 
fent  century,  might  reafonably  build  upon  the 
profpeft  of  his  defcendent  enjoying  the  fruits 
of  his  labors  in  the  next. 

For  government  to  interfere  at  all  with  the 
management  or  ufe  of  private  property,  by  tn~ 
forcing  in  any  way  the  planting  of  oak,  (a  prac- 
tice adopted  by  parliament  in  the  fixteenth  cen- 
tury) would  now  be  juuiy  deemed  a  trefpafs  on 
one  of  the  moft  facred  rights  of  the  fubjeft  ;  but 
what  it  cannot  compel,  it  might  perhaps  allure  to, 
by  holding  out  honors,  pecuniary  rewards,  or 
other  flimuli,  to  incite  and  encourage  the  pro- 
prietors of  land  to  cultivate  this  valuable  tree, 
and  thereby  to  provide  for  the  future  navies  of 
our  country. 

What  timber  remains,  is  chiefly  found  in  the 
central,  and  Eaftern  parts  of  the  ifland.  The 
noble  woods  of  Sir  John  Barrington,  Bart,  at 
Swainfton,  whofe  houfe  is  embofomed  in  them, 
are  of  great  extent,  and  contain  many  magnifi- 
cent and  valuable  trees.  Thofe  of  Wootton  and 

Quarr 


174        HISTORY    OF   THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

Quarr  prefent  a  fine  fylvan  fcene  to  the  eye, 
covering  a  fuperficies  of  eleven  hundred  acres. 
In  the  parilh  of  Whippingham,  alfo,  on  the  Eaft- 
ern  fide  of  the  river  Medina,  fome  valuable 
timber  may  be  feen. 

The  principal  rivers  of  the  ifland  are,  the  Me- 
dina, the  Yar,  and  Wootton  river.  The  fpreading 
mouth  of  the  firft  forms  an  ample  and  fecure 
harbour ;  and  its  ftream,  after  it  contracts,  and 
winds  into  the  heart  of  the  ifland,  rolls  its  waters 
through  fome  very  agreeable  quiet  fcenery,  pre- 
fenting  a  pleafing  contraft  to  the  buftle  and  con- 
fufion  of  the  port. 

Wootton  river,  alfo,  when  the  tide  is  high, 
is  rendered  extremely  beautiful  by  the  noble 
woods  which  defcend  quite  to  the  water's  edge, 
and  caft  their  fhades  athwart  it. 

In  the  Yar  there  is  nothing  ftriking  or  pic- 
turefque. 

The  fprings  are  in  general  pure  and  cryftal- 
line;  particularly  thofe  that  have  been  filtered 
through  the  vaft  ilrata  of  chalkj  with  which  the 

ifland 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  175 

ifland  abounds.*  They  are  plentiful  in  moll 
parts,  and  on  the  Southern  coaft  form  a  pleafing 
accompaniment  to  the  wild  fcenery  of  the  place, 
by  pouring  forth  their  treafures  in  innumerable 
little  cafcades,  pellucid  as  cryftal,  which  fall 
from  rock  to  rock,  and  gratify  the  ear  by  their 
murmurs,  and  the  eye  by  their  fparkling  bril- 
liancy. 

The  inhabitants  of  the  ifland  are  not  diftin- 
guifhed  by  any  local  chara&eriftics  from  their 
countrymen  on  the  main  land ;  but  are  a  vigo- 
rous, healthy,  and  aftive  race.  They  fall  natu- 
rally into  the  three  general  divifions  of,  gentry, 
yeomanry,  and  laboring  poor. 

The  firft  clafs  blend  fimplicity  with  refine- 
ment, and  are  at  once  hofpitable  and  urbane. 
They  live  together  in  a  friendly  reciprocation  of 
good  offices;  and  ftrengthen  their  harmony  by 

*  The  water  which  has  undergone  this  natural  perco- 
lation, is  fo  perfectly  free  from  impurity,  that  it  has  fre- 
quently been  carried  to  the  tropics,  and  brought  back 
entirely  fwcet. 

frequent 


176  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT*. 

frequent  focial  meetings,  and  the  pleafures  of 
the  chace. 

The  yeomanry  form  a  very  refpeftable  clafs 
of  people ;  renting,  in  general,  eftates  from  one 
hundred  pounds  to  four  hundred,  per  annum. 
They  are  excellent  farmers,  and  bear  the  cha- 
ra&er  of  kind,  benevolent  mafters. 

The  feeling  and  reflecting  mind  cannot  but 
receive  particular  pleafure  in  contemplating  the 
condition  of  the  third  divifion  of  inhabitants, 
the  laboring  poor ;  a  defcription  of  people  who, 
in  other  parts,  are  too  often  involved  in  want 
and  wretchednefs.  Among  the  laborers  of  the 
ifland,  a  general  appearance  of  content  and 
decency  does  away  the  ideas  of  poverty  and 
mifery.  They  all  feem  comfortable  and  happy. 
Their  dwellings  are  neat,  fnug,  and  cleanly ;  to 
each  of  which  is  attached  a  little  garden,  kept 
in  nice  order,  and  planted  with  potatoes.  Their 
manners  are  civil,  inoffenfive,  and  incorrupted 
by  thofe  vices  which  are  generally  found  amongft 
the  lower  ranks  of  people  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  great  towns. 

The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          1?7 

The  above  character  attaches  to  the  laborers 
in  general,  throughout  the  ifland,  but  applies 
perhaps  more  particularly  to  thofe  of  the  rocky 
and  mountainous  regions  of  the.  South,  who  are 
chained,  as  it  were,  to  their  native  hills,  and 
have  not  been  vitiated  by  foreign  communica- 
tion. It  is  about  Steephill,  Undercliff,  and  their 
neighbourhood  that  the  poet's  defcription  af- 
fumes  reality. 

"  Tho'  poor  the  peafant's  hut,  his  feafts  tho'  fmall, 
He  fees  his  little  lot  the  lot  of  all ; 
Sees  no  contiguous  palace  rear  its  head, 
To  fhame  the  meannefs  of  his  humble  med  ; 
No  coftly  lord  the  fumptuous  banquet  deal, 
To  make  him  loathe  his  vegetable  meal  r 
But  calm  and  bred  in  ignorance  and  toil, 
Each  wifli  contracting,  fits  him  to  the  foil. 
Chearful  at  morn  he  wakes  from  fhort  repofe, 
Breads  the  keen  air  and  carols  as  he  goes  ; 
With  patient  angle  trolls   the  finny  deep, 
Or  drives  his  vent'rous  plough-fhare  to  the  fleep." 

"  At  night  returning,  every  labour  fped, 
He  fits  him  down  the  monarch  of  a  fhed  ; 
Smiles  by  his  chearful  fire,  and  round  furveys 
His  children's  looks,  that  brighten  at  the  blaze; 
While  his  lov'd  partner,  boaftful  of  her  hoard, 
Difplays  the  cleanly  platter  on  the  board." 

A  a  It 


Ij8  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


It  is,  however,  much  to  be  lamented,  that  no 
pains  feem  to  have  been  taken,  in  imparting  ufc- 
ful  knowledge  to  this  honeft,  and  induftrious  clafs 
of  people.     When  we  look  into  other  parts  of 
the  kingdom,  and  fee  the  fuccefs  that  has  attend- 
ed one  of  the  nobleft  plans  of  general  improve- 
ment among  the  lower   ranks  of  fociety,  ever 
fuggefted,  the  eftablimment  offundayfchools,  by 
means  of  which,  the  morals  of  the  poor  are  bet- 
tered, their  manners  civilized,  and  valuable  in- 
ftruftion  is  imparted  to  them ;   we  cannot  but 
regret,  that  fimilar  advantages  are  not  held  .out 
to  the  laboring  poor  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight.     Both 
policy  and  morals  diclate  and  enforce  the  adop- 
tion of  this  excellent  fyftem.     To  impart  inflruc- 
tion  to  the  ignorant,  is  confeffedly  the  duty  of 
the  higher  and  better   informed   ranks ;    and  I 
believe  no  one  will  affert,  that  fulfilling  this  ob- 
ligation has  a  tendency  to  render  thofe  inftruft- 
ed,  lefs  valuable  members  of  fociety  than  they 
were,  before  their  emancipation  from  profound 
and  ftupid  ignorance.     I  would  not  take  upon 
me  to  determine  what  precifc  degree  of  knowledge 
it  may  be  neceflary  to  afford  to  the  lower  ranks 

of 


HISTORY   OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  1/g 

of  people;  but  I  think  we  may  venture  to  fay, 
all  fuch  information  ought  to  be  beftowed,  as 
can  tend  to  imprefs  their  minds  with  a  proper 
fenfe  of  their  obligations  to  God,  the  community, 
and  themfelves. 

It  would  be  unpardonable  were  we  to  take 
leave  of  the  inhabitants,  without  noticing  the 
jnoft  amiable  part  of  them  ;  the  fair  females  of 
the  ifland.  The  general  beauty  of  its  women 
has  long  been  one  of  the  boafts  of  this  part  of 
England,  and  any  one  who  poffefles  a  tafte  for 
female  charms,  will  readily  acknowledge  that 
the  boaft  is  neither  vain  nor  unfounded.  To 
what  phyfical  caufe  it  may  be  afcribed,  is 
difficult  to  fay ;  but  certainly  the  girls  of  the 
ifland,  of  all  ranks  and  defcriptions,  have  an 
elegance  of  ftature  and  beauty  of  countenance 
not  to  be  obferved  (in  the  general,  I  mean),  in 
any  other  particular  diflriclof  Southern  Britain. 

It  is  here  only  that  we  may  behold  conftant 

examples  of 

"  The  form 

Shap'd  by  the  hand  of  harmony  ;     the  cheek, 
Where  the  live  crimfon,  thro1  tlie  native  white 
Aa  :>  Soft- 


l8o         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISJLE    OF    WIGHT. 


Soft-fhooting,  o'er  the  face  diffufes  bloom, 
And  every  namelefs  grace  ;    the  parted  lip, 
Like  the  red  rofe-bud  moift  with  morning  dew, 
Breathing  delight ;    and,  under  flowing  jet, 
Or  funny    ringlets,  or  of  circling  brown, 
The  neck  light-fhaded,  and  the  fwelling  breaft." 

The  d  wns  confift  of  a  long  range  of  hills, 
ftretching  the  whole  length  of  the  ifland,  from 
the  town  of  Brading,  at  the  Eaftern  extremity, 
to  the  Needle  rocks  at  the  Weftern  one.  The 
whole  furface  of  thefe  is  covered  with  a  fhort, 
fweet  herbage,  which  affords  admirable  pafturc 
for  fheep;  rendering  the  meat  delicious,  and 
the  texture  of  the  wool  extremely  fine.  Some 
of  thefe  downs  fwell  into  very  bold  elevations, 
and  unfold  to  the  aftonifhed  vifion  profpe&s, 
vaft,  various,  and  fublime.  The  higheft  of 
them  appears  to  be  (from  a  late  meafurement) 
St.  Boniface  down,  which  rifes  about  eight  hun- 
dred and  forty  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
ocean. 

A  late  amiable  naturalilt,  fpeaking  of  a  range 
of  chalk  downs,  in  the  upper  part  of  Hampfhire, 
refembling  thofe  of  the  ifland,  has  the  following 

obfer-^ 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  l8l 


obfervation  :  "  perhaps  I  may  be  fingular  in  my 
opinion,  and  not  fo  happy  as  to  convey  to  you 
the  fame  idea;  but  I  never  contemplate  thefe 
mountains,  without  thinking  I  perceive  fome- 
thing  analogous  to  growth,  in  their  gentle 
fwellings,  and  fmooth  fungus  like  protuberances, 
their  fluted  fides,  and  regular  hollows  and  Hopes, 
that  carry  at  once  the  air  of  vegetative  dilatation 
and  expanfion."*  The  idea  is  novel  and  in- 
genious, and  feems  to  be  founded  in  truth,  from 
certain  appearances  of  gradual  enlargement 
which  the  Ifle  of  Wight  hills  have  exhibited. 
It  is  a  well-known  facl,  that,  about  half  a  cen- 
tury fince,  Shanklin  down,  which  (lands  in  the 
$outh-Eaftern  part  of  the  ifland,  was  not  to  be 
difcerned,  from  St.  Catherine's,  owing  to  the 
intervention  of  Week  down,  whofe  magnitude 
and  elevation  completely  fcreened  it  from  the 
eye.  A  gradual,  but  imperceptible  expanfion, 
however,  of  Shanklin  down,  has  at  length  reared 
it  to  a  greater  bulk,  and  a  greater  height,  (by  at 

*    White's  Nat.  Hift.  Sclborne,  p.  163. 

leaft 


l8a  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

lead  one  hundred  feet)  than  that  of  its  formerly 
invidious  neighbour. 

It  feems  fufficiently  clear,  that  this  difference 
in  the  appearance  of  the  two  downs  muft  have 
arifen  rather  from  the  growth  of  Shanklin,  than 
the  finking  of  Week ;  fince  the  latter,  and  all 
the  furrounding  downs,  bear  the  fame  relative 
proportion  to  each  other  they  ever  did,  which 
could  not  be  the  cafe,  had  any  change  taken 
place  in  its  elevation  or  magnitude. 

Thefe  downs  exhibit  a  number  of  thofc 
circular  marks  on  the  grafs,  which  Philofophy, 
unable  herfelf  to  account  fatisfaclorily  for  the 
phenomenon,  in  compliance  with  vulgar  fuper- 
ftition,  is  content  to  call  by  the  name  of  fairy 
rings  ; 

"  Where 

At  fall  of  eve  the  fairy  people  throng, 
In  various  game  and  revelry  to  pafs 
The  fummer  night,  as  village  ftories  tell." 

Thefe  appearances  are  generally  circular, 
fometimes  oval,  and  from  two  to  twenty  feet  in 
diameter.  They  may  eafily  be  difcovered  by 

the 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


the  ranknefs  of  the  grafs,  which  forms  the  ring, 
and  the  number  of  fungi  or  mufhrooms  that 
cover  it.  Various,  have  been  the  conjectures 
relative  to  the  caufe  of  this  phenomenon,  and 
none  perhaps  more  plaufible  than  that  of  Doftor 
Darwin,  who  accounts  for  it  in  the  following 
manner : 

"  The  numerous  flames  of  lightning  which 
occur  every  fummer,  are,  I  believe,  generally 
difcharged  on  the  earth,  and  but  feldom,  if  ever, 
from  one  cloud  to  another.  Moift  trees  are  the 
moft  frequent  conductors  of  thefe  flames  of 
lightning,  and  I  am  informed  by  purchafers  of 
wood,  that  innumerable  trees  are  thus  cracked 
and  injured.  At  other  times  larger  parts  or 
prominences  of  clouds,  gradually  finking  as  they 
move  along,  are  difcharged  on  the  moifter  parts 
of  graffy  plains.  Now  this  knob  or  corner  of  a 
cloud,  in  being  attracted  by  the  earth,  will  become 
nearly  cylindrical,  as  loole  wool  would  do  when 
drawn  out  into  a  thread,  and  will  ftrike  the  earth 
with  a  ftream  of  eleclricity  perhaps  two  or  ten 
yards  in  diameter.  Now  as  a  ftream  of  elec- 
tricity 


l8}  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    Of    \VIGHT, 

. —  *g 

tricity  difplaces  the  air  it  paffes  through,  it  is 
plain  no  part  of  the  grafs  can  be  burnt  by  it,  but 
juft  the  external  ring  of  this  cylinder,  where  the 
grafs  can  have  accefs  to  the  air,  fince  without  air 
nothing  can  be  calcined.  This  earth,  after 
having  been  fo  calcined,  becomes  a  richer  foil, 
and  either  funguffcs  or  a  bluer  grafs  for  many- 
years  mark  the  place.  That  lightning  difplaces 
the  air  in  its  paffage,  is  evinced  by  the  loud  crack 
that  fucceeds  it,  which  is  owing  to  the  fides  of 
the  aerial  vacuum  clapping  together  when  the 
lightning  is  withdrawn.  That  nothing  will  cal- 
cine without  air  is  now  well  tinderftood  from  the 
acids  produced  in  the  burning  of  phlogiftic  fub- 
Itances;  and  may  be  agreeably  feen  by  fuf- 
pending  a  paper  on  an  iron  prong,  and  putting 
it  into  the  centre  of  the  blaze  of  an  iron  furnace; 
it  may  be  held  there  fome  feconds,  and  may  be 
again  withdrawn  without  being  burnt,  if  it  be 
palfed  quickly  into  the  flame,  and  out  again 
through  the  external  part  of  it,  which  is  in  contaft 
with  the  air.  I  know,"  adds  the  Do6lor,  *'  fome 
circles  of  many  yards  diameter,  of  this  kind,  near 

Foremark 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  l8^ 

Foremark  in  Derbyshire,  which  annually  pro- 
duce large  white  fungufles,  and  ftronger  grafs, 
and  have  done  fo,  I  am  informed,  above  thirty 
years."  The  probability  of  this  hypothefis  will 
perhaps  be  allowed,  when  it  is  recollected  that 
thefe  gramineous  circles  are  generally  found 
upon  open  and  expofed  places,  and  never  in 
immediate  contatt  with  trees,  or  any  other  free 
conductors  of  the  electrical  fluid. 


Bb  CHAP. 


l86  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    II. 


OF     THE     ANCIENT    CONNECTION     OF     THE 
ISLE     O*F     WIGHT     WITH     THE     MAIN 
•  LAND ;   ITS  COAST ;   ROCKS  ;  CA- 
VERNS;     CHINES,      &C. 

AT  is  now  pretty  generally  imagined,  that  the 
ifland,  many  centuries  fince,  was  connected 
with,  and  actually  made  a  part  of,  the  main  land. 
Hiftory  indeed  does  not  reach  to  a  period 
previous  to  the  exiftence  of  the  prefent  feparating 
ftrait ;  but  we  have  recorded  accounts  remaining, 
of  the  waters  which  formed  it  being  fo  mallow, 
as  to  leave  its  bottom  entirely  dry  at  low  water.* 
Mr.  Borlafe  has  indeed  endeavoured  to  prove, 
that  the  hiftorian,  on  whofe  accounts  this 

*  Diodorus  Siculus,  p.  347. 

opinion 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  l8/ 

opinion  is  founded,  fpoke  of  one  of  the  Cafli- 
terides,  a  clufter  of  iflands  on  the  coaft  of  Corn- 
wall ;  and  that  Iftis  (the  ifland  mentioned  by 
him)  can  by  no  means  be  fuppofed  to  be  the  Ifle 
of  Wight.  But  his  arguments  do  not  appear  to 
me  convincing,  particularly  when  oppofed  to 
the  authorities  produced  by  Mr.  Whitaker,  in 
favor  of  a  contrary  opinion.*  The  Cornifh 
antiquary  perceives  a  great  abfurdity  in  the 
Britons  bringing  their  tin  from  fuch  a  diftant 
place  as  the  Belerian  fliores,  to  the  Ifle  of  Wight; 
but  this  apparent  abfurdity  will  vanifh,  if  we 
refleft,  according  to  my  fuggeftion  in  an  early 
part  of  this  volume,  that  the  Greeks  of  Marfeilles, 
on  their  fucceeding  the  Phoenicians  in  this 
traffic,  might  have  prevailed  on  the  Britons  to 
remove  the  itaple  of  this  article,  from  the  ports 
where  it  was  originally  fhipped,  to  thofe  of  the 
Ifle  of  Wight ;  iince  a  removal  of  this  nature 
would  fave  the  former  a  tedious,  long,  and 
dangerous  voyage  (in  thofe  cjays)  through  the 
Bay  of  Bifcay,  part  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  the 

*   See  his  Hift.  Mancheflcr,  vol.  II.  p.  177. 

B  b  2  Straits 


l88         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

Straits  of  Gibraltar,  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea. 
The  land-carriage  of  the  tin,  from  Normandy  to 
Languedoc,  might  be  performed  in  the  fpace  of 
fifteen  or  eighteen  days,  whereas  the  circuitous 
navigation  juft  mentioned  would  not  be  ac- 
complifhed,  by  the  unfldlful  failors  of  that 
period,  in  lefs  than  five  or  fix  weeks.  The 
appearance  alfo  of  the  Northern  fhore  of  the 
ifland,  and  the  oppofite  one  of  Hampfhire,  feems 
to  confirm  the  idea  of  an  ancient  junction 
between  them ;  as  they  are  both  low,  and  their 
refpe£tive^/2r<zta  of  foil,  bear  a  near  refemblance 
to  each  other. 

The  Northern  coaft  of  the  ifland  has  nothing 
particularly  interefting;  being  in  general  fiat,  or 
riling  gradually  into  moderate  elevations.  It 
now  and  then,  however,  moots  out  into  littlr 
points  and  capes,  which  give  a  pleafmg  variety 
to  it.  The  more  confifts,  for  the  moft  part,  of 
hard  gravel,  or  fand,  but  in  many  places  is  dif- 
ngured  with  dark-colored,  fubmarine  rocks. 
This  littoral  tamenefs  on  the  North  fide  is  finely 
comrailed  by  the  rude  magnificence  and  ftu- 

pendous 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  189 

pendous  horror  of  the  Southern  coaft ;  \vhich 
prefents  a  great  deal  of  awful  and  fublime 
fcenery.  In  order  to  give  an  accurate  idea  of 
its  appearance,  it  may  not  be  amifs  for  us  to 
furvey  it  rather  minutely,  and  trace  the  various 
promontories,  bays,  and  windings,  which  it 
exhibits. 

The  bold  cretaceous  cliffs  which  form  the 
Southern  fhore  of  the  ifland,  and  ftretch,  with 
but  few  interruptions,  from  the  Eaftern  to  the 
Weftern  extremities  of  it,  commence  on  the 
Southern  fide  of  Bimbridge  peninfula,  rifing 
abruptly  into  a  perpendicular  elevation  of  about 
four  hundred  feet.  This  lofty  cliff  is  deno- 
minated Culver  cliff,*  from  the  circumftance  of 
its  being  the  refort  of  a  great  profufion  of  that 
{"mail  fpecies  of  the  wild  pigeon,  called  by  orni- 
thologifts  the  Columba  Saxatilis,  which  delights 
infixing  its  aerial  abode  in  the  clefts  of  inac- 
ceffible  crags  and  lofty  rocks.  Here  indeed, 
one  would  fuppofe,  it  might  dwell  in  fafety; 
but,  alas  !  the  daring  foot  of  plunder  braves 

'  The  Saxon  name  of  pigeon  is  Culbpe, 

eyen 


190         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

even  the  horrors  of  this  beetling  eminence,  and 
its  fearful  ledges  are  often  vifited,  in  the  feafon 
of  incubation,  by  him,  who, 

"  To  the  rocks 
Dire  clinging,  gathers  his  ovarious  food." 

This  cliff  affords  fhelter  and  habitations  alfo  to 
a  particular  fpecies  of  hawk,  which  we  mail 
defcribe  in  another  place. 

The  more  now  becomes  fuddenly  very  much 
depreffed,  and  retires  into  a  deep  bay,  called 
Sand-down  bay,  forming  nearly  a  femi-circle  of 
about  four  miles  from  horn  to  horn.  The 
appearance  of  this  flat  beach,  and  of  the  marm 
to  the  Northward  of  it,  plainjy  indicates  that  the 
fea  formerly  flowed  over  both  of  them ;  and 
probably  infulated  the  parifh  of  Yaverland,  by 
connecting  its  waters  with  thofe  of  Brading 
harbour.  Towards  the  Weflern  point  of  this 
bay,  the  fliore  begins  to  refume  its  wonted  mag- 
nificence, leaving  however  its  chalky  appearance, 
andaffuming  a  dark,  ferruginous,  rufty  hue,  (but 
considerably  ftratified)  which  it  preferves  for 
fome  diflance.  It  here  exhibits  a  mofl  tremen- 
dous 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


dous  and  remarkable  fi  fibre  in  the  earth,  called 

»  * 

Shanklin  Chine;  a  rent  occafioned  by  fome 
partial  earthquake,  or  other  violent  natural  con- 
vulfion.  From  the  perceptible  commencement 
of  this  gaping  chafm,  to  its  termination  on  the 
more,  following  the  various  windings  of  the 
aperture,  is  about  eight  hundred  yards.  Its 
form  is  capricious  and  irregular,  fomewhat 
refembling  the  lefler  Greek  figma;  gradually 
increafing  in  depth  and  width,  till  it  opens  upon 
the  fea,  in  a  yawning  of  fixty  yards  over,  and 
eighty-feven  deep. 

The  rude  promontory  of  Dunnofe  now  pre- 
fents  itfelf,  the  waters  of  which  are  fo  deep,  that 
firft-rate  men  of  war  may  approach  within  half 
a  mile  of  its  cliffs.  The  fcenery  of  the  more 
here  becomes  truly  wonderful.  From  Luccomb 
to  Bonchurch  the  downs  of  St.  Boniface  heave 
themfelves  into  the  clouds  on  the  right,  while 
huge  mafles  of  disjointed  rock,  of  all  fhapes,  and 
in  all  directions,  lie  fcattered  in  ruinous  diforder 
below ;  and  imprefs  the  mind  with  an  idea  of 

thofc 


192  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISJ.E    OF    WIGHT. 

thofe  tempefluous  conflicts,  and  elemental  con- 
vulfions,  which  {hake  the   very   foundations  of 

nature  :  when 

"  The  gloomy  \voods 

Start  at  the  flafh,  and  from  their  deep  rcceft 
Widefldmmg  out,  their  trembling  inmates  fhake. 
Amid  Carnarvon's  mountains  rages  loud 
The  repercuflive  roar  ;   with  mighty  crufli 
Into  the  fldlhing  deep,  from  the  rude  rocks 
Of  Penmanmau-r  heap'd  hideous  to  the  Iky, 
Tumble  the  fmitten  cliffs  ;    and  Snowden's  peak 
Diffolving,  inftant  yields  his  wintry  load^ 
Far  feen  the  heights  of  heathy  Cheviot  blaze, 
And  Thule  bellows  through  her  utmdft  ifles." 

From  Steephill  quite  to  Chale,  a  di (Vance  of 
five  or  fix  miles  (called  not  improperly  Under  - 
cliff  or  Underway),  the  coaft  preferves  an  ap- 
pearance, equally  new,  ftriking,  and  magnificent. 
The  downs  now  lofe  their  regular  floping  fides 
gently  uniting  with  the  lefs  animated  flats  below 
them,  and  terminate  abruptly  in  a  fteep  preci- 
pice of  calcareous  rock,  not  unlike  thofe  con- 
tinuous cliffs  which  are  feen  on  the  banks  of 
the  Wye,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Persfield. 
This  perpendicular  precipice,  which  almoft  in  a 

right 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  193 

right  line  for  nearly  five  miles,  has  the  appear- 
ance, if  we  may  be  allowed, 

"  Parva  componere  magnis," 

of  an  immenfe  ftone  wall;  particularly  when 
viewed  from  any  diftance.  Its  height  varies  but 
little,  the  general  elevation  being  about  thirty  or 
forty  yards.  The  tracl  of  country  immediately 
beneath  this  precipitous  defcent,  which  unites 
with  the  fhore,  is  of  different  breadth ;  from  a 
quarter  of  a  mile,  to  a  mile  and  quarter  over. 
It  is  thrown  into  fuch  whimfical  fwellings  and 
indentations,  and  lies  in  fuch  romantic  con- 
fufion,  preferving  at  the  fame  time  a  refemblance 
of  parts  conftituting  an  uncouth  and  extraordi- 
nary whole,  that  I  cannot  help  thinking  it  may  be 
confidered  as  a  prodigious  land  Jlip,  occafioned, 
in  diftant  ages,  by  the  abforption  of  the  foun- 
dations of  this  vaft  tracl  into  fome  huge  cavern 
or  gulf  below,  after  being  fapped  and  under- 
mined by  fubterraneous  waters ;  an  opinion 
which  is  juftified  by  various  inftances  of  fimilar 
lapfes,  in  other  parts  of  the  kingdom,  and  perhaps 
confirmed  by  the  reclilinear  formality  of  the 
naked,  remaining  cliff. 

C  c  From 


194          HISTORY   -OF    THE    ISLE    Of    WIGHT. 


From  the  flatnefs  of  this  lengthened,  natural 
wall,  a  very  pleafing  effect  is  found  to  be  produced 
in  many  parts  of  Underway ;  I  mean  that  of  an 
echo,  or  reflection  of  founds,  delivered  loudly  and 
diftinctly.  Four  fyllables  have  been  known  to 
be  returned  from  thefe  rocks,  when  uttered  from 
their  true  centrum  phonicum,  which  appears  to  be 
at  about  two  hundred  yards  diftance.  Much 
depends  however  on  the  /late  of  the  atmofpherc,  at 
the  period  of  trial,  fince,  if  it  be  either  too  rare 
or  too  denfej  it  will  prove  unfuccefsful ;  for  in 
the  firft  inftance  the  voice  is  attenuated  and 
weakened,  in  the  other  it  is  impeded  and 
deadened,  In  a  ftill,  clear  evening,  at  a  late 
hour,  when  the  air  is  moderately  moift,  and  very 
elaftic,  the  reverberation  will  be  moft  diftincl: 
and  pleafing,  and  would  eafily  deceive  the  young 
and  unphilofophical. — 

"  Forte  puer,  comitum  feduftus  ab  agmine  fido, 
Dixerat,  Ecquis  adeft  ?  et,  Adeft,  refponderat  Echo. 
Hic'flupet;    utque  acicm  partes  divifit  in  omnes, 
Vocc,  Vcni,  clamat  magna.     Vocat  ilia  vocantem." 

In  the  iingular  trad  of  country  which  we  have 
been  defcribing,  it  is  interefting  to  obferve  how 

the 


HISTORY'OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  195 

the  induftrious  labor  of  the  inhabitants  over- 
comes certain  circumftances  of  local  incon- 
venience. Many  fpots  of  ground  hereabouts 
lie  in  fuch  intricacies,  among  the  crags  of  rocks 
and  mountains,  that  one  would  imagine  their 
fituation  mould  fecure  them  from  the  notice  of 
the  hufbandman.  The  iflanders,  however,  have 
found  means  to  reduce  all  thefe  fpots  to  tillage;  and 
even  thofe  which  appear,  from  their  rapid  de- 
fcent  and  whimfical  inequalities,  to  be  moft  in- 
capable of  being  worked,  yet  by  ploughing  them 
fometimes  in  a  tranfverfe,  and  fometimes  in  an 
oblique  direction,  they  make  them  produce 
heavy  and  abundant  crops.  The  operation  is 
r.otwithftanding  a  very  laborious  one ;  and  I 
frequently  remarked  it  was  neceflary  for  them  to 
have  five  .horfes  to  perform  it.  Thefe  pieces  of 
land,  though  thus  awkwardly  fituated,  are  very 
valuable,  and  let  for  twenty  millings  and  upwards 
per  acre. 

Knowles,  and  the  defcent  of  St   Catherine's 
ftupendous  hill,  difplay   a  great  deal  of  rude, 
rocky  fcenery>  being  covered  with  huge  frag- 
£J  c  2  ments 


196  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

ments  of  cliff,  tumbled  and  thrown  about  in  the 
wildeft  confufion.  On  the  Weftern  fide  of  the 
latter,  another  gaping  fiflure  occurs,  called  Black' 
gang  chine,  a  name  which  in  fome  degree  pre- 
pares one  for  the  gloomy  horrors  of  the  chafm. 
Its  fides  are  ftratified  with  alternate  layers  of  cal- 
careous ftone,  and  a  black  argillaceous  earth. 
Through  the  bottom  of  it  runs  a  ftream  ofwater, 
that  after  heavy  rains  is  magnified  into  a  copious 
torrent,  w  -'ch  da  flies  with  roaring  impetuofity 
from  one  rocky  fragment  to  another,  till  it  reaches 
the  mouth  of  the  chine,  down  which  it  precipi- 
tates itfelf,  in  a  noble  perpendicular  cafcade  of 
forty  feet. 

The  coaft  exhibits  from  hence  a  continued 
range  of  cliffs  of  unequal  height,  for  the  diftance 
of  eight  or  nine  miles;  when  it  forms  another 
extenfive  finus.  called  Frefhwater  bay.  To- 
wards the  centre  of  this  fweeping  recefs,  the 
fhore  again  becomes  flat  and  pebbly  ;  and  feems 
to  offer  but  a  poor  bulwark  againft  the  thundering 
feas  which  rufh  in  hither,  when  the  ocean  is 
agitated  by  a  South-wefterly  wind.  Nature  in- 
deed 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          197 

deed  appears  to  have  here  intended  a  divifion  of 
the  Weftern  limb  of  the  ifland,  from  the  other 
part,  having  brought  the  fpring-head  of  the  river 
Yar  within  one  hundred  yards  of  the  water's 
edge,  and  placed  no  obftacle  to  their  jun6iion  in 
this  intermediate  fpace,  but  the  low,  pebbly  beach 
above-mentioned,  over  which,  in  tempeftuous 
weather,  the  fpray  of  the  fea  eafily  makes  it* 
way. 

The  view  from  the  bottom  of  Frefhwater  bay 
is  extremely  noble.  On  the  left,  the  eye  takes 
in  the  rugged  defcent  of  St.  Catherine's  hill,  the 
white  cliffs  to  the  Weftward  of  it,  and  three  mif- 
fhaped,  unwieldy  rocks,  ifolated,  and  detached 
from  the  land,  and  frowning  on  the  waves  that 
lafh  their  fides.  On  the  right,  it  beholds  a  more 
covered  with  vaft  fragments  of  broken  rock,  and 
the  commencement  of  thofe  ftupendous  chalky 
elevations  called  Frefhwater  cliffs;  while  in 
front,  the  ocean,  bounded  only  by  the  horizon, 
clofes  the  fcene. 

This  fpot  is  alfo  remarkable  for  a  prodigious 
natural  cavern,  formed  in  the  rock ;  to  which 

there 


198         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHTi 

there  is  an  approach  when  the  tide*  is  at  ebb.  It 
penetrates  into  the  cliff  about  forty  yards;  gra- 
dually finking  in  height,  and  contracting  in 
breadth,  from  the  mouth  to  the  bottom.  Its 
largeft  aperture  (for  it  has  three)  is  a  noble  rude 
arch,  fpreading  about  twelve  yards  from  fide  to 
fide,  and  meafuring  five  and  twenty  feet  in 
height.  The  vaft  excavation  we  are  now  con- 
fidering,  like  moft  other  fnnilar  appearances  in 
the  natural  world,  has  probably  been  produced 
by  water,  which  is  a  wonderfully  aftive  agent  in 
the  fccret  receffes  of  the  earth.  This  element, 
according  to  Doclor  Goldfmith,  finding  fub- 
terraneous  paffages,  and,  by  long  degrees,  hol- 
lowing the  beds  through  which  it  flows,  the 
ground  above  it,  in  time,  naturally  flips  down 
clofer  to  its  furface,  leaving  the  upper  layers  of 
earth  or  ftone  ftill  fufpended,;  the  ground  or 
rock,  that  finks  upon  the  face  of  the  water, 
forming  thus  the  floor  of  the  cavern,  the  ground 
or  rock  that  keeps  fufpended,  forming  the  roof. 

At  this  part  the  fhore  rifes  into  one  immenfe 
chalk    cliff,  from  four  to   fix  hundred   feet  in 

height, 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


height,  and  runs  in  a  South-wefterly  direction 
about  four  miles,  fometimes  prefenting  a  per- 
pendicular elevation,  at  other  times  beetling 
fearfully  over  its  excavated  bafe.  If  the  eye  be 
caft  down  this  abrupt  defcent,  particularly  during 
the  feafon  of  incubation,  it  is  aftonifhed  and 
delighted  with  a  new  and  unexpected  fcene. 
Myriads  of  birds  of  various  forts  and  different 
fizes  are  feen,  either  feated  on  the  clefts  and 
fhelvings  of  the  rocks,  or  fporting  in  circular 
flights  through  the  midway  air;  or  floating 
lightly  on  the  billows,  in  purfuit  of  their  filhy 
prey.  Meanwhile  the  whole  fky  refounds  with 
the  rude  harmony  of  thefe  winged  nations ;  and 
rocks,  air,  and  ocean  prefent  one  fcene  of  noife, 
buftle,  and  animation.* 

The  greater  part  of  thefe  feathered  clouds  are 
aquatic  fowl,  which  migrate  hither  from  the 

colder 

*  Mr.  Pennant  has  the  following  amufing  obfcrvation, 
the  truth  of  which  may  be  fully  exemplified  by  a  vifit  to 
Frefhwater  cliffs.  ';  1'he  notes  of  all  the  fea  birds  are 
extremely  harfli  or  inharmonious :  we  have  often  refted 
under  the  rocks  attentive  to  the  various  founds  above 

our 


tOO  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

colder  regions  of  the  North,  to  depofit  their  eggs, 
and  rear  their  young ;  of  the  moft  remarkable 
fpecies  we  lhall  give  an  account  in  their  proper 
place,  but  their  great  variety  utterly  precludes  a 
particular  defcription  of  all;  for, 

"  Who  can  recount  what  tranfmigrations  here 
Are  annual  made  ?  what  nations  come  and  go  ? 
And  how  the  living  clouds  on  clouds  arife  f 
Infinite  wings  !  till  all  the  plume-dark  air 
And  rude  refounding  fliore,  are  one  wild  cry  !" 

The  molt  fublime  part,  however,  of  this  won- 
derful coaft,  is  the  Weftern  termination  of  the 
ifland ;  a  perpendicular  chalk  rock,  fcooped  by 
the  hand  of  Nature  into  an  immenfe  femi- 

our  heads,  which,  mixed  with  the  folcmn  roar  of  the 
waves  fwelling  into  and  retiring  from  the  vaft  caverns 
beneath,  have  produced  a  fine  effeft.  The  fharp  voice 
of  the  fca  gulls,  the  frequent  chatter  of  the  guillemots, 
the  loud  note  of  the  auks,  the  fcream  of  the  herons,  to- 
gether with  the  hoarfe,  deep,  periodical  croak  of  the 
corvorants,  which  ferves  as  a  bafs  to  the  reft  ;  has  often 
furnifhed  us  with  a  concert,  which,  joined  with  the 
wild  fcenery  that  furrounded  us,  afforded  in  a  high  de- 
gree, that  fpecies  of  pleafure  which  arifes  from  the  no- 
velty, and,  we  may  fay,  gloomy  grandeur  of  the  enter- 
tainment."— Britilh  Zoology,  vol.  II.  p.  434. 

circular 


HISTORY     OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  2Oi 

circular  hollow,  and  rearing  itfelf  fix  hundred 
feet  above  the  pebbly  fhore.  It  is  called  St. 
Chriftopher's  cliff.  Its  Northern  limb  is  length- 
ened intft  a  chain  of  rocks,  named  the  Needles., 
from  a  lofty  pointed  one  which  formerly  ftood 
a  little .  to  the  North  of  the  remaining  rocks ; 
but  (being  undermined  by  the  fea,)  fell  into  the 
ocean  about  twenty-five  years  fince.* 

The  grandeur  of  this  fcene,  compared  with 
which  the  mightieft  works  of  human  labor  arc 
trifling  and  contemptible,  cannot  be  expreffed 
by  verbal  defcription.  To  be  conceived,  it 
muft  be  beheld ;  and  forry  mould  I  be  for  that 
man  who,  on  beholding  it,  was  not  involuntarily 
led  to  a  contemplation  of  its  divine  and  almighty 
Architect ;  who  did  not  feel  the  pious  rapture  of 
the  Poet,  and  exclaim, 

"  Thefe  are  thy  glorious  works,  Parent  of  Good, 

Almighty  !   thine  this  univerfal  frame 

Thus  wond'rous  fair  ;  thyfelf  how  wond'rous  then  ! 

*  The  annexed  plate  gives  a  view  of  this  fingular 
rock,  vulgarly  called  Lot's  Wife,  from,  its  fancied  refem- 
blance  to  the  pillar  of  fait,  into  which  her  improper  curi- 
ofity  occafioned  her  to  be  converted. 

D  d  Unfpeakable ; 


2O2         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

Unfpeakable  ;  who  fitt'ft  above  ihefe  heav'ns 
To  us  invjfible,  or  dimly  feen 
In  thefe  thy  loweft  works." 

The  chalky  cliffs  continue  round  this  vaft 
promontory,  the'diftance  of  fomewhat  more  than 
a  mile  into  Alum  bay,  when  the  fcene  is  fuddenly 
changed ;  they  at  once  lofe  their  white  and  pre- 
cipitous appearance,  and  are  converted  into  a 
gradual  flope,  confiding  of  various  ochres,  and 
fands  of  different  colors,  beautifully  ftratified  in 
a  very  oblique  direction.  And  here  all  gran- 
deur ceafes;  the  hills  fink  gently  to  the  fhore, 
and  nothing  now  occurs  but  flat  beach  or  ver- 
dant declivities. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


203 


CHAP.    III. 


THE    ZOOLOGY  -OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT;    ITS 
ANIMALS,    REPTILES,    AND    FI^H.  ^ 

r|_^  *- 

"  But  afk  now  the  bcafts,  and  they  fhall  teach  thec  ; 
and  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  they  fhall  tell  thee  :" 

'*  Or  fpcak  to  the  earth,  and  it  fhall  teach  thce  ;  and 
the  fifties  of  the  fea  fhall  declare  unto  thee." 

"  Who  kuoweth  not  in  all  thcfc,  that  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  hath  wrought  this  ?" 

VV  E  have  hitherto  confidered  the  magnifi- 
cent exhibitions  of  nature  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight : 
we  fhall  now  defcend  to  her  more  minute  but 
not  lefs  ihterefting,  operations.  In  the  contem- 
plation of  caverns,  rocks,  and  mountains,  the 
mind  is  rather  awed  into  aftonifhment  than  foft- 
ened  into  delight :  we  there  behold  the  agency 
of  a  Being  of  infinite  power  and  majefty,  at 
whofe  prefence  the  "  earth  {hakes,  the  heavens 
Dd.2  drop, 


204  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

drop,  and  the  waters  are  afraid ;"  but  in  furvey- 
ing  the  economy  of  the  animal  and  vegetable 
kingdoms;  the  exquifite  mechanifm  with  which 
their  individuals  are  formed;  the  unerring  in- 
ftin£ls  with  which  they  are  endued  ;  and  the  nice 
adaptation  of  their  feveral  parts  to  anfwer  the 
purpofes  for  which  they  were  created;  we  ac- 
knowledge the  finger  of  a  God,  wife  and  bene- 
volent, as  he  is  great  and  powerful;  who  is 
"  good  to  all  the  creatures  of  his  hand ;  and 
whofe  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works." 

The  fauna  Vettenjis  does  not  add  much  to  the 
zoology  of  Hampfhire.  It  is  indeed  marked 
by  fome  fingular  omifflons  in  the  chain  of  quadru- 
peds common  in  every  other  part  of  England. 
The  fox,  who  has  for  ages  been  the  terror  of  the 
farmer,  and  the  delight  of  the  fportfman  through- 
out Britain,  was  never  yet  found  in  the  Ifle  of 
Wight.  The  harmlefs  badger  alfo,  and  the  fetid 
jitchet,  or  polecat,  are  (hangers  to  this  diftrift; 
which,  from  the  abfence  of  thefe  animals,  and 
its  infular  fituation,  appears  to  be  the  beft  cal- 
culated for  the  production  of  game  of  any  place 

in 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  205 

1h  Great-Britain.  And  indeed  it  has  always 
been  famous  for  its  hares,  pheafants,  and  par- 
tridges. 

The  hare  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight  furnifhes  good 
and  conftant  fport  to  the  hunter  during  the 
fcafon.  It  is,  I  think,  rather  fmaller  than  its 
brethren  on  the  continent,  but  fwift  and  ftrong. 
The  inequalities  of  the  ifland  make  this  fpot  an 
excellent  relidence  for  the  animal,  and  give  it 
confiderable  advantages  over  its  purfutrs.  The 
long  mufcular  hind  legs  which  it  has,  are  well 
calculated  to  mount  the  fteep  downs  of  the 
ifland  with  uncommon  fleetnefs;  and  it  not 
unfrequently  efcapes,  by  diftancing  both  hunters 
and  dogs,  at  thefe  rapid  afcents. 

As  the  hare  is  an  animal  of  furprizing  fecun- 
dity,* and  fecured  from  the  attacks  of  the  fox, 

*  They  breed  frequently  in  the  year,  bringing  forth 
from  two  to  four  young  ones  at  a  litter.  This  wife  pro- 
vifion  of  nature^  in  making  the  moft  innocuous  and  efcu- 
lent  animals  the  moft  fruitful,  was  not  unnoticed  by  the 
ancient  naturalifts.  "  Benigna  circa  hoc  natuva,  innocua 
et  efculenta  animalia  foccunda  generuvitj" — Hiny,  lib. 
VIII.  cap,  Iv. 

and 


206  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


and  polecat,  by  the  abfence  of  thefe  definitive 
vermin  in  this  part,  we  may  naturally  fuppofe 
they  would  be  found  in  very  great  plenty 
throughout  the  ifland.  And  indeed  this  was  the 
cafe  till  within  thefe  thirty  or  forty  years ;  but 
as  a  Roman  tafte*  for  thefe  animals  has  arifen 
amongft  us,  and  they  are  considered  as  tit-bits  by 
modern  epicurifm,  the  midnight  poacher  finds  it 
well  worth  while  to  employ  ail  his  fkill,  and  run 
every  rifle,  in  the  capture  of  the  hare;  a  practice 
which  of  courfe  muft  thin  the  breed  extremely. 
There  remain,  however,  fufficient  for  the  fport 
of  the  gentlemen  of  the  ifland. 

There  are  few  difagreeable  reptiles  in  the 
ifland.  Such  as  occur,  are  found  in  the  lower, 
fandy  parts  of  it ;  the  other  fpots  being  freed 
from  them  by  the  elevation  and  expofure  of  their 
fituation.  Many  -vipers  indeed  are  met  with  in 

*    The  Romans  were  very  partial  to  this  animal  : 
"  later  quaJrupedes  gloria  prima  lepus." Martial. 

And  its  fhoulder  was  reckoned  a  moft  delicate  morfel  ; 

"  Fcecund:  leporis  fapiens  feftabitur  anr.os." Horace. 

Sec   my  "  Antiquitates    Culinariaj."     Quarto,    Blamire, 
1791, 

the 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          2O/ 


the  chalky  and  ftony  places,  and  the  largeft  I  ever 
faw,  I  had  nearly  trodden  upon,  in  the  parifh  of 
Wootton,  in  the  outfldrts  of  Coombly  wood,  in 
Auguft,  1792.  Had  my  foot,  however,  come  in 
contact  with  this  animal,  no  injury  could  have 
cnfued  to  me  from  the  preffure,  as  it  was  utterly 
incapable  of  revenging  the  infult.  This  in- 
capacity had  been  produced  by  its  voracioufnefs, 
as  was  evident  on  an  examination  of  the  reptile. 
We  then  found  that  it  had  attempted  to  gorge  a 
frog,  (at  leail  three  times  as  large  in  circum- 
ference as  the  thickeft  part  of  its  own  body,)  but 
being  unable  to  accomplifh  the  tafk  entirely,  one 
of  the  legs  and  thighs  of  its  prey  continued  to 
depend  from  the  viper's  mouth,  and  effectually 
prevented  it  from  clofing  the  jaws  and  excluding 
its  poifon.  The  animal  indeed  (as  is  the  cafe 
with  all  the  ferpent  kind  after  fatisfying  their 
voracity,)  was  in  a  ftate  of  torpor,  which  rendered 
it  apparently  infenfible  of  our  approach  or  ob- 
fervation,  and  unable  to  exprefs  any  tokens  of 
indignation  when  we  deftroyed  it.  On  meafu- 
ring  it  when  dead,  it  was  found  to  be  exaclly 

twenty-nine  inches  long. 

On 


2O8         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

On  contemplating  this  animal,  one  of  the  moft 
remarkable  circumftances  relating  to  it,  appears 
to  be  the  faculty  it  thus  pofleffes,  of  extending  its 
jaws,  throat,  and  flomach  fo  confiderably,  as  to 
render  them  capable  of  admitting  a  fubftance 
much  thicker  than  any  part  of  its  body.      In  the 
fingular  conformation  of  its  parts,  to  accomplifh 
this  purpofe,  the  wifdom  of  providence  ftrikingly 
manifefts  itfelf.     The  head  of  the  viper  is  broad 
and  flat,   having  a    wide    mouth    of  very   un- 
common and  difproportionate  magnitude.     This 
permits  the  jaws  to  gape  to  a  great  extent ;   but 
the  aperture  would  ftill  be  inefficient  for  the 
admiffion  of  the  animal's   prey,    were   not  the 
capability    of   its    diftention    increafed    by   the 
following  nice  contrivance.      The  jaws  are  not 
united  together  at  the  bottom,  as  in  the  human 
mouth,  by  a  procefs  refembling  a  pair  of  hinges ; 
but  connected  by  a  ftrong  mufcle,  the  elafticity 
of  which  is  fuch,  as  to  keep  the  features  firm 
when  not  in  aftion,  and   to   allow  their  being 
ftretched  to  an  immoderate  extent,  when  the  fize 
or  form  of  the  animal's  food  requires  it.     The 
gullet  or  throat  receives  the  aliment  from  the 

mouth. 


HISTORY  OF  THE  ISLE  OF  WIGHT. 


mouth,  and  being  very  capacious  and  elaftic, 
eafily  accommodates  itfelf  to  the  magnitude  and 
figure  of  it.  From  hence  a  part  only  imme- 
diately finds  its  way  into  the  ftomach,  a  recepta- 
cle by  no  means  fo  large  as  the  gullet;  here  it 
continues  till  it  be  reduced  by  the  aftion  of 
digeftion  into  chyle,  which  going  off  in  the 
natural  way,  affords  room  for  the  remaining  parts 
to  be  abforbed  by  the  ftomach,  and  digefted. 

Thefe  reptiles  are  viviparous,  but  fortunate- 
ly for  mankind  not  very  prolific.*  The  poifon 
of  their  bite  is  fully  eftablifhed;  and  the  effects 
of  it,  if  there  be  no  fpeedy  application  to  the 
wound,  extremely  frightful,  and  many  times  fatal. 
The  fnnpleft  and  moft  ready  cure,  in  cafe  of  an 
injury  from  a  viper,  is  a  brifk  fomentation  of 
the  wounded  limb  with  warmed  fallad  oil  ;  and 
taking  about  a  jill  of  the  fame  liquid  internally. 

*  That  is,  as  Ariftotlc  cxpreiFes  it,  "  E>  xiroif  /«»  uonxit 
TO  TiXf/o»  woy,  e|w  &  CaoToxti."  —  DC  Gen.  Animal,  lib.  III. 
cap.  ii.  "  Within  them  they  bear  a  perfeft  egg,  (wherein 
the  young  one  is  contained)  but  they  bring  forth  their 
young  alive."  They  produce  from  fix  to  ten  at  a  time; 
copulate  in  May,  and  are  about  three  months  in  geftation. 

E  e  The 


210  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


The  only  infecl  of  any  curiofity,  which  my 
occafional  walks  through  the  ifland  have  given 
me  an  opportunity  of  difcovering,  is  the  gryllus 
tcdpdi  or  mole-cricket.  The  character  and  man- 
ners of  this  little  creature,  which  is  perfectly  in- 
offenfive,  are  well  deferving  notice,  particularly 
as  its  homely,  and  indeed  hideous  figure,  are  apt 
to  excite  emotions  of  dread  and  abhorrence, 
neither  of  which  need  be  entertained  againft  it. 
The  only  one  I  have  feen  in  this  part  of  Hamp- 
fhire  occurred  in  a  wet  meadow  in  the  heart  of 
the  ifland.  It  had  been  dug  up  by  a  lad  who 

was  grouting  for  earth-worms;    and  had  filled 

I 
him  with  aftonifhment  arid  apprehenfion.     The 

fpade  was  juft  lifted  for  dividing  the  harmlefs  in- 
left  in  twain,  when  my  prefence  and  intreaty 
prevented  the  meditated  blow.  On  examining 
this  infecl,  it  appeared  to  be  of  a  very  dark 
brown  color,  and  little  more  than  two  inches  in 
length.  Its  body  was  fcaly;  furnifiied  with  two 
long,  pointed  wings,  and  as  many  hairy  tails. 
The  moft  remarkable  parts  about  it,  however, 
•were  the  fore-feet,  which  have  forne  refemblance 

to 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  211 

to  a  human  hand,  and  are  admirably  formed  for 
making  thofe  fubterraneous  excavations  wherein 
the  animal  refides,  and  depofits  its  eggs.  Strong, 
webbed,  and  a  little  incurvated,  the  mole- 
cricket  works  with  its  paws  at  a  prodigious  rate, 
and  will  burrow  its  way  through  a  whole  ridge 
of  leguminous  plants,  (of  the  roots  of  which  it  is 
very  fond)  in  the  courfe  of  a  fingle  night.  With 
thefe  inftruments,  alfo,  its  neat  habitation  (which 
is  a  room  about  the  fize  of  an  hen's  egg)  is 
quickly  formed,  and  guarded  with  various  wind- 
ing paffages,  and  curious  approaches  to  it.  This 
domicilium  is  generally,  in  the  fummer  time, 
placed  within  fix  inches  of  the  furface  of  the 
ground,  and  herein  the  female  lays  her  eggs,  from 
one  hundred  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  ;  but  to- 
wards winter,  inftinft,  ever  faithful  to  its  office,  in- 
forms the  little  being  that  in  order  to  fecure  his 
tender  offspring  he  muft  get  deeper  into  the  foil, 
and  retire  from  the  influence  of  the  froft.  Again 
therefore  he  fets  to  work,  and  in  a  fhort  time 
completes  with  his  little  webbed  feet,  a  commo- 
dious hybernaculum,  about  fourteen  inches  be- 
e  2  low 


212          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT, 

low  the  furface  of  the  ground.  Hither  he  retires 
with  his  family,  and  patiently  waits  for  the  return 
of  genial  funs,  and  warmer  feafons,  when  he, 
again  takes  pofTeflion  of  his  fummer  abode. 

The  chief  food  of  the  mole-cricket  confifts  of 
roots  and  vegetables,  for  which  he  fometimes 
travels  at  night,  by  the  afiiftance  of  his  wings,  to 
a  confiderable  diftance.  Before  morning  he 
generally  returns  to  his  fubterraneous  habitation, 
and,  wonderful  to  tell  !  is  found  (by  the  minute 
inveftigations  of  naturalifts  and  anatomifls,)  to  be 
employed  there  during  the  day  chiefly  in  rumi- 
nating, or  chewing  the  cud. 

What  purpofes  thefe  little,  but  curious  infecls 
may  anfwer  in  the  fcale  of  creation,  we  cannot 
at  prefent  apprehend,  and  mail  perhaps  ever 
remain  ignorant  of  them.  That,  however,  they 
fulfil  certain  ends,  and  thofe  beneficial  ones, 
cannot  be  doubted ;  as  they  are  the  creatures  of 
an  Artift  who  made  nothing  in  vain,  and  who 
formed  every  part  to  aflift  and  co-operate 
towards  the  good  of  the  whole.  Viewed  in  this 
light,  even  the  mole-cricket  becomes  a  fourcc 

of 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE   OF    WIGHT.  213 

of  edification;  fince  it  may  at  leaft  ferve  to 
humble  the  pride  of  human  knowledge,  by 
exemplifying  the  truth  of  the  Philofopher's 
obfervation  ;  Ea  quce  fcimus  Junt  pars  minima 
eorum  qua  ignoramus, 

The  fijh  found  on  the  coaft  of  the  ifland 
are  chiefly  fuch  as  frequent  the  Southern 
fhores  of  Britain.  Now  and  then,  indeed,  thefe 
innoxious  tribes  are  difturbed  by  \\\tjhark,  who 
is  either  brought  from  the  Baltic,  or  the  tropics. 
In  thcfe  cafes  he  comes, 

"  Lur'd  by  the  fcent 
Of  {learning  crouds,  of  rank  difeafe,  and  death." 

following  veffels,  the  crews  of  which  are  un- 
healthy, and  afford  him  luxurious  meals  by  their 
occafional  diflblution.  Sharks  have  been  mot 
in  the  {trait  that  feparates  the  ifland  from  the 
oppofite  fhore,  and  been  feen  even  within  the 
harbour  of  Cowes.  They  make,  however,  but  a 
fhort  ftay  in  this  neighbourhood;  and  either 
return  to  the  regions  from  whence  they  came,  or 
go  more  to  the  Weflward,  in  fearch  of  the  droves 
of  pilchards  on  the  Cornifh  coaft. 

The 


214  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

The  porpeffe  alfo  is  perpetually  feen  on  the 
coafts  of  the  ifland,  "  tempefting  the  deep"  with 
its  unwieldy  gambols.  It  is  a  very  difgufting 
fifh  to  the  eye,  being  almoft  black  in  color,  with 
a  head  like  a  hog,  and  from  three  to  fix  feet  in 
length. 

During  the  whiting  and  herring  feafon,  it  is 
very  amufing  to  watch  thefe  animals  in  purfuit 
of  their  food,  which  is  compofed  of  the  fmaller 
fifh ;  and  to  remark  the  various  arts  by  which 
they  accomplish  the  great  end  of  fatisfying  their 
voracity.  An  excellent  naturalift*  compares 
their  exertions,  at  this  time,  to  thofe  of  a  pack  of 
hounds  after  a  fox ;  and  indeed  there  is  a  great 
refemblance  in  the  operations  of  both.  Their 
eagernefs  alfo,  when  thus  engaged,  equals  that  of 
the  dog,  and  frequently  renders  the  porpeffe  fo 
blind  to  its  fafety,  that  he  will  dam  headlong 
upon  fhoals  from  whichhe  never  can  recede,  rather 
than  give  up  the  purfuit.  It  is  either  by  ar. 
accident  of  this  nature,  or  by  an  injury  or  in- 
difpofition  which  prevents  him  keeping  the  feas. 

*  Pennant.  Brit.  Zoology,  vol.  III. 

that 


.  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


that  the  porpefle  is  now  and  then  forced  on  our 
fhores,  and  found  either  dead  or  expiring, 
When  this  happens,  the  carcafe  proves  to  be  no 
contemptible  treafure  to  the  finder;  for  the 
quantity  of  fat  with  which  the  flefh  is  furrounded, 
being  well  boiled,  is  converted  into  a  very 
excellent  and  valuable  oil.  The  lean  alfo  of  this 
fifh  is  in  fome  parts  of  the  world  ufed  for  the 
table  ;  but  proves,  to  a  palate  not  habituated  to 
it,  a  very  rank  and  difagreeable  viand. 

The  mutations  of  faihions  and  taftes,  however, 
in  the  line  of  eating,  have  been  not  a  little 
whimfical,  even  in  our  own  country  ;  fince  the 
porpefle,  which  we  now  turn  from  with  loathing 
and  abhorrence,  was  eaten  with  avidity  by  the 
old  Englifh  epicure.  Ancient  cookery  ex- 
haufted  all  its  art  in  mixing  fauces  for  this 
dele&able  morceau  ;  and  there  was  no  enter- 
tainment of  any  magnificence  till  the  fixteenth 
century,  at  which  the  porpefle,  either  bodily  or 
in  junks,  did  not  find  a  refpeftable  place.* 

*  Vide  my  "  Antiquitatatcs  Culinariae,  or  Curious  Trafts 
relating  to  old  Englifh  Cookery."  Quarto  ;  Blamirc,  1791. 

There 


2l6  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

There  is  another  fifh  of  a  curious  form  and 
fingular  hiftory,  which  is  often  fifhed  up  by  the 
dredgers  on  the  ifland  fhores.  This  is  the  loligo, 
or  great  cuttle -fifh,  whofe  bones  are  the  well 
known  white,  oval  fubftances,  found  on  the  beach 
in  many  parts  of  the  ifland.  This  aquatic  ani- 
mal, which  the  naturalifts  place  in  the  vermcs 
clafs,  exibits  a  very  hideous  and  deformed  ap- 
pearance. It  is  from  eighteen  inches  to  two 
feet  in  length,  and  covered  with  a  thin  dark  co- 
lored (kin.  To  the  eye  it  feems  to  be  of  the 
confiftence  of  jelly ;  ftrengthened,  confolidated, 
and  defended  as  it  were  by  a  bone  on  the  upper 
part  of  the  back.  For  the  convenience  of  feed- 
ing itfelf,  it  poffefles  eight  arms,  placed  with 
great  regularity  round  its  mouth,  each  of  which 
is  thickly  fet  with  a  multitude  of  fmall  concave 
difes,  that  enable  it  to  adhere,  with  inconceivable 
tenacity,  to  rocks  or  Hones  when  it  chufes  to  be 
quiefcent.  Exclufive  of  thefe  arms  it  has  two 
tentacula,or  feelers,  of  confiderable  length,  which 
it  is  able  to  extend  or  contract  at  pleafure. 
With,  thefe  it  feizes  upon  (he  fmall  fry  that 

com- 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          217 


compofe  its  food,  which  having  entangled,  they 
immediately  commit  the  prey  to  the  management 
of  the  eight  arms.,  while  therafeJves  are  again 
expended  in  fearch  of  further  plunder.  The 
eyes  are  feated  immediately  beneath  the  tentacula; 
and  a  little  below  them  is  discovered  a  curious 
mouth,  which  in  fhape  at>4  fubliance  nearly  re- 
fembles  die  beak  of  a  parrot. 

As  this  fifh  is  formed  without  any  external 
weapons  of  defence,  and  by  no  means  made  for 
conteft  or  exertion,  it  would  fare  but  ill  amid  the 
dangers  of  the  deep,  and  the  numerous  enemies 
that  furround  it,  had  not  providence  wifely  af- 
forded it  a  means  of  fafety,  which  enables  it  to 
cfcape  mifchance,  and  continue  the  propagation 
of  its  kind.  This  arifes  from  a  fecretion  of  a 
black  fluid,  nearly  refembling  the  beft.ink,  con- 
tained in  a  bladder  under  the  belly  of  the  fifh. 
No  fooner  does  the  animal  perceive  himfelf  to 
be  in  danger,  from  the  purfuit  of  an  enemy  which 
he  can  neither  outfwim  nor  contend  with,  than 
he  emits  (by  the  anus)  a  certain  portion  of  his 
dingy  liquor;  this  immediately  difcolors  the  cir- 
Ff  cum- 


2l8         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

cumambient  waters,  and  precludes  the  purfuer 
from  feeing  his  deftined  prey,  which,  wrapped  in 
impenetrable  darknefs,  quietly  finks  to  the  bot- 
tom, and  there  remains  till  the  danger  be  over- 
paft. 

Thefe  remarkable  means  of  felf-prefervation, 
did  not  elude  the  obfervation  of  the  ancient 
naturalifts,  who  all  make  mention  of  them ;  and 
particularly  Oppian,  in  the  following  pretty 
manner : 

"  Th'endanger'd  cuttle  thus  evades  his  fears, 
And  native  hoards  of  fluid  fafety  bears. 
A  pitchy  ink  peculiar  glands  fupply^ 
Whofe  (hades  the  fharpeft  beams  of  light  defy  : 
Purfu'd  he  bids  the  fable  fountains  flow, 
And  wrapt  in  clouds  eludes  th'impending  foe. 
The  filh   retreats  unfeen,  while  felf-born  night, 
With  pious  fhade  befriends  her  parent's  flight."* 

The  launce,  ammodytes,  or  fand-eel,  is  a 
delicate  little  fifh,  found  on  the  fandy  mores  of 
the  ifland.  It  being  both  a  good  bait  for  other 
fpecies,  and  excellent  eating  in  itfelf,  the  fimer- 
men  take  fome  trouble  in  procuring  them.  At 

*  Jones's  Oppiarvs  Halieut,  lib.  III. 

the 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  219 

the  recefs  of  the  tide,  they  are  to  be  found  atout 
fourteen  inches  below  the  furface,  and  are  eafily 
turned  up  by  a  light  fpade,  or  indented  fork. 
The  iflanders  call  them  the  fand-fprat,  from  the 
place  of  their  refidence;  into  which  they  bore 
with  great  dexterity  and  difpatch. 

Here  alfo  is  found  theftliqua,  a  fpecies  of  th« 
John-)  or  razor ;  fo  called  from  the  exa£l  refem- 
blance  of  its  fhell  to  the  haft  of  that  inflrument, 
I  believe  the  iflanders  are  unacquainted  with  the 
excellence  of  this  fifh  ;  fince  I  did  not  find  they 
ever  made  a  practice  of  taking  them,  although  it 
is  evident  they  are  fufficiently  plentiful,  on  the 
fandy  parts  of  the  coaft,  from  the  numbers  of  caft 
(hells  which  occur,  and  the  holes  of  their  habi- 
tations vifible  allow  water. 

The  (lender  form  of  this  fhell  enables  its  in- 
habitant to  fink  it  eafily  into  the  fand,  which  it 
does  in  a  perpendicular  direction,  to  the  depth 
of  nearly  two  feet.  When  the  fifh  requires  food, 
it  afcends  from  this  dark  retreat,  and  difcovers 
one  end  of  the  fhell  a  few  inches  above  the  fur- 
face  of  the  fand  ;  from  this  the  body  is  feen  to 
Ff2  be 


220  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

be  protruded,  and  aftively  employed  in  the 
fearch  of  fuch  minute  infefts  as  conftitute  its 
prey. 

The  filiqua  is  only  to  be  caught  at  the  recefs 
of  the  tide ;  and  fo  vigilant  is  it  in  providing 
for  its  own  fafety,  that  it  requires  great  circum- 
fpeclion  to  furprize  it  even  then.  In  this  cafe, 
the  fifherman  takes  fome  fait,  and  places  a  fmall 
quantity  of  it  round  the  perforation  in  the  fand 
wherein  the  fifh  refides.  This  quickly  melting 
penetrates  to  i\\c  filiqua^  v;ho  is  led  from  thence 
to  believe  the  tide  is  tifen,  and  accordingly  ele- 
vates himfelf  to  the  furface  to  feek  for  food.  A 
moment,  however,  convinces  it  of  the  deceit, 
and  if  the  fifherman  be  not  extremely  atlive,  his 
deftined  prey  efcapes  him,  by  finking  inftanta- 
neoufly  into  its  dark  and  deep  retreat,  from 
•whence  it  is  not  a  fecond  time  to  be  allured. 

The  mytilus  edulis,  or  eatable  mttfcle*,  is  found 
in  many  parts  of  the  ifland  mores,  but  appears 
not  to  be  regarded  much,  from  the  opinion  of 
its  pofleffing  fome  noxious,  nay  poifonous  qua- 
lities. The  idea,  however,  is  flanderous  and 

Without 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    \VIGHT.  221 

without  foundation,  as  the  fifh  itfelf  is  a  whole- 
fome  and  nutritious  food.  What  occafions  the 
difagreeable  effe&s  fometimes  experienced  after 
eating  mufcles,  is  fwallowing  inadvertently  the 
little  mafs  of  hair  or  filky  web,  found  in  the 
middle  of  the  fifh,  with  which  it  attaches  itfelf 
when  alive  to  rocks  and  ftones.  This  is  very- 
pernicious  and  highly  incligeftible,  producing 
that  ficknefs,  fwelling,  &c.  which  raw  filk,  cob. 
webs,  or  any  thing  of  the  fame  nature,  is  found, 
if  fwallowed,  to  occafion.* 

On  opening  the  mufcle,  there  is  generally 
difcovered  a  fmall  crab,  called  the  pifum^  or  pea- 
crab,  who  feems  to  be  the  voluntary  inhabitant  of 
this  bivalve.  The  ancients  fancifully  imagined, 
that  this  minute  infecl  was  purpofely  placed  in 

*  Ihe  nngular  conformation  of  the  organs  of  this  ma- 
rine animal  is  faid  to  be  this  :  It  has  a  mouth  fumifhcd 
with  two  flefhy  lips ;  its  inteftine  begins  at  the  bottom 
pf  the  mouth,  pafles  through  the  brain,  and  makes  a  num- 
ber of  circumvolutions  through  the  liver  ;  on  leaving  this 
organ  it  goes  on  ftraight  into  the  heart,  which  it  penetrates, 
and  ends  in  the  anus ;  near  which  the  lungs  are  placed, 
and  through  which  it  breathes! — Goldfmith's  Animated 
Nature,  vol.  VI I.  p.  42. 

the 


222         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

the  (hell  of  the  mufcle,  and  other  fifli  of  the  fame 
clafs,  to  affift,  by  its  fagacity,  the  ftupidity  of  its 
hoft,  in  acquiring  food  and  avoiding  danger. 
When  the  friendly  pair  feel  inclined  to  eat,  the 
mufcle  opens  its  fhells,  and  permits  the  little 
lodger  to  travel  forth  in  queft  of  provender.  As 
foon  as  he  has  procured  a  fupply,  he  returns  to 
the  fluggifh  mufcle,  enters  the  (hell,  a*nd  divides 
the  plunder  .with  him.  But  mould  he,  on  going 
out,  perceive  any  of  the  polypus  race,  (the  fworn 
enemies  of  the  mytilus  tribe,)  in  the  neighbour- 
hood, he  inftantly  hurries  to  his  teftaceous  home, 
communicates  the  alarm,  and  all  danger  is 
immediately  prevented  by  the  mufcle  firmly 
clofing  his  impenetrable  fhells.* 

All  the  fubmarine  rocks  and  ftones  on  the 
coaft  of  the  ifland  afford  protection  to  the 
patella  vulgata,  or  common  limpet ;  and  to  thefe 
this  fifh  attaches  itfelf  with  the  rnoft  obftinate 
adhefion.  The  difficulty  of  feparation  indeed  is 
fuch,  that  the  fimermen  are  deterred  from 
attempting  to  colleft  limpets  for  fale ;  though 

?  Pliny.     Antiquitates  Culin.  in  preliminary  difcourfe. 

fuclv 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  223 

fuch  as  have  patience  fufficient  to  difengage  them 
from  the  places  to  which  they  are  affixed,  are 
rewarded  for  their  trouble  by  an  extremely  good 
and  nourifhing  viand. 

Various  fpecies  of  turbinated  fhells,  chiefly  of 
the  buccinum  or  wdk  kind,  are  picked  up  on 
thefe  mores.  As  the  natural  inhabitants  of  thefe 
affect  the  deep  recefles  of  the  ocean,  the  mells 
are  never  found  with  their  original  pofleflbrs 
alive.  It  frequently  happens,  however,  that  on 
taking  them  up  they  appear  to  be  tenanted  by  a 
kind  of  crab ;  the  claws  and  legs  of  which 
difcover  themfelves  at  the  mouth  or  opening  of 
the  ftiell.  This  lodger  is  called  the  bernard,  or 
hermit-crab,  and  curioufly  exhibits  the  \vonderful 
operations  of  animal  inftinft.  As  the  hinder 
parts  of  the  hermit's  body  are  tender  and  naked, 
unprotected  by  that  Ih'elly  covering  which  its 
cruftaceous  brethren  poffefs,  perpetual  injuries 
would  happen  to  it,  had  not  nature  provided  it 
with  a  foj-efight  which  ferves  to  guard  it  from 
external  accident.  Taught  by  this,  the  hermit- 
crab  feeks  for  the  roomy  cavity  of  fome  forfaken 

welk, 


8*4  HISTORY    OF    THE'  ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

welk,  into  which  it  wriggles  itfelf,  and  there  con- 
tinues till  its  increased  fize  obliges  it  to  look  out 
for  an  habitation  of  greater  dimenfions.  It  then 
leaves  its  temporary  prote.clor,  and  traverfes  the 
coaft  with  patient  affiduity  in  fearch  of  another 
abode,  to  which  when  found  it  attaches  itfelf,  as 
to  the  former  one,  by  means  of  a  ftrong  hook 
placed  at  the  extremity  of  its  tail.  So  kindly 
has  providence  beftowed  even  on  the  mod 
minute  and  contemptible  animals,  the  means  of 
comfort  and  felf-prcfervation  ! 

The  Southern  fhore  of  the  ifland  abounds 
with  cruflaceous  fifh  of  all  forts.  The  lobjler 
and  crab  in  particular  are  found  in  great  plenty, 
and  of  uncommon  fize  and  excellence.  Of  the 
former.  I  have  feen  an  individual  that  weighed 
•fix  pounds  and  an  half;  and  I  am  informed  the 
latter  will  arrive  to  an  equal  magnitude.  The 
plentiful  production  of  this  fifii  on  a  particular 
part  of  the  fhore,  at  the  back  of  the  ifland,  has 
occafioned  a  neighbouring  village  to  be  called 
Crab-Niton. 

CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISI.E    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    IV. 


OF  THE  ORNITHOLOGY  OF  THE  ISLE  OF  WIGHT. 


"  Quae  multae  glomcrantur  aves!' 


T» 


L  HOUGH  Nature  have  been  rather  thrifty 
in  her  diftribution  of  quadrupeds  to  the  Ifle  of 
-«£  Wight ;  yet  fhe  makes  ample  amends  by  the 
number  and  variety  of  the  feathered  tribes^  which 
are  either  conftant  refidents  in  this  part  of 
England,  or  flock  hither  during  the  feafon  of 
incubation.  At  this  period  the  lofty  chalk  cliffs 
are  all  one  living  fcene,  and  exhibit  a  fingular 
appearance  of  univerfal  buftle. 

Amongft  the  winged  emigrants  who  thus  vifit 
the  fhores  of  the  ifland,  to  fulfil  the  great  com- 
mand of  nature,  and  rear  their  tender  young, 
G  g  there 


226          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


there  are  fome  which  are  feen  only  occafionally 
on  thefe  rocks;  and  who  appear  to  be  brought 
hither  by  accident  or  caprice,  rather  than  the 
force  of  inftincl:.  Thus  for  inftance,  the  eagle 
has  been  known  to  incubate  among  the  crags  of 
Culver  cliff.  The  beetling  brows  of  this  emi- 
nence appear  to  offer  an  eligible  habitation  for 
this  predacious  bird,  which,  according  to  Job's 
fublime  defcription  of  it,  is  partial  to  thefe 
elevated  fituations  : 

"  Doth  the  eagle  mount  up  at  thy  command, 
and  make  her  neft  on  high  ?" 

"  She  dwelleth  and  abideth  on  the  rock,  upon 
the  crag  of  the  rock,  and  the  ftrong  place." 

"  From  thence  me  feeketh  the  prey,  and  her 
eyes  behold  afar  off." 

"  Her  young  ones  alfo  fuck  up  blood ;  and 
where  the  (lain  are,  there  is  me."* 

The  laft  eagle  known  to  build  in  Culver  cliff 
(according  to  the  information  I  could  obtain,) 
came  there  in  the  year  1780.  An  adven- 

*  Job,  chap,  xxxix.  ver.  27,  28,  29,  30.  Pliny, 
fpeaking  of  the  fame  birds,  fays  ;  "  Nidificant  in  petris 
€t  arboribus." — Lib.  X.  feft.  iv. 

turous 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  227 


turous  countryman,  who  had  frequently  de- 
fcended  the  rock  for  the  eggs  of  its  other  winged 
tenants,  having  watched  the  eagle  from  the  neft, 
paid  a  vifit  to  it  alfo.  He  found  this  fabri- 
cation to  be  of  confiderable  fize,  and  formed  of 
fticks  and  rufhes  laid  alternately;  containing  one 
folitary  young  bird.  This  he  took,  but  not 
knowing  how  to  manage  it,  the  eaglet  foon  died. 
It  is  probable  the  parent  bird  had  come  from 
the  Northern  parts  of  Wales,  or  the  craggy  cliffs 
of  -  the  Weftern  Ifles;  fince  the  offspring 
appeared  to  be  of  the  ringtail  fpecies,  a  fort  very 
common  in  thofe  places.  It  is,  however,  but 
very  rarely  that  this  noble  bird  builds  its  ayry  in 
a  fpot  fo  diftant  from  the  natural  place  of  its 
abode.  The  vigor  of  this  race  fits  it  for  in- 
habiting the  colder  regions  of  the  North.  Here 
it  dwells  in  folitary  majefty,  furrounded  by  filence 
and  defolation  ;  its  ficrcenefs  and  voracity  giving 
additional  horrors  to  the  favage  fcenery  of  its 
Unfrequented  domain ; 

"  High   from  the  fummit  of  a  craggy  cliff 
Jiuiig  o'er  the  deep,  fuch  as  ?.n?.r.ing  frowns 

G2  On 


228  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

On  utmoft  Hilda's  fhore,  whofe  lonely  race 
Refign  .the  fetting  fun  to  Indian  worlds ; 
The  royal  eagle  draws  his  vig'rous  young, 
Strong  pounc'd,  and  ardent  with  paternal  fire." 

To  an  obferver  of  the  manners  of  birds, 
nothing  is  more  amufing  than  to  remark  the 
various  little  devices  which  the  parents  will  ufe, 
during  the  feafon  of  incubation,  to  draw  any  in- 
truding footftep  from  the  fpot  that  conceals  their 
offspring.  Thus,  for  example,  a  pewit,  or  lap- 
wing, the  moment  it  is  aware  of  any  approach  to 
her  young,  immediately  takes  flight,  and 
wheeling  in  circles  round  the  head  of  the  enemy, 
endeavours  to  engage  his  attention,  and  by  de- 
grees to  draw  him  from  her  neft.  A  partridge 
alfo,  if  file  obferve  a  dog  or  man  coming  towards 
her  helplefs  covey,  will  hop  away  as  if  wounded, 
with  a  tumbling  kind  of  gait,  that  the  intruder 
may  be  induced  to  purfue  her,  rather  than 
moleft  the  offspring.  But  of  all  the  different 
modes  fuggefted  by  animal  orosv>i  for  the  pre- 
fervation  of  the  young,  that  of  the  eagle  feems  to 
t>e  the  mofl  efficacious;  and  indeed  forms  an 

admirable 


HISTOR.Y    OF    THE    ISLE   OF    WIGHT.  229 

admirable  accompaniment  to  the  rude  and  fear- 
ful fcenery  of  the  precipices  wherein  thefe  birds 
ufually  fabricate  their  lofty  citadels. 

As  no  naturalift  (to  the  beft  of  my  recollection) 
has  mentioned  this  particular  in  the  hiftory  of 
the  eagle,  the  reader  will  not  be  difpleafed  in 
being  made  acquainted  with  it  by  the  following 
anecdote : 

A  few  fummers  fince,  a  gentleman,  making  the 
tour  of  Wales,  paffed  through  the  county  of 
Carnarvon.  Having  furnifhed  himfelf  with  a 
guide,  he  vifited  every  part  of  this  romantic 
coaft.  One  day,  in  drolling  amongft  the  rocks 
and  precipices  with  which  it  abounds,  he  found 
himfelf  fuddenly  feparated  from  his  companion. 
At  that  moment,  a  difmal  hollow  moan  afTailed 
his  ear  from  below.  Shortly  afterwards  he  heard 
it  again :  and  it  was  repeated,  with  flight  inter- 
ruptions, for  two  or  three  minutes.  His  ima- 
gination, prepared  to  receive  imprefiions  of  ter- 
ror from  the  ruggednefs  and  defolation  of  the 
furrounding  rocks,  immediately  painted  to  him 
the  unfortunate  guide  fallen  from  the  precipice, 

and 


230  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

and  darned  to  pieces  on  the  crags  beneath.  In  a 
fhort  time,  however,  his  mind  was  relieved  from 
this  painful  idea,  by  the  appearance  of  the  fup- 
pofed  fufferer,  who  had  been  hidden  from  his 
obfervation  by  the  prominent  jutting  of  an  enor- 
mous rock.  On  being  joined  by  him,  he  com- 
municated the  extraordinary  circumftance  which 
had  occurred,  and  the  founds  of  diftrefs  that 
even  then  rang  in  his  ear.  But  his  apprehenfions 
were  foon  calmed  by  the  guide,  who  informed 
him,  they  proceeded  from  fome  eagle  in  the 
vicinity ;  with  which  bird  it  was  cuftomary, 
during  the  feafon  of  incubation  and  before  the 
young  ones  had  quitted  the  neft,  to  emit  the  dole- 
ful founds  that  had  alarmed  him,  in  order  to  en- 
tice away  any  intruder  from  the  place  of  its 
abode. 

When  the  diverfion  of  falconry  was  a  noble, 
and  even  royal  amufement,  Culver  cliffs  were  in 
fome  degree  of  repute,  from  their  producing  in 
great  abundance  a  fmall  fpecies  of  hawk,  of  great 
ftrength  and  fpirit,  much  ufed  in  fporting  for 
partridges,  and  other  birds  of  an  equal  or  inferior 

fize. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  23! 

fize.  As  this  amufement  is,  however,  now  ob- 
folete,  the  breed,  which  ftill  continues,  is  allowed 
to  build  its  aerial  nefts,  and  purfue  its  depreda- 
tions on  young  game,  pigeons,  &c.  without  mo- 
leftation.  I  take  it  to  be  the  falco  nifus  of  Lin- 
naeus. 

I  have  before  mentioned  the  multitude  of  mi- 
< 

grating  birds,  which  may  be  feen  on  the  rocky 
mores  of  the  ifland,  during  the  early  fummer 
months.  Moft  of  thefe  come  hither,  merely  for 
the  purpofe  of  depofiting  their  eggs  on  the  ledges 
of  the  cliffs,  and  rearing  their  young;  which  bu- 
finefs  being  performed  they  return  to  their  more 
northerly  habitations.  Of  thefe  fpecies  the  moil 
curious  and  remarkable  are,  the  puffin;  the  razor- 
bill; the  guillemot;  and  the  cormorant,  or,  as  it 
is  vulgarly  called  in  thefe  parts,  the  IJle  of  Wight 
parfon. 

The  puffin  ufually  reforts  to  this  coaft  about 
the  latter  end  of  April.  On  its  arrival,  it 
immediately  looks  out  for  a  proper  place  for  the 
depofition  of  its  egg ;  it  feldom,  or  never,  laying 
more  than  one  :  a  crevice  in  the  rock,  or  a  hole 

in 


232          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


in  the  ground  near  the  more,  beft  ferves  this 
important  purpofe.  Being  thus  provided  with 
an  habitation,  the  female  produces  her  burthen, 
which  fhe  and  her  faithful  confort  continue 
alternately  to  cover  and  proteci,  till  the  young 
bird  is  excluded  from  the  fhell.  This  happens 
about  the  middle  of  June,  when  nothing  can 
equal  the  buftle  and  anxiety  of  the  dams.  They 
are  now  to  be  feen  flying  in  circular  rings  about 
the  aperture  of  their  nefts,  mewing,  as  it  were, 
the  ufe  of  their  pinions  to  the  unpraftifed  young, 
arid  encouraging  them,  by  a  thoufand  little  arts, 
to  commit  themfelves  to  the  vacant  air,  or  drop 
into  the  watery  wafte.  This  bufinefs,  however, 
once  finifhed,  the  oro^/n  ceafes.  Nature  has 
accomplifhed  the  important  end  of  introducing 
the  rifing  generation  properly  to  the  world  ;  and 
it  would  now  be  a  wafte  of  affection,  were  the 
dam  to  continue  its  parental  fondnefs.  The 
moment,  therefore,  that  inftmcl  informs  the  older 
birds  it  is  time  for  them  to  depart  from  their 
fummer  habitation,  they  obey  its  intimations. 
,  No  paternal  ties  can  protrad  their  flay ;  fuch  of 

their 


tilSTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  233 

their  offspring  as  are  able  to  accompany  their 
flight,  join  the  migrating  hod,  whilft  the  more 
feeble  young  ones  are  left  to  fhift  for  themfelves. 

I  cannot  give  fo  accurate  an  idea  of  this  fingu- 
lar  bird,  which  is  equally  curious  in  perfon  as  in 
manners,  as  by  tranfcribing  the  excellent  defcrip- 
tion  of  it,  drawn  by  the  faithful  pen  of  our 
Britifh  Zoologift. 

"  This  bird,"  fays  he,  u  weighs  about  twelve 
ounces ;  its  length  is  twelve  inches ;  the  breadth 
from  tip  to  tip  of  the  wings  extended,  twenty-one 
inches  :  the  bill  is  more,  broad  at  the  bafe,  com- 
preffed  on  the  fides,  and  running  up  to  a  ridge, 
triangular,  and  ending  in  a  fharp  point :  the  bafe 
of  the  upper  mandible  is  ftrengthened  with  a 
white  narrow  prominent  rim,  full  of  very  minute 
holes;  the  bill  is  of  two  colors,  the  part  next  the 
head  of  a  bluifh  grey,  the  lower  part  red :  in  the 
former  is  one  tranfverfe  groove  or  furrow,  in  the 
latter  three ;  the  fize  of  the  bill  is  one  inch  and 
three  quarters  long ;  and  the  bafe  of  the  upper 
mandible  one  inch  broad." 

Hh  «  The 


234  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


"  The  iridcs  are  grey,  and  the  edges  of  the 
eye-lids  of  a  fine  crimfon ;  on  the  upper  eye- 
lid is  a  fingular  callous  fubftance,  grey,  and  of  a 
triangular  form ;  on  the  lower  is  another  of  an 
oblong  form ;  the  crown  of  the  head,  whole 
upper  part  of  the  body,  tail,  and  covert  feathers 
of  the  wings  are  black ;  the  quill-feathers  are  of 
a  dufky  hue." 

46  The  cheeks  are  white,  and  fo  full  of  feathers 
as  to  make  the  head  appear  very  large,  and  al- 
moft  round ;  the  chin  of  the  fame  color,  bounded 
on  each  fide  by  a  broad  bed  of  grey :  from  the 
corner  of  each  eye  is  a  fmall  feparation  of  the 
feathers,  terminating  at  the  back  of  the  head. 
The  neck  is  encircled  with  a  broad  collar  of 
black ;  but  the  whole  lower  part  of  the  body,  as 
far  as  is  under  water,  is  white." 

"  Tail  black,  compofed  of  fixteen  feathers : 
legs  fmall,  of  an  orange  color,  and  placed  fo  far 
Behind  as  to  difqualify  it  from  {landing,  except 
quite  ere£t ;  refting  not  only  on  the  foot,  but 
the  whole  flength  of  the  leg ;  this  makes  the  rife 
of  the  puffin  from  the  ground  very  difficult,  and 

it 


HISTORY    OP    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


it  meets  with  many  falls  before  it  gets  on  wing ; 
but  when  that  is  effe&ed,  few  birds  fly  longer  or 
ftronger."* 

The  razor-bill  is  found  among  the  lofty  crags 
of  Frefhwater,  and  St.  Chriftopher's  cliffs,  about 
the  beginning  of  May.  Here  it  is  that  the  female 
depofits  her  fingle  egg  (for  they  never  lay  but  one 
at  a  time)  on  the  bare  level  of  fome  rocky  ledge, 
that  beetles  over  the  beach  below.  This  egg  is 
enormoufly  large  in  proportion  to  the  fize  of  the 
bird,  being  three  inches  in  length ;  its  color  is 
cither  a  dirty  white,  or  a  fea  green,  thickly  fet 
with  a  variety  of  irregular  black  fpots.t  To 
acquire  thefe,  and  to  procure  the  feathers  of  the 
young  puffins,  it  is  cuftomary  with  many  of  the 
iflanders  to  defcend  the  tremendous  precipices 
where  they  are  found,  by  the  afliftance  of  a  ftrong 
rope,  attached  to  a  crow  bar  fixed  in  the  ground 

*  Brit.  Zool.  p.  431.    Quarto. 

f  Thefe  are  erroneoufly,  though  commonly,  called 
puffin's  eggs ;  whereas  the  egg  of  that  bird  is  much 
fmaller,  and  entirely  white. 

above. 


236         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

above.  When  the  eggs  are  gotten,  they  may  be 
purchafed  at  about  nine  pence  a  dozen;  and 
being  boiled  hard,  are  by  many  people  much 
efteemed.  The  yolk  is  then  rich  and  well 
flavored,  but  the  white  very  infipid,  and  fome- 
what  difagreeable  to  the  eye,  having  the  appear- 
ance of  a  dingy  tranfparent  jelly.  Jf  the 
fituation  of  the  egg  be  obferved,  as  ordered  by 
the  parent  bird,  it  will  be  found  to  be  moft  won- 
derfully and  curioufly  placed  3  with  a  balance 
fo  nice  and  exaft,  that  fliould  it  be  once  re- 
moved, it  is  out  of  the  power  of  human  art  to 
Teftore  it  to  its  former  equilibrium.  Indeed  the 
danger  of  the  egg  rolling  off  the  fmooth  level  on 
which  it  is  depofited,  from  the  agitation  of  the 
winds,  or  other  external  caufes,  is  fo  inftinftively 
known  by  the  female  razor-bill,  that  when  once 
it  is  brought  forth,  fhe  feldom  forfakes  it  till  the 
young  one  is  excluded ;  being  regularly  fed  by 
the  affiduous  male,  who  is  conftantly  on  the  wing 
feeking  provifion  for  his  faithful  partner,  during 
this  tedious  incubation.  In  the  mean  time, 
fhould  any  plunderer  deprive  this  patient  crea- 
ture 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  237 

ture  of  her  folitary  egg,  (he  immediately  fupplies 
its  place  with  another;  and  if  the  theft  be1  re- 
peated twice  or  thrice,  me  will  as  often  produce 
a  frefh  one;  though,  wonderful  to  tell,  fhe  never 
thinks  of  laying  a  fecond  if  her  firft-born  be 
left  undifturbcd. 

The  razor-bill  is  a  handfome  bird,  about 
eighteen  inches  long,  and  twenty-fix  broad;  its 
head,  back,  and  wings  black;  it?  neck  and  belly 
white.  The  bill  is  two  inches  long;  fomewhat 
crooked,  ftrong,  and  fharp  ;  having  a  broad 
tranfverfe  groove  of  white,  eroding  each  man- 
dible. The  legs  are  black,  and  placed  very  far 
back,  which  gives  the  bird  the  fame  ereQ:  ap- 
pearance when  {landing,  as  the  puffin  has;  and 
nothing  is  more  laughable,  but  at  the  fame  time 
more  curious,  than  to  behold  long  ranks  of  thefe 
birds  thickly  planted  fide  by  fide,  on  the  different 
ledges  of  the  rocks,  in  a  pofture,  which,  though 
natural  to  them,  has  a  mod  affefted  and  abfurd 
appearance. 

The  guillemot  alfo  migrates  to  the  Ifle  of 
Wight  rocks,  to  produce  and  rear  its  offspring. 

It 


338  HISTOF-Y    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

It  generally  accompanies  the  other  aquatic  birds 
before  defcribed,  both  in  their  advent  and  de- 
parture. Like  them  too,  it  only  lays  one  egg, 
of  a  pale  blue,  fpotted  with  black  blotches,  or 
marked  with  numerous  interfering  lines.  Its 
figure  is  not  inelegant,  though  it  do  not  boaft 
the  brilliant  colors  of  other  birds ;  being,  on  the 
head,  neck,  back,  and  wings,  of  a  deep  moufe 
color,  with  the  belly  perfectly  white.  The  bill 
is  about  three  inches  long,  ftraight,  and  tapering 
to  a  very  (harp  point. 

Naturalifts  have  given  to  this  bird  the  oppro- 
brious name  of  the  fooli/h  guillemot,  from  its  not 
changing  its  fituation  when  mot  at.  But  I  am 
inclined  to  think,  from  obfervations  which  I 
have  perfonally  made,  that  this  conduft  of  the 
bird  is  rather  a  beautiful  example  of  inftinftive 
animal  affection,  than  a  fpecimen  of  ftupidity. 
The  attachment  of  thefe  aquatic  birds  to  their 
offspring,  is  (whilft  it  continues)  ardent  beyond 
apprehenfion ;  and  the  reafon  of  the  older  birds 
thus  neglecting  to  fly  from  danger,  when  it 
becomes  too  obvious  to  them  to  be  miftaken,  is, 

their 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.         239 


their  difinclination  to  remove  from  their  young 
ones,  which  would  not  be  able  to  accompany 
them  in  their  flight. 

Whilft  thefe  various  fpecies  of  migrating  bird* 
continue  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Needle 
rocks,  it  is  a  common  diverfion  with  the  fportf- 
men  of  thefe  parts,  to  form  parties  for  the 
purpofe  of  mooting  them ;  a  barbarous  practice, 
and  without  excufe ;  fince  the  wounded  carcafes 
of  thefe  unfufpe£ting  vifitors  can  be  applied  to  no 
one  ufe  after  they  are  deftroyed.  But  fuch  are 
the  delights  of 

"  The  fteady  tyrant  man, 

Who,  with  the  thoughtlefs  infolence  of  pow'r 
Inflam'd  beyond  the  moft  infuriate  wrath 
Of  the  worft  monfter  that  e'er  roam'd  the  wafte, 
For  fport  alone  purfues  the  cruel  game, 
Amid  the  beamings  of  the  gentle  days." 

The  cormorant  *  is  not,  properly  fpeaking,  a 
bird  of  migration.  It  builds  in,  and  inhabits  the 

*  The  proper  name  of  this  bird  is  corvorant,  from 
eorvus  crow,  and  varans  devouring  ;  an  appellation  if 
well  deferves,  from  its  incredible  voracity,  infatiablcr 
gluttony,  and  rapid  digeftion. 

immenfc 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


immenfe  precipices  of  Frefhwater,  for  the  better 
part  of  the  year.  During  the  winter,  however, 
the  voracious  plunderer  may  be  feen,  purfuing 
his  depredations  in  the  rivers  and  creeks,  for 
many  miles  around.  Here  this  folitary  favage  is 
on  the  perpetual  watch  for  prey  ;  tortured  with 
unquenchable  hunger,  occafioned  by  an  infinite 
multitude  of  worms,  which  inhabit  his  infide,  and, 
like  the  dogs  of  Milton's  Sin,  would  make  his 
bowels  their  repaft,  did  he  not  fupply  their 
voracity  by  unceafing  repletion.  For  this 
purpofe,  the  miferable  glutton  is  feen  continually 
diving  after  the  fifh,  which  his  piercing  eye  can 
difcern  at  a  great  depth  in  the  water  ;  or  perched 
upon  fome  folitary  elevation,  enjoying  a  tempo- 
rary refpite  from  labor,  and  the  attacks  of  his 
internal  enemies.  During  thefe  moments  of 
idlenefs  and  eafe,  he  is  often  found  feated  in  a 
lofty  tree;  a  fituation  fomewhat  fingular  for  a 
water  fowl,  and  which  indeed  (according  to  the 
obfervation  of  Ariftotle)  the  cormorant  alone,  of 
all  birds  of  that  clafs,  makes  ufe  of.  It  is  this 
generally  unobferved  circumftance,  in  the  hiftory 

of 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  24  I 


of  the  cormorant,  that  our  great  Poet  has  laid 
hold  of,  when  he  introduces  Satan  ufurping  the 
figure  of  that  bird,  and  perching  upon  a  tree,  to 
make  his  obfervations  on  our  firft  parents  : 

"  Thence  up  he  flew,  and  on  the  tree  of  life, 
The  middle  tree,  and  higheft  there  that  grew, 
Sat  like  a  cormorant''* 

An  admirable  vehicle,  from  its  voracity  and 
bafenefs,  for  the  Devil  to  make  ufe  of,  whilft 
devifing  fchemes  of  death  and  definition. 

Nature  feems  to  have  intended  a  check  upon 
human  gluttony,  by  rendering  thofe  quadrupeds 
and  birds,  which  are  moft  remarkable  for  an  in- 
temperate indulgence  of  the  appetite,  the  moft 
hateful  and  offenfive.  The  cormorant  is  a  proof 
of  this,  than  which  bird  no  other  is  more  vora- 
cious in  feeding,  nor  at  the  fame  time,  more 
difagreeable  in  perfon,  deteftable  in  fmell,  or  dif- 
gufting  in  manners ;  an  inftance,  amongft  num- 

*  Paradife  Loft,  book  IV.  line  193. 

I  i  berlefs 


342  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

berlefs  others,  of  the  moral  inji.ruftion  which 
might  be  gleaned  from  every  part  of  nature,  if 
we  would  but  perufe  her  ample  volume. 

The  ifland  has  always  produced  abundance  of 
game.  As  early  as  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII. 
we  find  that  the  pheafants  and  partridges  of  the 
royal  demefnes  here,  engaged  the  attention  of  our 
monarchs.  This  prince,  who  was  a  great  fportf- 
man,  and  more  particularly  devoted  to  hawking^ 
arnufed  himfelf  occafionally  that  way  in  the 
ifland.  Great  depredations,  however,  were 
committed  by  the  farmers,  and  lower  ranks  of 
people,  on  the  birds,  (for  poaching  was  praftifed 
even  three  centuries  ago)  which  occafioned  the 
following  mandate  from  Henry,  to  Richard 
Worfley,  Efq.  who  was  then  Captain  of  the  Ifle 
of  Wight.  It  bears  date  in  15  j  i  : 

"  Trudy  and  well  beloved  we  grete  you  well 
and  being  crediblye  enfourmed  that  o1 .  Games  of 
Partricheand  Fcfant  w;in  that  our  Ifle  of  Wight 
is  muche  decayed  by  the  pmiflion  and  fufferaunce 
of  fuche  lewd  psonsas  for  their  pryvate  Lucres 

contrary 


KiSTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  243 

contrary  to  our  Lawes  and  pleafure  doo  dailye 
wt.  netts  and  other  Engyns  take  the  fame.  You 
fhall  underftande  that  myndyng  to  havie  the 
fayd  Games  of  Patriches  and  Fefant  cherifhed 
w*in  our  fayde  Ifle  as  wel  for  our  difporte  and 
Paftyme  if  we  fhould  chaunce  to  repayre  thither 
as  for  our  Furniture  at  Tundry  our  Hono1"*. 
Manors  and  Houfes  which  from  tyme  to  tyme 
we  intende  to  replenifhe  with  the  fcore  of  trie 
fame  Ifle  as  nede  mail  requyre  Our  pleafure  and 
commaundement  is  that  you  fhall  not  only  uppon 
monicon  to  be  by  you  hereof  given  to  the  In- 
habitaunts  of  the  fayde  Ifle  have  diligent  regarde 
and  vigilant  Eye  that  no  man  of  no  degree  or 
condition  kill  any  Fezant  or  Partriche  w*.  net 
Engyne  or  Hawk  on  any  our  propre  lands  in 
the  fame  Ifle,  taking  the  Netts  and  Engyns  of  all 
fuch  as  (hall  attempte  the  contrary  and  further 
punifheng  the  ptyes  foe  offending  as  to  your 
Wifdom  fhall  be  thought  convenyent.  But 
alfo  that  you  fhall  advife  all  the  Reft  of  the 
Owners  and  Inhabitaunts  there  at  or.  coriT 
li  2  tem- 


244         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


templacon  alfo  to  fpare  the  fame  games  in  their 
own  grounds,  fpeally  abftaining  to  take  or  fuffre 
.  to  be  taken  any  Fefant  or  Partriche  wt.  netts  and 
fuch  Engyns  as  totally  deftroyeth  the  Brede  of 
the  fame  wherein  you  mall  doo  unto  us  accep- 
table fervice.  And  theife  our  Lres  mail  be  your 
fufficient  Warraunt  and  difcharge  in  that  behalf. 
Given  undre  our  Signet,  at  oi\  manor  of  Otland 
the  19th.  day  of  Decembre  the  32  yere  of  or. 
Reign."* 

The  woodcock  is  found  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight 
during  the  ufual  feafon  of  his  vifits  to  this  part 
of  Europe.  Two  or  three  ftragglers  generally 
arrive  before  the  appearance  of  the  great  flock, 
which  always  manages  to  reach  the  land  after 
funfet;  a  well-informed  friend,  who  is  alfo  a 
fportfman,  informed  me,  that  one  or  two  had 
been  feen  this  year  as  early  as  the  middle  of 
September,  but  inftances  of  this  premature 


*  Append,  to  Worfley's  Hill.  I  He    of    Wight,    No. 
XXXVII. 

advent 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  245 

advent  are  by  no  means  common.  They  con- 
tinue here  till  the  latter  end  of  March,  after 
which  time  it  feldom  happens  that  they  are  met 
with.  One  or  two  pair,  indeed,  have  been- 
known  to  remain  and  breed,  as  has  been  the 
cafe,  though  rarely,  in  fome  other  parts  of  the 
kingdom. 

Many  (lories  have  been  told  off-wallows,  and 

other  Britifh  hirundines^  being  found  during  the 

winter,  in  a  torpid  ftate,  in  holes  and  crevices  of 

the  ifland  cliffs;  but,  after  the  minuted  enquiry, 

I  do  not  fee  reafon  to  credit  any  of  the  relations. 

Indeed,  the  general  migration   of  the  hirundo 

tribes  is  now  fo  fully  eftablifhed,  that  the  natu- 

ralifl  will  be  difmclined  to  give  credit  to  any 

thing  lefs  than  ocular  demonftration,  for  their 

continuance  during   the   winter  with    us.      In 

forward  fprings  they  have  been  obferved  here  as 

early    as    the    eighteenth     and     twentieth     of 

February  :    and  at  the  latter  end  of  September 

may  be  feen  afiembled  in  large  flocks,  waiting 

for  a  fair  gale,  to  waft  them  to  Southern  latitudes, 

and 


«40  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

and  warmer  climes.  Indeed  they  need  every 
afliftance  from  wind  and  weather,  fince  we  find 
they  wing  their  arduous  flight  as  far  as  Senegal, 
and  other  parts  of  Africa.* 

*  M.  Adanfon's  Voyage  to  Senegal,  p.  12*.  The 
Poet  of  Nature  has,  with  his  ufual  accuracy,  painted  the 
manners  of  thefe  tribes,  previous  to  their  departure  from 
their  funamer  abodes : 

"  When  autumn  fcatters  his  departing  glooms, 

Warn'd  of  approaching  winter,  gather'd  play 

The  fwallow  people,  and  toff'd  wide  around 

O'er  the  calm  (ky,  in  convolution  fwift, 

The  feathered  eddy  floats,  rejoicing  once, 

Ere  to  their  winter  {lumbers  they  retire. 

In  clutters  hung  beneath  the  mould'ring  bank, 

And  where,    unpierc'd  by  frofts,  the  wint'ry  cavern. 

fweats"; 

Or  rather  into  warmer  climes  convey'd, 
With  other  kindred  birds  of  feafon  there, 
They  twitter  chearful,  till  the  vernal  months 
Invite  them  welcome  back  ;    for  thronging  now, 
Innum'rous  wings  are  in  commotion  all." — Thompfon, 


CHAP. 


HISTORY     OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  247 


CHAP.'  V. 


OF    THE    BOTANY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


s  not  our  ntenton  to  enter  nto  a  mnute 
and  fcientific  account  of  the  various  plants  to  be 
found  in  this  extenfive  diftricl  ;  fince  this  alone 
would  make  a  copious  work.  The  objeft  of 
thefe  pages  is  merely  to  point  out  a  few  fpecies, 
remarkable  either  for  their  rarity,  the  fingu- 
larity  of  their  conformation,  or  their  efficacy  in 
medicine.  The  mere  fyftematic  claffification  of 
herbs  and  flowers,  without  a  view  to  their 
utility,  feems  to  be  but  a  trifling  purfuit,  an  ufe- 
lefs  wafte  of  time  and  patience  ;  but  when  the 
botanift,  by  pointing  out  their  various  virtues 
and  powers,  or  their  curious  and  wife  con- 
ftruftion,  can  extend  the  knowledge  of  fimples, 

or 


240  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

or  elevate  the  mind  to  contemplation,  his  labors 
are  then  dignified  by  their  laudable  and  eligible 
ends. 

The  ophrys  apifera,  or  bee  archly  is  found  in 
the  fields  about  Carifbrooke  caftle.  It  flowers 
in  June  and  July,  and  then  difplays  a  fingular 
and  beautiful  contrivance  of  nature  for  the 
prefervation  of  the  plant.  The  great  importance 
of  the  ne6lary  or  honey-gland  in  flowers  is 
manifeft;  and  furprizing  care  and  various 
devices  are  found  to  have  been  ufed,  in  pro- 
tecting this  part  from  the  depredations  of  thofe 
various  infecls,  which  are  ever  on  the  wing  in 
fearch  of  this  delicious  vegetable  liquid.  To 
this  end  the  ne£larium  of  the  bee  orchis  is  formed 
with  fo  near  a  refemblance  to  the  wall  bee,  as  at 
a  fmall  diftance  to  be  eafily  miftaken  for  that 
infeft;  by  which  appearance,  it  is  probable,  a 
number  of  depredators,  who  would  otherwife 
rob  the  plant  of  its  means  of  fupport,  are 
deterred  from  approaching  it. 

The  digitalis,  or  fox-glove,  is  a  moft  beautiful 
and  fhewy  wild  plant,  occurring  in  almofl  every 

hedge-bank 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  249 

hedge-bank  in  the  ifland.  It  is  indeed  common 
to  moft  parts  of  Southern  England,  and  there- 
fore not  mentioned  here  on  account  of  its 
rarity,  but  becaufe  it  teems  with  efficacious 
virtues,  which  are  by  no  means  generally  under- 
ftood.  The  misfortune  is,  that  in  the  vegetable 
world,  as  in  every  thing  elfe,  we  are  apt  to  over- 
look and  defpife  thofe  productions  which  are 
moft  common,  not  troubling  ourfelves  with  an 
inveftigation  of  their  feveral  properties ;  whereas 
it  is  not  improbable,  (reafoning  from  the  kind- 
nefs  of  nature  in  other  refpecls)  that  thofe  which 
moft  perpetually  occur,  are  moft  replete  with 
medicinal  ufes,  would  we  be  at  the  trouble  of 
fearching  them  out ; 

"  But  yet  the  wholefome  herb  neglefted  dies, 
Though  with  the  pure  exhilarating  foul 
Of  nutriment  and  health,  and  vital  pow'rs, 
Beyond  the  reach  of  art  'tis  copious  blefs'd." 

The  falutary  effe&s  of  the  digitalis  are  ex- 
perienced in  one  of  the  fevereft  maladies  that 
can  affli6l  the  human  frame ;  the  anafarca,  a  kind 
of  dropfy,  attended  with  an  enlargement  of  the 

Kk  legs 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


legs  and  thighs,  and  a  difficulty  of  refpiration* 
In  this  diforder,  the  following  deco&ion  is  found 
to  be  extremely  efficacious,  and  in  a  very  fhort 
time  ;  one  large  fpoonful,  or  half  an  ounce, 
being  taken  twice  during  the  day. 

Boil  four  ounces  of  the  frefh  leaves  of  purple 
fox  glove,  from  two  pints  of  water  to  twelve 
ounces  3  and  add  to  the  ftrained  liquor,  while  yet 
warm,  three  ounces  of  re&ified  fpirit  of  wine. 

The  preparation  of  it  is  eafy,  the  mode  of  ad 
miniftering  fimple,  and  the  good  effefts  nearly 
certain.*  There  can  be  no  difficulty  in  dif- 
tinguifhmg  this  elegant  plant  from  its  more 
homely  neighbours;  the  length  of  the  ftem, 
thickly  fet  with  inverted  corollas,  of  a  purple  hue, 
and  a  bell  fhape,  forming  a  beautiful  cone  of 
flowers,  fufficiently  points  it  out.t 

On 

*  Vide  a  pamphlet,  entitled,  "  Experiments  on  Muci- 
laginous and  Purulent  Matter,"  by  Dr.  Darwin.  Ca- 
elcll,  1780. 

t  This  plant  may  be  further  afcertained  by  the 
following  character.  The  leaves  of  the  calyx  are  ovate 
(egg-fhaped)  and  acute,  with  the  fegments  of  the  corolla 

obtufe 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          251 

On  the  Eaftern  fhores  of  the  ifland  is  found 
the  conferva  polymorfha^  which  receives  its  name 
from  the  fingular  changes  it  undergoes  in  form 
and  appearance.  Originally  it  is  of  a  red  hue ; 
this  it  firft  difcards  for  brown,  and  fhortly  after- 
wards becomes  black;  dropping,  at  the  fame 
time,  its  lower  leaves,  and  lengthening  fome  of 
its  upper  ones,  to  the  almoft  total  alteration  of  its 
priftine  figure. 

The  lichen  calcareum^  or  liver-wort,  occurs  on 
all  the  rocky  elevations.  This  plant  feems  to  be 
the  foundation  of  all  vegetation,  drawing  its  own 
nourifhrnent  probably  from  air  alone,  originally. 
ft  is  the  firft  vegetable  that  appears  on  the  broad 
front  of  the  naked  rock,  which  it  runs  over  with 
a  kind  of  net-work.  When  it  dies  away,  its  re- 
crements afford  a  bed  for  other  mo^Tes  to  root 
themfelves  in,  which  in  their  turn  perifh,  and 
leave  an  additional  foil  for  fucceeding  plants; 

obtufe,    and   the   upper   lip   entire :    the   infide  of  the 
corolla  is  beautifully  fprinkled  with  fpots  rcfcmbling  eyes  ; 
and  the  leaves  are  large  and  wrinkled.     The  color  of  the  t 
flower  is  red.      Roufleau's  Letters  on  Botany  ;  Martyn's 
edit.  1794  ;   p.  316. 

Kk  2         v  thus 


2,52         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

thus  probably  has  the  globe  gradually  acquired 
the  means  of  fupporting  vegetables,  and  affumed 
that  foil  with  which  it  is  covered,  from  the  naked 
appearance  it  exhibited  after  the  ravages  of  an 
univer&l  deluge. 

Among  the  ledges  and  precipices  of  the  cliffs 
is  found  the  crithmum  maritimum^  or  rock-fam- 
phire ;  which  is  gathered  for  fale  by  the  adven- 
turous hinds  of  the  ifland.  Well  might 
Shakfpere  pronounce  this  avocation  to  be  a 
dreadful  trade  ;  *  for  it  is  a  fearful  fight  even  to 
fee  the  bufinefs  performed,  much  more  terrible 
then  muft  the  aftual  execution  of  it  be.  The 
mode  is  the  fame  with  that  praftifed,  and  before 
hinted  at,  in  acquiring  the  puffin  eggs ;  a  rope 
attached  to  a  crow  bar  firmly  fixed  on  the  brow 
of  the  cliff,  by  which  the  perfon  lowers  himfelf 
down  to  the  crevices  wherein  the  famphire  is 
found ;  and  by  the  fame  means  clambers  again 
to  the  fummit,  when  he  has  filled  the  bafket  girt 
around  him.  There  is,  however,  fome  little 
fraud  praclifed  now  and  then  by  thefe  famphire 

*  In  his  King  Lear. 

dealers, 


HISTORY     OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  253 

dealers,  and  the  purchafer  (unlefs  he  be  a  botanift 
and  can  difcover  the  deceit)  is  furnifhed  with  a 
baftard  kind  of  plant,  by  no  means  fo  fit  for 
medicinal  or  culinary  purpofes  as  the  genuine 
famphire.  This  fubftituted  vegetable  is  called 
the  inula  crithmoides,  or  golden  famphire,  and 
gathered,  with  little  trouble  and  no  danger,  on  all 
the  fea  beaches  in  and  near  the  ifland.  The 
fallacy  may  be  detected  by  obferving  the 
formation  of  the  plant,  and  tafting  the  ftalk  or 
leaf.  In  the  genuine  famphire,  the  ftalks  are 
fucculent,  the  leaves  pinnate  (winged,  or  feather- 
ed) formed  of  three  or  five  divifions,  each 
having  as  many  fmall,  thick,  lance-fhaped  leaves. 
Both  thefe  and  the  ftalk  have  a  pungent  tafte. 
In  the  other  fpecies,  the  ftalk,  on  the  contrary, 
is  roundifh,  jointed,  and  taftelefs ;  with  a  tough 
ftring  running  through  the  middle  of  it.  inftead 
of  the  flat  leaf  of  the  crithmum  maritimum.* 

The  fubmarine  rocks  and  ftones  which  line  the 
coafts  of  the  ifland,  abound  with  various  aquatic 
plants;  fuch  as 

*  Roufleau's  Letters  on  the  Elements  of  Botany  j 
tranflated  by  Profcffor  Martyn  ;  edit,  i  794  ;  p.  233. 

The 


2,54         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


The  fucusjibrofus,  or  fennel-leaved  wrack  of 
fea-weed ; 

Thefucus  bifiduS)  or  bifid  ditto ; 

Thefucus  caniliculatus,  or  furrowed  ditto; 

Thefucus  crifpatus,  or  branched  ditto ; 

The  fucus   albiduS)   or  white   ditto — a  very 
beautiful  fpecies; 

Thefucus'multifidus,  ormultifid  ditto : 

The  ulva purpurefccns,  or  purple  laver ; 

The  ulva  capillaris.,  or  capillary  ditto ; 

The  ulva  filiformiS)  or  filiform  ditto — 
moft  of  them  conftrufted  for  riding  on  the  waves, 
by  the  afliftance  of  numberlefs  little  bladders 
filled  with  air,  which  fupport  them  on  the 
furface,  and  thus  enable  them  to  form  vaft  beds 
of  floating  vegetation. 

The  mildnefs  of  the  climate  in  this  part  of 
England,  is  manifefted  by  the  great  numbers  of 
the  tnyrtus  communis,  or  common  myrtle,  to  be 
feen  here  in  all  its  varieties.  It  needs  no  par- 
ticular culture  or  attention,  but  braves  the  vari- 
ations of  the  external  air,  and  all  the  rigors  of  the 
winter;  circumftances  which  would  have  af- 
forded 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  2,55 


forded  fufficient  hints  for  ancient  mythologifts 
to  have  afcribed  the  tutelage  of  the  ifland  to  the 
gentle  goddefs  of  love ; 

"  Populus  Alcidae  gratiffima,  vitis  laccho, 
Formofae  myrtus  Veneri,  tua  laurea  Phoebo."* 

*  Virg.  Eclog.     The  myrtle  flourilhes  bed  in  a  warm 
marine  fituation — 

"  Pallentesque  ederas,  et  amantes  littora  myrtus.— -Virg. 
Georg.  I.  verfe  2 9. 


CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    VI. 


OF    THE    FOSSILOGY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

JL  HE  ifland  confifts  chiefly  of  an  immenfe 
mafs  of  calcareous  matter,  of  a  chalky  nature, 
running  in  a  direction  Eaft  and  Weft.  Of  this 
all  the  higher  parts  are  compofed;  the  other 
flat  and  lefs  animated  fpots  exhibit  a  gravelly, 
fandy,  or  clayey  foil. 

This  chalk,  however,  is  not  of  fo  foft  and  fine 
a  texture  as  that  found  more  to  the  Eaftward,  by 
Portfmouth,  and  along  the  Suflex  downs;  ap- 
proaching nearer  to  limeftone.  It  is,  notwith- 
ftanding,  dug  both  for  medicinal  and  agri- 
cultural purpofes,  andufedas  a  manure  through- 
out the  whole  ifland. 

In 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  2,57 

In  the  pits  which  have  been  thus  formed,  arc 
frequently  found  chalk-foflils  of  different  forts, 
fuch  zsechiniijharks'  teeth,  andammonice,  that  have 
preferved  their  form,  enveloped  in  the  calcareous 
matter  wherein  they  were  bedded,  throughout  all 
the  unknown  and  wonderful  mutations  it  has  in 
the  lapfe  of  ages  experienced.* 

LI  The 

*  A  modern  philofopher  thus  accounts  for  the  for- 
mation of  chalk.  "  The  limeftone  rocks  have  had  their 
origin  from  (hells  formed  beneath  the  fea,  the  fofter  ftrata 
gradually  difTolving,  and  filling  up  the  interlaces  of  the 
harder  ones  ;  afterwards,  when  thefe  accumulations  of 
{hells  were  elevated  above  the  waters,  the  upper  ftrata 
became  diffolved  by  the.  aftion  of  the  air  and  dews,  and 
filled  up  the  intcrftices  oerieath,  producing  folid  rocks,  of 
different  kinds,  from  the  coarfe  limeftones  to  the  fineft 
marbles.  When  thefe  limeftones  have  been  in  fuch  a 
fituation  that  they  could  form  perfeft  cryftals,  they  are 
called^arj,  fome  of  which  poffefs  a  double  refraftion,  as 
obferved  by  Sir  Ifaac  Newton.  When  thefe  cryftals  arc 
jumbled  together,  or  mixed  with  fome  coloring  impuri- 
ties, it  is  termed  marble,  if  its  texture  be  equable  and  firm  ; 
if  its  texture  be  coarfe  and  porous,  yet  hard,  it  is  called 
limejloru ;  if  its  texture  be  very  loofe  and  porous,  it  is 
termed  chalk." — Darwin's  Bot.  Garden,  Firft  Part, 
additional  notes. 

With  refpeft  tofoj/iljhetts,  it  is  a  very  curious  circum- 
ftance,  that  many  of  them  are  not  now  known  to  our 

naturalifts 


258  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

The  range  of  cliffs  which  form  the  bold 
Southern  fhore  of  the  ifland  exhibit  alfo  a  great 
variety  of  beautiful  fojfil /helh  ;  amongft  which 
are  fecn  vail  and  perfecl  echini^;  cornua  nmmonis^ 
of  all  fizes,  from  fix  inches  to  eighteen  in 
diameter ;  cava s ;  turbinated  and  bivalved  fhells 
of  various  fpecies,  either  now  altogether  un- 
known in  a  living  ftate,  or  inhabitants  only  of 
the  tropical  climates.  They  are  fometimes 
found  bedded  in  limeftone  rock  ;  and,  in  other 
fpots,  enveloped  in  a  dark-colored,  indurated 
clay,  which  is  foluble  by  water. 


naturalifts  in  their  reeent  Hate  ;  and  that,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  fhells  moft  numerous  in  their  recent  ftate,  are 
not  known  in  a  fofTil  one.  The  cornu  ammonis,  for 
inflar.cc,  of  which  fuch  ^numbers  are  every  where  dif- 
covered  in  the  fofnl  ftate,  has  never  been  difcovered  in  a 
recent  one.  "  Were  all  the  ammonia:  deftroyed,"  fays 
Dr.  Darwin,  ':  when  the  continents  were  raifed  ?  Or  do 
fome  genera  of  animals  perifh}  by  the  increafing  power  of 
their  enemies?  Or  do  they  ftill  refide  at  inacceflible 
depths  in  the  fea  ?  Or  do  fome  animals  change  their 
forms  gradually,  and  become  new  genera  ?"  Philofophy 
may  afk  thefc  queftions,  but  it  is  to  be  feared  the  narrow 
bounds  of  human  knowledge  will  never  enable  us  to  give 
fatisfaftory  anfwers  to  them. 

A  thick 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  &$g 

A  thick  and  extenfive  flratum  of  a  clofe, 
black,  earthy  ftone,  or  fchiftus,  runs  under  the 
whole  ifland.  It  appears  at  low  water  mark  on 
the  coaft  near  Mottifton.  When  firft  taken  up 
it  can  be  penetrated  by  any  fharp  or  pointed 
inftrument;  but  after  having  been  fometime 
expofed  to  the  air,  it  indurates,  and  makes  very 
good  whetftones.  The  inhabitants  call  it 


A  ftratum  of  coal  difcovers  itfelf  at  the  foot  of 
Bimbridge  cliff,  and  runs  through  the  Southern 
part  of  the  ifland,  appearing  again  at  Warden 
ledge,  in  Frefhwater  parifh.  On  the  North  fide 
of  this  ftratum,  lie  a  vein  of  white  fand  and 
another  of  fuller's  earth  ;  and  on  the  South  fide 
is  a  vein  of  red  ochre.  The  coal  is  faid  to  be  of 
a  good  quality.  The  late  Sir  Robert  Worfley 
funk  a  fhaft  at  Bimbridge,  in  order  to  afcertain 
the  depth  of  the  ftratum  ;  but  finding  it  was  very 
thin,  he  did  not  conceive  the  profits  of  working 
it  would  anfwer  the  charges  of  the  undertaking, 
and  therefore  defifted.* 

*  Sir  Richard  Worthy's  Hift.  p.  7. 

LI  2  Various 


a6o         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT* 

Various  forts  of  fiont  are  found  in  the  Ifle  of 
Wight,  but  none  of  very  fuperior  quality.  That 
•which  was  formerly  dug  near  Ouarr  Abbey,  (fa 
named  from  its  neighbourhood  to  thefe  quarries) 
appears  to  have  been  for  feveral  centuries  in 
fome  eftimation  ;  the  cathedral  at  Winchefter 
and  other  ecclefiaftical  edifices  being  built  with 
it.  When  the  Portland  freeftone,  however,  once 
became  known,  its  qualities  were  found  to  be  fq 
much  more  valuable  than  thofe  of  the  Quarr 
{tone,  that  the  latter  funk  into  difrepute,  foon 
ceafed  to  be  called  for,  and  is  now  forgotten. 
There  are  feveral  varieties  of  flone  alfo,  at  the 
back  of  the  ifland,  but  being  all  of  a  fandy 
nature,  coarfe  grain,  and  dark  color,  they  are  not 
in  much  requeft. 

The  argilla  apyra,  a  heavy,  ductile,  white 
clay,  commonly  called  tobacco-pipe  clay,  is  found 
in  the  ifland ;  there  are  feveral  confiderable 
ftrata  of  it,  which  are  made  to  turn  to  good 
account. 

Amongft  the  foffil  earths  of  this  diftrift,  may 
be  reckoned  the  argilla  fullonic  a  (fuller's  earth); 

the 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  2&1 

A 

the  argilla  tnarga,  or  white  marie ;  the  marga 
columbina,  or  dove  marie;  the  ochra  fcrri,  or 
yellow  ochre ;  and  the  ochra  Syriaca^  or  red 
qchre :  the  two  laft  are  particularly  obvious  in 
Ahun  bay,  where  their  mingled  ftrata  form  a 
beautiful  and  variegated  appearance  at  a  fmall 
diftance.  At  the  fame  fpot  is  alfo  found  the 
arena  micacea  argcntca,  or  white  filvery  fand,  of 
infinite  ufe  in  the  glafs  and  porcelain  manu- 
factories, for  which  it  is  perpetually  (hipping  off. 
The  bed  of  it  is,  however,  fo  immenfe,  that 
fcarcely  any  diminution  in  the  quantity  can  be 
perceived. 

The  name  of  this  bay  fufficiently  points  out 
the  kind  of  fofiil  fait  produced  there.  The 
alumen  commune,  common  native  alum,  is  found 
in  confiderable  quantities.  As  it  is  a  fait  of  great 
efficacy  and  ufe  both  in  medicine,  dying,  &c.  the 
crown  ufed  formerly  to  monopolize  the  whole  of 
it ;  and  proper  people  were  appointed  to  gather 
and  preferve  it  for  government.  This  practice 
commenced  with  Queen  Elizabeth,  who  having 

learnt 


262         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT, 

learnt  that  much  of  this  natural  production  was 
to  be  gotten  in  the  ifland,  fent  the  following 
mandate  to  the  then  governor,  Mr.  Richard 
Worflcy,  in  order  to  afcertain  the  truth  of  what 
me  had  heard,  and  to  avail  herfelf  of  it,  if  it 
were  fo. 

"  After  my  right  harty  commendacons — 
Whereas  the  Quean's  Majefty  being  infermyd 
that  there  is  wtin  that  lie  certen  Oure  of  Alume. 
For  trial  and  Profe  whereof  her  Highnefs  purtly 
fendeth  thider  the  Bearer  herof  one  Bendall, 
Thefe  mall  be  in  her  Mat's.  Name  to  require 
you  with  your  Authorite  and  favr.  fo  to  aflift 
him  in  that  behalf,  as  he  may  revyfe  fyche  partes 
there  as  he  (hall  thynk  to  be  meete  for  the 
purpofe  and  bring  w*.  him  fume  part  of  the  fayde 
Oure  to  the  End  he  maye  therof  make  fume 
profe  here  w*in  the  Realme.  In  this  part  as  her 
Highnefs  trufteth,  you  will  give  order  that  no 
man  there  mail  impede  and  refift  him ;  foe  he 
hath  charge  to  ufe  himfelf  with  fyche  moderation 
and  refpeft  of  behavior  as  mail  apperteyne. 

And 


HISTORY    OP    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          463 

And  thus  I  bid  you  hartely  well  to  fare.  Fro 
the  Court  at  Weflmynfter  the  yth.  daye  of 
Marche  1561;  your  allured 

Frend, 

W.  Cecil."  * 

Small  mafTes  of  the  fulphur  vivum  opacum^  of 
yellow  native  fulphur ,  are  picked  up  on  feveral 
parts  of  the  ifland  mores  ;  and  fuch  quantities  of 
copperas  about  Shanklin,  as  are  fufficient  to  freight 
fmall  trading  veffels,  which  carry  the  fame  to  the 
London  markets,  and  there  difpofe  of  it  to  great 
advantage. 

The  expectations  of  the  iflanders  were  fome 
years  fince  awakened,  on  a  difcovery  that  fmall 
particles  of  gold  were  mingled  with  the  fand  of 
Chale  bay.  The  circumftance  was  foon  noifed 
about,  and  the  whole  neighbourhood,  filled  with 
the  thoughts  of  ideal  fortunes,  left  their  occu- 
pations, and  bent  their  attention  to  the  collecting 
and  fifting  of  this  precious  fand.  After  a  fhort 
time,  however,  the  gold  duft  ceafed  to  appear, 

*  Sir  Richard  Worfley's  Hift<  Append.  No.  II. 

and 


264         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

and  it  was  found  out,  that  a  Spanifh  fhip  having 
been  wrecked  on  the  coaft,  this  rich  article, 
which  had  been  fuppofed  to  be  the  natural  pro- 
duction of  the  place,  was  part  of  her  cargo, 
wafhed  afhore  by  the  violence  of  a  ground  fea. 
The  iflanders  therefore  returned  to  their  homes 
and  ufual  avocations,  fomewhat  difappointed,  but 
wifely  determining  to  content  themfelves  for  the 
future  with  the  flow  but  certain  profits  of  agri- 
culture, and  mercantile  purluits.  * 

*  "  Arguntum  ft  aurtcm,"  fays  the  incomparable  Tacitus, 
fpeaking  of  the  natural  productions  which  their  country 
yielded  to  the  Germans,  "  propitii  an  irati  dii  negavtrint, 
dubito."  Could  our  philofopher  have  beheld  the  evils 
which  the  poffeffion  of  thefe  fatal  metals  occafioned  to 
the  innocent  inhabitants  of  the  netu  world  ;  or  have  taken 
a  view  of  the  barbarifm,  ferocity,  and  wretchednefs  which 
are  exhibited  on  the  gold  coaft,  from  one  extremity  to 
another,  he  would  have  entertained  no  doubt  on  the 
fubjeft;  but  inftantly  acknowledged  the  kindnefs  and 
benevolence  of  the  gods,  in  denying  thefe  "  filming  mif- 
chiefs"  to  the  honcft  Germans. 


A 

GENERAL  VIEW 


AGRICULTURE 


OP    THI 


ISLE  OF   WIGHT. 


"Ye  gen'rous  Britons!  venerate  the  plough, 
And  o'er  your  hills,  and  long  withdrawing  vales, 
Let  autumn  fpread  his  treafures  to  the  fun, 
Luxuriant  and  unbounded." 


CHAP.    I. 

A    SKETCH    OF    THE    PROGRESS    OF    AGRICUL- 
TURE   IN    BRITAIN,    FROM    THE   EARLI- 
EST    TO     THE     PRESENT     TIMES. 

AGRICULTURE  is  one  of  the  neceflary 
arts  of  life ;  perhaps  the  moft  fo  of  any  other. 
At  leaft  it  muft  be  the  firft  ftep  towards  comfort 
and  civilization.  Whilft  men  continue  to  lead 

*  "  If  .ardent  thirft  of  wealth  thy  bofom  warm, 
Leave  vain  purfuits,  and  take  afertilefarm." — Phocy.  Sent. 

Mm  a  wandering 


t66  HISTORY    OF    THfe    ISLE    OF    WIGHT* 

a  wandering,  unfettled  life,  without  fixed  habi- 
tations, they  will  of  courfe  remain  favage  and 
unenlightened;  nor  can  any  fcintillation  of 
improvement  be  expe&ed  to  appear  in  their 
minds  and  manners,  till  the  knowledge  and 
practice  of  agriculture  have  given  them  ideas  of 
the  advantages  refulting  from  the  pofleffion  of 
permanent  property,  and  taught  them  to  be 
ftationary,  and  to  fettle  and  affociate  together. 

That  the  firft  Celtic  inhabitants  of  this 
kingdom  were  not  arrived  to  the  knowledge  of 
agriculture,  when  they  wandered  hither,  has  been 
ftiggefted  before ;  they  were  in  that  ftage  of 
human  manners  denominated  the  hunter  Jlate, 
migrating  from  place  to  place,  without  any 
notions  of  permanent  property  or  fettled  abode. 

Their  Belgic  fucceffors,  in  the  South  of 
Britain,  had  advanced  a  ftep  beyond  thefe 
barbarians,  and  pofTefled  fome  little  theoretic 
and  pratlical  knowledge  of  hufbandry ;  though 
fo  crude  and  perverfe  were  their  ideas  on  the 
fubjeft,  that  they  efteemcd  the  purfuit  of  this 
ufeful  art  ignoble  and  impolitic ;  and  actually 

framed  infUlutions'to  difcourage  it. 

Ciefar 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE   OF    WIGHT.          167 


Caefar  tells  us,  the  diet  of  thefe  people  con- 
Cfted  chiefly  of  milk,  flc-fh  and  cheefe :  that 
none  of  them  poffefled  any  fpot  of  ground  which 
they  could  call  their  own  :  that  the  chiefs 
allotted  annually  a  certain  proportion  of  land  to 
each  perfon,  which,  at  the  conclufion  of  the  year, 
was  again  refumed,  and  the  temporary  owner 
obliged  to  repair  to  another  fpot;  a  conduft 
they  adopted  for  the  exprefs  purpofe,  as  he 
further  informs  us,  of  weaning  the  people  from 
agricultural  purfuits.* 

It  was  under  the  government  of  the  Romans, 
that  Britain  firft  exhibited  a  fyftematic  and  re- 
fpeftable  hufbandry ;  thefe  conquerors  {hewed  a 
minute  and  fludious  attention  to  every  branch 
of  this  art.  In  their  hands  it  became  a  perfect 
fcience ;  a  fubjeft  of  eulogy  to  their  orators,t 
Mm  2  of 

*  De  Bell.  Gal.  lib.  VI.  cap.  xxii.  Tacitus  gives  an 
acxount  nearly  funilar.  DC  Mpribus  Germ.  cap.  xxvi. 

i  -  Omnium  rcrum  ex  quibus  aliquid  adquiretur, 
nihil  eft  agricultura  melius,  nihil  uberius,  nihil  dulcius, 
aihil  homine  libcro  dignius." — Cicero  de  Officiis,  I.  cap. 
xlii. — and  again  ;  {:  Ab  aratro  arc&flebantur  qui  conlulef 


268  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

of  difcuffiorrto  the  literati,*  and  of  defcription  to 
their  poets  : 

"  Such  things  as  thefe  the  rural  Maro  fung 
To  wide  imperial  Rome,  in  the  full  height 
Ot  elegance  and  tafte  by  Greece  refiii'd." 

Moft  of  the  modes  of  tillage  which  are  even 
now  in  ufe  with  us,  were  introduced  amongft  the 
natives  of  Britain  by  their  Roman  conquerors  ; 
to  whom  we  are  indebted  alfo  for  many  of  the 
feeds,  plants,  root?,  and  flowers,  which  ad- 
minifter  to  our  prefent  comfort,  luxury,  and 
amufement.t 

At 

iicrent.  Suos  enim  agros  ftudiofe  colebant,  non  alienos 
cupide  appetebant,  quibus  rebus  et  agris,  et  urbibus,  et 
nationibus  rempublicam,  atque  hoc  imperium  et  populi 
Roman!  nomen  auxerunt." — Orat.  pro  Ligaro. 

*    Varro  ;   Cato  ;   Columella  ;   Fliny. 

i  We  are  to  thank  the  Romans  for  the  following  feeds, 
plants,  and  roots.  The  radix,  or  radifh  ;  the  afparagus  ; 
the  cucumber  ;  the  lettuce  ;  the  melon  ;  the  pea  ;  the 
faba,  or  bean  ;  the  beet  root  ;  the  fennel  ;  rofemary  ; 
and  thyme.  They  alfo  added  to  the  parterre  the  following 
flowers — the  rhos,  or  rofe  ;  thelilly  ;  the  violet :  and  to 
the  orchard  the  following  fruits — the  pear  ;  the  damfon  ; 
the  cherry  ;  the  perfica,  or  peach  ;  the  aprica,  or  apricot ; 

the 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


At  the  time  of  the  Norman  conqueft,  the  agri. 
culture  of  Britain  appears  to  have  been  at  a  very 
low  ebb.  But  a  fmall  proportion  of  land  was  in 
tillage;  and  the  chief  attention  was  bent  to  the 
grazing  of  cattle,  and  the  fattening  of  hogs.* 
Little  encouragement,  indeed,  could  be  given  to 
it  in  the  pure  feudal  ages  ;  the  lord  of  the 
demefne  was  too  much  occupied  in  conftant 
warfare,  to  attend  to  domeftic  concerns  ;  and  his 
miferable  vaflal,  with  every  intellectual  faculty 
chilled  and  deprefled  by  ignorance,  fuperflition, 
and  fervimde,  had  neither  ability,  fpirits,  nor 
inclination,  to  try  experiment,  or  attempt  im- 
provement. 

A  fmall  approach  to  the  increafe  of  tillage  was 
made  at  the  clofe  of  the  twelfth  century,  when 

the  cidonia,  or  quince  ;  the  morus,  or  mulberry  ;  the 
caftanea,  or  chefnut  ;  the  lie  us,  or  fig  ;  the  vitis,  or  vine  ; 
the  forbus,  or  fervice  ;  the  mefpilus,  or  medlar.  They 
introduced  cider  and  perry:  and  laftly,  enlarged  the 
Briiijh  fauna  by  bringing  with  them,  pheafants  ;  pigeons  ; 
partridges  ;  pluvialis,  or  plover  ;  turtur,  or  turtle  dove  ; 
DSIVO,  or  pea-cock  ;  rabbit  ;  coccyx,  or  cuckoo.  Pliny. 

*  Vide  Domefday  Book,  paflim. 

the 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


the  barons  manumitted  a  number  of  their  vaflals, 
in  order  to  itrengthen  their  caufe  againil  the 
kingly  power.  Thefe  freedmen  receiving  at  the 
fame  time  a  certain  proportion  of  allodial  1ands 
began  inclofing  their  acquifitions  ;  and  foon 
experiencing  the  fweets  of  eating  the  fruits  of 
their  own  labor,  introduced  fome  fmall  tafte  for 
the  purfuits  of  hufbandry. 

But  the  inaufpicious  influence  of  the  feudal 
inftitutions,  and  the  monopolizing  fpirit  of  the 
church,  that  fwallowed  up  nearly  a  third  part  of 
the  landed  property  of  the  kingdom,  ft  ill  ope- 
rated as  conftant  checks  upon  any  little  fpirit  of 
agricultural  improvement,  which  might  other- 
wife  have  gotten  abroad  ;  and  it  was  not  till  the 
reign  of  Henry  VII.  (whofe  policy  didated  a 
relaxation  and  diminution  of  the  feudal  tenures) 
when  landed  property  was  to  be  acquired  by 
moft  defcriptions  of  people,  that  any  general 
attention  was  paid  to  this  art.  This  event, 
however,  being  followed,  in  the  fubfequent  reign, 
by  a  diftiibution  of  the  immenfe  pofleflions  of  the 
ccclefiaftics  amongft  the  laity,  the  united  circum- 

ftances 


HISTORY    OF    THfi    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


ftances  diffafed  a  pretty  univerfal  fpirit  of 
hufbandry,  and  lucrative  improvement;  a  fpirit, 
indeed,  that  operated  rather  too  violently.  For 
the  new  poflefTors  of  thefe  lands,  wifhing  to  turn 
their  recently-acquired  property  to  the  fpeedieil 
advantage,  began,  with  all  expedition,  breaking 
up  the  numerous  commons  and  wafte  grounds^ 
which  had  hitherto  afforded  fubfi  Hence  to  the 
fcafantry  of  the  kingdom.  The  legiflature  per- 
ceiving that  this  fyftem  was  praftifed  univerfally 
with  increafing  ardor,  thought  proper  at  length 
to  prohibit  it,  as  it  had  a  manifeft  tendency  to 
impoverilh  and  deflroy  that  ufeful  defcription  of 
people. 

Since  the  period  of  the  Reformation,  when  the 
vail  advanfages  pf  agriculture  firft  became 
generally  known  and  acknowledged,  this  ufeful 
art  has  been  creeping  on  by  a  flow,  but  pro- 
greffive  improvement,  till  the  prefent  time. 
During  this  interval  of  two  centuries  and  an 
half,  feveral  names,  high  on  the  roll  of  literary 
fame,  have,  at  different  times,  honored  agri- 
culture with  their  patronage  and  recommen- 

dation ; 


872          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

dation ;  nor  did  Bacon,  Milton,  Evelyn,  or 
Cowley  think  it  unworthy  of  their  occafional 
lucubrations.  But  it  was  left  for  the  prefent  age 
to  call  in  the  influence  of  government^  to  the 
promotion,  encouragement,  afliftance,  and  im- 
provement of  the  national  hufbandry ;  a  great 
and  wife  idea,  originally  fuggefted  by  a  patriot, 
whofe  affiduous  labors  in  the  developement  of 
the  true  fources  of  national  happinefs  and  wealth, 
entitle  him  to  the  efteem  and  gratitude  of  every 
real  lover  of  his  country.* 

*  Sir  John  Sinclair^  Bart.  Prefidcnt  of  the  Board  of 
Agriculture., 


CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  273 


• 


CHAP.    II. 


OF     THE     DIFFERENT     GRAINS     SOWN   ;     USUAL 
COURSE   OF  CROPS;    VARIOUS  MANURES,    &C. 

HE  foil  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight  being  extremely 
diversified,  as  we  have  feen  in  a  former  part  of 
this  volume,  the  modes  of  tillage,  kinds  of  grains, 
courfes  of  crops,  and  forts  of  manure,  will  of 
courfe  be  different  in  its  different  diftrifts.  We 
will,  however,  point  out,  as  nearly  as  poflible, 
the  hufbandry  of  each  particular  part. 

The  grains  chiefly  cultivated  here  are,  wheat, 
barley,  oats,  peafe,  and  beans. 

Of  wheat,  all  the  different  forts  are  occafionally 
ufed.  In  the  neighbourhood  of  the  fea,  the 
fanners  prefer  the  old  white-Jlrazued  wheat,  for 
the  fenfible  reafon  of  its  being  lefs  liable  than 
any  other  kind  to  be  injured  by  high  winds  and 
Nn  tern- 


a/4         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT* 

tempeftuous  weather.  On  the  North*  part  of 
the  ifland,  the  red  ftrawed  wheat  is  ufually  fown; 
as  well  as  in  all  the  wet,  poor  lands,  becaufe  it  is 
fuppofed  to  run  more  to  Jlraw  than  any  other 
kind,  and  of  courfe  enables  the  farmer  to  pro- 
vide more  fodder  for  his  cattle  in  the  winter. 

Of  oats,  the  common  forts  are  generally 
fown;  though  fome  farmers,  particularly  in  the 
Eaftern  parts  of  the  ifland,  are  partial  to  the 
Tartarian  kind;  but  I  am  informed  they  feldom 
anfwer. 

With  refpeft  to  beans  and  peafe,  more  or  lefs 
attention  is  paid  to  them,  according  to  the  nature 
and  foil  of  the  land. 

The  following,  is  a  ftatement  of  the  rotation  of 
crops,  in  various  parts  of  the  ifland. 

Towards  the  Eaftern  extremity,  the  common 
eourfe,  on  the  free,  light-working  land,  is, 


*  By  the  North  of  the  ifland  is  to  be  underftood  all  the 
land*  on  the  North  of  the  range  of  hills  which  imerfeft  the 
Hland  from  Eaft  to  Weft ;  and  by  the  South  of  the 
ifland  is  to  be  underftood  all  the  lands  lying  between  the 
faid  hills  and  the  ocean. 

Firft 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          875 


Firft  year,       -       *•     Wheat ; 
Second  ditto,  *      -     Barley; 
Third  ditto,     -       -     Clover; 
Fourth  ditto,  -       -     Wheat. 
On  the  fliff  land  they  have  wheat  once  in 
four  years  only. 

At  the  Southern  part  of  the  ifland  the  follow- 
ing courfe  is  ufed : 

Firft  year,       -       -     Wheat ; 

C  Fallow  dunged,  and 
Second  ditto,     -     < 

£  turnips; 

Third  ditto,     -       -     Barley; 
Fourth  ditto,   -       -     Clover. 
About    Steephill     we    have     the    following 
management : 

Firft  year,       -       -     Wheat,  oats,  or  peaff; 
Second  ditto,        -     Barley,  with   clover; 
mow  it  next  fummer ;  feed  it  afterwards ;  plough 
it  up ;  and  fow  it  with  wheat  again. 

Near  the  centre  of  the  ifland,  the  rotation  is  as 
follows : 

Firft  year,       -       -     Wheat ; 
Second  ditto,         -     Barley ; 

Nn  2  Third 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


Third  year,      -     -     Clover,; 
Fourth  ditto,    -     -     Wheat. 
Towards  the  Weftern  extremity  there  is  this 
variation  in  the  management  of  their  crops  : 
Firftyear,       -       -     Turnips; 
Second  ditto,         -     Barley  ; 
Third  ditto,     -     -     Clover,  and  ray-grafs  ; 
Fourth  ditto,   -      -     Wheat. 
The  wheat  is  prepared  for  fowing,  fometimes 
by  fteeping  it  in  fait  water,  and  afterwards  mix- 
ing it  with  lime  ;  but  generally  by  (imply  mixing 
with  it  lime,  which  has  been  fcalded  with  boiled 
frem  water. 

The  medium  produce  of  wheat  on  the  beft 
land  in  the  Southern  part  of  the  ifland  is  about 
twenty-four  bufhels  per  acre  ;  and  on  the  North 
fide  of  the  ifland  the  average  may  be  laid  at 
eighteen  bufhels  per  acre;  fo  that  the  medium 
produce  throughout  the  whole  dijtnft  appears  to 
be  twenty-one  bufhels  per  acre. 

The  medium  produce  of  oats  is  twenty-five 
bufhels  per  acre  in  the  Eaftern  part  of  the  ifland, 
and  about  five  and  thirty  in  the  Southern  and 

Weftern 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  277 


Weflern  parts.     Of  barley  thirty  bufhels  on  the 
fame  fpots. 

The  leguminous  crops  are  generally  pretty 
productive;  peafe  and  beans  yielding  twenty- 
four  bufhels  per  acre  in  the  Eaftern  parts ;  and 
in  the  Southern  and  Weftern  parts,  the  former 
giving  twenty-eight  bufhels,  and  the  latter  thirty- 
two  bufhels,  per  acre.  . 

In  preparing  their  land  for  wheat,  the  ifland- 
ers  give  three  or  four  ploughings  (as  the  foil  re- 
quires) to  their  fallows ;  and  one  on  breaking  up 
their  clover  lays.  They  fow  about  two  bufhels 
and  an  half  per  acre.  For  oats  they  feldom 
plough  more  than  once,  and  fow  about  four 
bufhels  and  an  half  per  acre,  For  barley  they 
give  three  ploughings,  and  fow  about  four 
bufhels  per  acre. 

The  grain  is  in  general  broad-caft,  though 
fome  farmers  have  adopted  the  drilling  fyilem 
for  wheat,  barley,  and  peafe,  which  is  found  to 
fucceed  very  well  in  the  free,  light,  fandy  foils. 
When  this  hufbandry  is  pra6lifed,  they  ufe  a 
fmall  kind  of  horfe-hoes,  which  are  worked  by 

a  man; 


478  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF   WIGHT. 


a  man;  thefe,  with  the  afliftance  of  hand-hoes, 
and  earthing  up  the  ranks,  and  keeping  them 
clean  by  women  and  children  weeders,  combine 
to  produce  profitable  crops. 

The  fyftem  of fallows^  both  fummer  and  win- 
ter, is  pretty  generally  followed  throughout  the 
ifland ;  nor  will  many  of  the  farmers  hear  of  a 
contrary  practice.  Much,  indeed,  has  been 
written  and  faid  on  both  fides  of  this  agitated 
queftion ;  and  the  favorers  of  the  different  modes 
are  equally  pertinacious  in  fupport  of  their  ref- 
pe&ive  doftrines.  It  would  be  difficult  there- 
fore to  fay  which  is  right  in  all  points ;  but 
modern  philofophy  has  proved  that  the  fallowift 
is  wrong  in  one.  The  great  argument  of  the 
friend  to  fallows,  for  leaving  his  land  in  a  ftate  of 
idlenefs  during  the  winter,  has  been  the  fuppofed 
benefit  it  received  from  the 

"  Etherial  nitre — 

whate'er  the  wintry  froft 
Nitrous  prepar'd." 

It  is  now,  however,  well  known,  that  neither  ice 
nor  fnow  contain  any  nitrous  particles,  nor  in 

any 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          279 

any  degree  meliorate  the  ground  ;  for,  according 
to  the  obfervation  of  an  excellent  natural 
philofopher,  though  froft,  by  enlarging  the  bulk 
of  moid  clay,  leaves  it  fofter  for  a  time  after  the 
thaw,  yet  as  foon  as  the  water  exhales,  the  clay 
becomes  as  hard  as  before,  being  prefled  together 
by  the  incumbent  atmofphere,  and  by  its  felf- 
attraftion.*  Hence,  therefore,  one  of  the 
ftrongeft  reafons  for  purfuing  this  fyftem  vaniihes 
into  air. 

In  many  of  their  ftiff  clayey  lands,  the 
iflanders  dibble  beans  j  but  fome  improvement 
might  be  introduced  into  this  branch  of  huf- 
bandry.  By  planting  ten  pecks  upon  an  acre, 
(a  common  practice),  a  very  ufelefs  wafte  of  feed 
is  occafioned;  and  in  not  hoeing  them  when 
they  come  up,  which  in  general  they  omit  doing, 
the  plant  is  lefs  healthy  and  productive  than  it 
would  be  if  properly  attended  to. 

Potatoes  are  not  fo  much  regarded  in  the  Ifle 
of  Wight  as  their  excellence  and  utility  defervc. 
The  little  farmers,  and  laboring  poor,  are  almoft 

*  Dr.  Darwin, 

the 


*8o  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

the  only  people  who  plant  them :  the  land 
intended  to  receive  them  is  fallowed  and  well 
dunged,  the  potatoes  (divided  according  to  their 
eyes)  are  then  planted  in  rows ;  the  rows  being 
about  a  foot  diftance  from  each  other;  and 
earthed  up  when  about  four  or  five  inches  above 
the  ground.  In  general  the  crops  are  very 
fatisfa6lory ;  from  fixty  to  eighty  facks  per 
acre. 

I  confefs,  I  am  aftonifhed  that  more  attention 
is  not  paid  to  the  potatoe,  in  this  part  of  Hamp- 
fhire,  where  fomany  fpots  are  found,  peculiarly 
well  calculated  for  its  cultivation.  Of  all  the 
roots  which  our  climate  produces,  none  perhaps 
is  of  greater,  or  more  general  ufe  than  this ; 
whether  it  be  confidered  as  a  meliorator,  cleanfer, 
and  improver  of  the  foil,  or  as  a  plant  which 
affords  a  cheap  and  nutritious  food,  both  to  men 
and  to  cattle.  Viewed  in  the  light  of  profit  alfo, 
it  would  affuredly  anfwer  well  to  the  Ifle  of 
Wight  farmer  to  cultivate  potatoes,  as  his 
vicinity  to  Portfmouth,  whither  they  might  be 
carried  at  a  trifling  expence,  would  always 

infure 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  281 

infurc  him  an  immediate  and  profitable  market 
for  his  crop. 

I  am  confcious,  that  with  many  farmers  this 
plant  is  no  great  favorite ;  nor  is  a  crop  of 
potatoes  confidered  by  them  as  an  improving  one. 
So  far  from  it,  indeed,  that  in  fome  counties, 
about  Crewkerne  in  Somerfetfhire,  for  inftance, 
as  a  very  intelligent  gentleman  has  informed  me, 
the  landlords  reftricl:  their  tenants  by  fpecial 
covenants,  from  planting  more  than  a  very  fmall 
quantity  of  land  with  potatoes,  under  the  idea  of 
their  being  very  impoverijliing  roots.  However, 
in  this,  as  well  as  in  moft  other  matters  in  agri- 
culture, much  muft  depend  on  the  nature  of  the 
foil,  the  management  and  preparation  of  the 
land,  and  the  different  forts  and  quantities  of 
manure,  &c.  made  ufe  of  in  different  parts. 

The  times  of  fowing  and  harvefting  are  as 
follow.  Wheat  and  winter  vetches  are  generally 
fown  in  October,  and  harvefted  in  Auguft ; 
oats  are  fown  in  March ;  barley,  in  April ; 
beans,  in  February  ;  and  peafe,  in  February  or 
Oo  March. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISXE    OF    WI«HT. 

March.*  Peafe  are  harvefted  in  the  latter  part 
of  July,  or  beginning  of  Auguft,  and  the  other 
grains  in  September. 

Their  manures  are  chiefly  chalk  and  dung 
arifing  from  the  farm-yard,  which,  after  lying  for 
fome  time  in  a  heap,  is  mixed  with  earth.  From 
fifteen  to  twenty  pots  per  acre,  of  this  compoft, 
are  fpread  on  the  lands  prepared  for  wheat. 
Chalk  is  alfo  much  ufed,  its  durable  and  im- 
proving qualities  having  been  of  late  years 
experienced  by  the  Ifle  of  Wight  farmers. 
They  put  about  one  hundred  bufhels  of  it  upon 
an  acre,  which  continue  to  operate  beneficially 
for  fourteen  or  fifteen  years.  Some  few  experi- 
mental farmers  have  of  late  tried  the  effe&s  of 
fea-weeds  as  a  manure ;  and  mixing  them  up 
with  dung,  lime,  and  earth,  formed  a  compoft, 
and  fpread  it  on  the  foil :  but  I  am  informed 
their  pains  have  not  been,  in  many  inftances, 
rewarded  with  fuccefs. 

*  Some  farmers  fow  their  peafe  as  early  as  January, 
and  thefe  are  generally  found  to  produce  the  befl  crops, 

In 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE   OF    WIGHT.          183 

In  the  ifland  the  farmers  have  a  choice  of 
marles,  both  ftone  and  teftaceous :  when  they 
find  it  neceffary  to  ufe  this  manure,  they  ufually 
put  from  twenty  to  twenty-four  waggon-loads 
upon  an  acre. 

The  farms  are  of  a  moderate  fize,  fome  few 
under  £100  per  annum,  and  fome  above  £^400 
per  annum ;  but  the  general  run  is  between  thofe 
two  fums. 

Early  in  Henry  the  Seventh's  reign,  a  regu- 
lation was  made  for  reducing  the  fize  of  the  farms 
in  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  and  preventing  the  landed 
property  getting  into  the  hands  of  a  few  indi- 
viduals, to  the  decreafe  of  population,  and  the 
deftruftion  of  the  peafantry.  An  aft  of  parlia- 
ment was  pafled,  prohibiting  any  of  the  in- 
habitants from  holding  farms,  lands,  or  tithes, 
exceeding  the  annual  rent  of  ten  marks;  an 
abfurd  law,  which  could  not  long  operate  with 
any  efficacy,  inafmuch  as  money  was  conftantly 
decreafing  in  value,  and  land  taking  a  contrary 
direction ;  the  confequence  of  which  would  be 
that  the  fize  of  the  farms  muft  have  been  con- 
Oo  2  llantly 


284         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

ftantly   diminifhed,    to   keep    them  within  the 
letter  of  the  a6t. 

The  average  rent  of  land  on  the  South  fide  of 
the  ifland.  including  foul  ground,  does  not 
exceed  fifteen  (hillings  per  acre;  and  on  the 
North  fide  the  medium  is  about  eleven  fhillings 
per  acre.  Eftates,  when  fold,  fetch  about  twenty- 
eight  years  purchafe. 


CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    III. 

TURNIPS;  GRASSES;  PASTURE;  DRAINING; 
AND  ROADS. 

JL  URNIPS  are  now  highly  efteemed  in  the 
Southern,  Weftern,  and  central  parts  of  the 
ifland ;  and  the  farmers  are  correcting  an  error, 
which  fome  few  years  fince  they  were  guilty  of, 
viz.  not  hoeing  this  valuable  root.  They  now 
plough  four  times,  harrow  and  hoe  once,  and 
feed  them  off  with  (heep  by  hurdling. 

The  green  crops  moftly  cultivated  are,  tur- 
nips, clover,  vetches,  ray-grafs.  and  trefoil. 
They  have  alfo  fome  buck-wheat;  but  the 
quantity  is  fmall,  and  only  raifed  in  their  lighteft 
and  moft  fandy  foil.  It  is  generally  given  to  the 
hogs,  for  the  purpofe  of  fattening  them. 

Of  clover  they  cut  on  an  average  about  one 
ton  and  an  half  per  acre  j  and  then  let  it  go  to 

feed. 


«86  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

feed.  Vetches  are  now  and  then  fowed  after 
clover,  and,  according  to  the  pleafure  of  the 
farmer,  are  either  fed  off,  or  mowed,  and  given 
to  the  horfes  in  the  ftable. 

The  pafture  and  meadow  land  is  extremely 
rich,  and  produces  from  one  to  two  tons  of  fine 
hay  per  acre.  The  dry  meadows  are  well  ma- 
nured, at  the  proper  feafon,  with  good  rotten 
dung;  and  the  wet  ones  kept  in  excellent  order 
by  well  managed  drains.  The  common  method 
of  forming  thefe  drains  is  by  digging  a  trench, 
two  feet  and  an  half  deep,  in  which  fmall  picked 
ftones,  or  lumps  of  chalk  are  thrown  to  the 
height  of  a  foot ;  on  thefe  is  placed  a  layer  of 
ftraw,  heath,  or  furze;  and  the  whole  is  then 
covered  with  foil.  The  expence  of  this  opera- 
tion is  about  nine-pence  per  perch. 

The  roads  of  the  ifland  (particularly  in  the 
Eaftern  divifion)  are  paid  great  attention  to ;  and, 
except  in  the  Southern  parts,  where  their  natural 
rocky  ruggednefs  and  inequality  cannot  be 
rectified  by  labor,  are  as  good  as  thofe  of  Hamp- 
fhire.  The  Weftcrn  divifion  being  more  thinly 

in- 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          287 

inhabited,  the  roads  here  are  lefs  pleafant  to  the 
traveller;  though,  indeed,  of  late  years,  great 
improvements  have  been  made  in  thefe  means  of 
communication  throughout  the  whole  ifland. 

They  are  formed  and  repaired,  as  in  other 
places,  by  the  refpeftive  parifhes  or  tythings 
through  which  they  pafs. 


CHAP. 


288          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    IV. 


SHEEP,    HORSES,    COWS,    AND    SWINE. 

J.  HOSE  profitable  and  ufeful  animals, Jheep, 
have  been  very  much  attended  to  of  late  years  by 
the  Ifle  of  Wight  farmers,  who  fully  find  their 
account  in  adopting  this  excellent  fyftem  of 
husbandry.* 

*  It  is  only  fince  the  introduction  of  the  Norfolk 
hufbandry  into  the  Ifle  of  Wight,  that  the  Jheep-farming 
has  been  attended  to  there  ;  the  yeomanry  are  now  fully 
aware  of  the  many  advantages  which  arife  from  keeping 
numerous  flocks  of  thefe  animals,  whofe  ufes  are  thus 
defcribed  by  an  ancient  faunift.  "  Poft  majores  quadru- 
pedes  ovilli  pecoris  fccunda  ratio  eft  ;  quae  prima  fit,  fi  ad 
utilitatis  magnitudinem  referas.  Nam  id  praecipue  contra 
frigoris  violentiam  protegit,  corporibusque  noftris  liberali- 
ora  praebet  velamina  ;  et  etiam  elegantium  menfas  jucundis 
et  numerous  dapibus  exornat."—Columella,  de  Re  Ruftica, 
lib.  VII.  cap.  ii.  Had  the  Roman  added  the  dung  to  its 
other  advantages,  the  catalogue  would  have  been  complete. 

The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          289 

MMHMMMMMMMMM^^M^HMMM^^MHMHMB^BMHMMMMMMMMMMMMHHMMMMBM^^^W 

The  number  of  fheep  annually  fhorn  is  com- 
puted to  amount  to  forty  thoufand.  In  the 
year  1793,  five  thoufand  lambs  were  fold  to  the 
London  butchers  alone.  And  during  the  fum- 
mer  of  that  year,  when  I  happened  to  be  at 
Newport,  one  of  thefe  dealers  bought  fifteen 
hundred  of  them. 

The  Dorfetfhire  breed  is  the  one  in  general 
ufe;  perhaps  however,  by  occafionally  changing 
it  (a  praftice  not  fufficiently  attended  to  here) 
that  degeneracy  might  be  prevented,  which  I 
obferved  began  to  appear  in  two  or  three  flocks. 
This  is  a  practice  common  with  all  the  great 
fheep  farmers  in  the  Weft  of  England ;  and,  as  I 
have  heard  fome  of  the  moft  intelligent  declare, 
is  the  only  method  of  keeping  up  the  original 
perfection  of  a  flock. 

The  average  weight  of  wool  per  fleece,  in  the 
Eaftern  part  of  the  ifland,  is  three  pounds ;  and 
in  the  Southern  and  Weftern  parts,  about  three 
pounds  and  an  half.  Little  of  this  is  manu- 
factured in  the  ifland,  it  being  chiefly  exported  in 
the  fleece  to  different  trading  towns. 

Pp  The 


290  HISTORY    OF    THE   ISLE   OF    WfCHT. 

The  flock  ufually  kept  on  the  farms  confifts 
of  fheep,  cows,  and  horfes ;  oxen  are  rare,  what 
few  there  are,  the  farmers  generally  feed  with 
ftraw  and  hay,  and  work  them  as  horfes. 

The  cows  are  moftly  of  the  Devon  breed, 
though  blended  with  other  forts.  The  farmers 
alfo  make  a  point  of  having  a  few  Alderney  cows 
in  their  dairies,  which  they  think  produce  a 
better  and  fweeter  butter  than  would  be  made 
without  their  milk. 

Thefe  little  animals  are  extremely  profitable, 
fome  of  them  giving  to  the  dairy,  during  part  of 
the  fummer,  nine  and  ten  pounds  of  butter  per 
week.  It  is  matter  of  furprize  that  this  breed 
is  not  more  generally  attended  to  in  other  parts 
of  the  kingdom,  than  appears  to  be  the  cafe.  The 
original  price  of  a  good  Alderney  cow,  at  the 
place  where  fhe  is  imported,  is  feldom  more  than 
eight  guineas;  (he  is  equally  hardy  with  our 
own  breeds,  nay  perhaps  has  the  advantage  of 
them  in  this  refpeft ;  confumes  lefs  provender, 
and  certainly  yields  as  much  milk,  the  cream  of 

which 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  291 

which  gives  a  richnefs  to  butter,  not  obfervable  in 
what  is  made  from  the  Englifh  cow. 

The  horfes  are  of  different  breeds,  but  in 
general  large,  and,  I  think,  black.  As  there  is 
fome  emulation  among  the  farmers  with  regard 
to  the  beauty  and  ftrength  of  their  teams, 
the  draught-horfes  are  fine  animals,  and  kept  in 
excellent  order. 

It  was  the  practice  formerly  among  the  farmers 
of  the  ifland,  not  to  confine  their  cattle  to  the 
farm-yard  in  winter.  Their  own  good  fenfe, 
however,  or  hints  from  others,  have  convinced 
them  of  the  pernicious  confequences  of  this 
omiflion.  They  now  adopt  farm-yard  foddering 
in  the  winter  pretty  generally,  and  thereby  reap 
thofe  certain  good  confequences  of  the  practice, 
health  to  their  cattle,  '  and  a  great  addition  to 
their  farm-yard  manure. 

The  hogs  are  of  a  breed,  I  believe,  peculiar  to 
the  ifland ;  at  leaft  I  do  not  recollect  feeing  any 
of  the  fame  in  other  places.  They  are  large  and 
tall,  marked  with  black  fpots,  and  have  very 
deep  fides ;  their  bacon  is  excellent. 

Pp  2  The 


292  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

The  oxen  and  cows  are  fattened  with  bay  ?.nd 
turnips.  The  hogs  with  peafe  and  barley  meal. 
The  Jhtep  are  fed  in  the  winter  with  hay  and 
turnips. 

The  dairies  produce,  in  confiderable  quantities, 
a  particular  kind  of  fkim-milk  cheefe,  emphati- 
cally called  the  IJle  of  Wight  rock.  It  is  ex- 
tremely hard;  can  fcarcely  be  cut  but  by  a 
hatchet  or  faw ;  is  to  be  mafticated  only  by  the 
firmeft  teeth ;  and  digefted  only  by  the  ftrongeft 
ftomachs. 


CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  293 


CHAP.    V. 


WASTE-LAND;    FORESTS;     ANDSEA-MUtf. 


X  HERE  is  but  little  -wajlt  land,  in  the  ifland, 
and  this  chiefly  exhibits  a  fandy  foil,  which 
would  probably  repay  the  expence  of  being 
brought  into  tillage. 

Perhaps,  indeed,  Parkkiirft  or  Carijbrook  foreft, 
lying  in  the  centre  of  the  ifland,  may  at  prefent 
be  properly  denominated  wafte  land,  as  it  remains 
in  an  inactive,  ufelefs  ftate,  without  affording 
any  advantages  to  the  crown,  of  whofe  demefne 
it  makes  a  part ;  and  very  trifling  ones  to  the 
inhabitants  who  refide  in  its  neighbourhood. 
This  tra£l  of  land,  which  contains  three  thoufand 
acres,  is  fituated  to  the  North  of  Newport  and 
Carifbrook;  and  though  called  a/0r£/2,  has  long 
been  without  a  tree  of  any  value.  There  is, 

however, 


294  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

however,  a  lodge  ftill  kept  up,  and  a  keeper  ap- 
pointed, whofe  office  it  is  to  preferve  the  deer 
and  the  wood,  of  which  fcarce  a  veftige  remains. 
Notwithftanding  the  inattention  paid  hitherto  by 
government  to  Parkhurft  foreft,  the  foil  is  in 
many  places  extremely  good,  and  capable  of  be- 
ing applied  to  the  moft  valuable  purpofes.  Se- 
veral large  fpots  are  .to  be  found  on  which  the 
oak  would  thrive  furprizingly  well,  and  none 
arc  fo  bad  as  to  preclude  the  hope  of  the  larch, 
Scotch  fir,  and  fuch  hardy  trees  fucceeding  on 
them. 

The  obftacles  which  prefent  themfelves  to  the 
plan  of  inclofing  and  planting  the  other  royal 
foreftsin  the  kingdom,  fuch  as  the  adjuftment  of 
multiplied  and  complicated  claims,  &c.  would 
perhaps  be  gotten  over  without  much  difficulty, 
in  the  cafe  of  Parkhurft  foreft,  fhould  govern- 
ment think  proper  to  appropriate  it  to  the  growth 
of  timber;  fince  thefe  claims  are  but  few,  and 
confined  to  a  fmall  number  of  people,  (the  real 
ones,  I  mean,  for  that  of  a  general  right  of 
common  for  black  cattle,  exercifed  by  the  free- 
holders 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  2Q$ 

holders  of  the  ifland,  appears  to  be  a  furreptitious 
one)  and  confequently  might  be  fettled  with  little 
trouble  and  expence.  Thefe  claims  confift  of  a 
right  of  common  for  cattle  and  fheep ;  and  of 
turbary,  (or  turf-cutting)  and  are  attached  to  the 
cftates  immediately  adjoining  the  foreft. 

In  the  Eaftern  parts  of  this  ifland  are  fome 
trafts  of  marfhy  ground,  covered  at  high  tide  by 
the  fea,  but  left  bare  on  its  reflux  :  the  largeft  of 
thefe  (the  others  being  inconfiderable)  is  Brading 
haven,  containing  about  nine  hundred  acres. 
Into  this  the  fea  flows  through  a  narrow  inlet. 
As  early  as  the  reign  of  Edward  I.  an  idea  was 
entertained  that  there  was  a  poflibility  of  re- 
covering this  ufurpation  of  foil,  from  the  fea,  and 
converting  it  to  agricultural  purpofes;  and 
accordingly  Sir  William  Ruflel,  warden  of  the 
ifland  at  this  period,  made  the  attempt,  and 
actually  fucceeded  in  gaining  a  confiderable 
number  of  acres;  a  circumftance  fomewhat 
remarkable,  fo  little  attention  being  paid  in  that 
comparatively  barbarous  age,  by  the  feudal 
chieftains,  to  any  thing  connected  with  agricul- 
tural 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT* 


tural  improvement.     Further  acquifitions  were 
alfo  made  in  the  years  1562  and  1594. 

The  next  and  laft  attempt  was  of  a  more 
extenfive  nature,  the  particulars  of  which,  as  they 
are  curious  in  them  (elves,  and  may  afford  ufeful 
hints  to  future  adventurers  in  that  line,  I  fhall 
extracl  from  Sir  Richard  Worfley's  Hiflory  of 
the  Ifle  of  Wight. 

A  grant  of  Brading  haven  was  obtained  from 
King  James  I.  by  Gibbs,  a  groom  of  the  bed- 
chamber. The  owners  of  the  adjoining  land 
contefted  this  grant,  which  the  king  was  very 
earneft  in  fupporting.  After  a  verdict  obtained 
in  the  Exchequer,  againft  the  gentlemen  of  the 
ifland,  Gibbs  fold  his  fliare  for  two  thoufand 
pounds,  to  Sir  Bevis  Thelwall,  a  page  of  the  king's 
bed-chamber,  who  admitted  the  famous  Sir  Hugh 
Middleton  to  a  fliare.  They  employed  a  num- 
ber of  Dutchmen  to  inclofe  and  recover  the 
haven  from  the  fea.  The  firft  taking  of  it  in 
coft  four  thoufand  pounds,  and  one  thoufand 
pounds  more  were  expended  in  building  a 
dwelling-houfe,  barn,  water-mill;  in  trenching, 

quick- 


quick-fetting,  and  other  neceflary  works ;  fo  that, 
including  the  original  purchafe,  the  total  ex- 
penditure amounted  to  feven  thoufand  pounds. 
But  after  all,  the  nature  of  the  ground  did  not 
anfwer  the  expectation  of  the  undertakers; 
for  though  that  part  of  it  adjoining  Brading 
proved  tolerably  good,  nearly  one  half  of  it  was 
found  to  be  a  light  running  fand;  neverthelefs 
an  inconteftible  evidence  appeared,  by  the  dif- 
covery  of  a  well,  cafed  with  ft  one,  near  the 
middle  of  the  haven,  that  it  had  formerly  been 
good  ground.  Sir  Hugh  Middleton  tried  a 
variety  of  experiments  on  the  land  which  had 
been  taken  in,  before  he  fold  his  mare,  fowing  it 
with  wheat,  barley,  oats,  cabbage,  and  finally 
with  rape-feed,  which  lad  was  alone  fuccefsful. 
But  the  greateft  difcouragement  was  that  the  fea 
brought  up  fo  much  ooze,  weeds,  and  fand,  as 
choaked  up  the  paffage  for  the  difcharge  of  the 
frefli  water;  and  at  length,  in  a  wet  feafon, 
when  the  inner  part  of  the  haven  was  full  of 
frefh  water,  and  a  high  fpring  tide,  the  waters 
met  under  the  bank  and  made  a  breach.  Thus 
Qq  ended 


2g8          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

ended  this  expenfive  project;  and  though  Sir 
John  Oglander,  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood, 
confeffes  himfelf  a  friend  to  the  undertaking, 
which,  befide  its  principal  object,  tended  to  ren- 
der that  part  of  the  country  more  healthy,  he 
declares  it  as  his  opinion,  that  the  fcheme  can 
never  be  refumed  to  any  profitable  purpofc. 

Sir  Bevis  Thelwall  and  his  heirs  labored  to 
afcribe  this  accident  to  other  caufes,  in  order  to 
preferve  their  claims,  and  to  recover  compen- 
fation  for  their  lofles ;  but  the  whole  affair  died 
away,  and  the  fea  ftill  Continues  to  overflow 
Brading  haven. 

The  ill  fuccefs  of  Sir  Bevis  Thelwall  and  Sir 
Hugh  Middleton  (whofe  adventurous  exertions 
delerved  a  better  fate,)  feems  fufficient  to  deter 
any  future  projector,  from  rifking  fo  large  a 
fum  as  would  be  neceffary  to  recover  Brading 
haven  from  the  fea,  on  a  fpeculation  that  has 
already  terminated  fo  much  to  the  difadvantage 
of  thofe  engaged  in  it.  But  fhould  any  gentle- 
man be  bold  enough  to  attempt  its  embankment 
a  feeond  time,  he  would  do  well  to  pay  every 

attention 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  299 

attention  to  the  mode  adopted  by  the  late  Count 
Bentinck,  for  fhutting  out  the  fea  on  his  Norfolk 
eftate ;  who  has  fhewn  an  example  almoft  unique 
in  this  kingdom,  of  laudable  fpirit,  unconquer- 
able perfeverance,  found  judgment,  and  con- 
fummate  (kill,  in  adding  to  his  propeny  upwards 
of  one  thoufand  acres,  formerly  overwhelmed  by 
the  tides  of  the  ocean. 


Oq  2  CHAP. 


300         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


CHAP.    VI. 


IMPROVEMENTS    AND    EXPERIMENTS. 

JL  HE  improvements  introduced  of  late  yeart 
in  the  Ifle  of  Wight  hufbandry,  are  chiefly  fuch 
as  have  occurred  in  the  preceding  pages :  the 
general  introduction  of  large  flocks  of  fheep  on 
the  different  farms,  the  adoption  of  fome  branches 
of  the  Norfolk  hufbandry,  and  other  fmaller 
matters. 

But  I  cannot  help  dwelling  more  particularly 
upon  an  experiment,  which,  as  it  is  connected 
with  agriculture,  naturally  falls  within  a  view  of 
that  agricultural  fyftem  which  is  praclifed  in  the 
Ifle  of  Wight. 

I  allude  to  Sir  Richard  Worfley's  -vineyard-)  at 
his  elegant  cottage  of  St.  Lawrence,  in  the 
Southern  part  of  the  ifland. 

The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  301 

The  claflical  owner  of  this  charming  retreat, 
having  remarked  a  very  fc-Lfible  mildnefs  of 
climate  in  this  part  of  the  ifland,  (occafioned  by 
its  lying  immediately  open  to  the  South,  and 
being  flickered  to  the  North  and  Eaft  by  a  high 
range  of  rocky  hills,  which  at  the  fame  time  (hut 
out  the  biting  winds,  and  ftrongly  reflect  the  rays 
of  the  fun  on  the  foil  beneath  them)  determined 
to  attempt  the  propagation  of  the  vines  of 
Bretagne,  the  climate  of  which  place  corref- 
ponded  in  fome  meafure  with  that  of  Steephill. 

For  this  purpofe  he  procured  the  neceflary 
number  of  plants,  of  the  two  grapes  called  white 
mufcadine  and  plant  verd,  from  which  the  natives 
of  the  North-weft  of  France  make  a  light  white 
wine  :  and  at  the  fame  time  hired  a  Breton  to 
attend  to  their  management  and  cultivation. 

The  man  began  his  operations  in  the  early  part 
of  the  year  1792;  having  gotten  rather  more 
than  an  acre  (in  a  very  flickered  fpot)  into 
proper  order  for  the  reception  of  the  plants,  in  the 
month  of  March  he  put  them  into  the  ground. 

This 


g02  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT, 


This  piece  of  land  is  divided  into  feveral  beds, 
each  bed  being  about  twelve  feet  in  breadth ; 
thefe  are  feparated  by  foot  paths,  for  the  con- 
venience of  a  near  approach  to  the  vines.  The 
plants  themfelves  are  placed  in  rows,  at  the 
diftance  of  a  foot  and  an  half  from  each  other. 

As  this  firft  experiment  wore  a  very  encoura«. 
ging  appearance,  another  piece  of  ground,  rather 
more  to  the  Eaftward,  and  about  an  acre  and  an 
half  in  extent,  was  gotten  irUa  order,  and  a  fimilar 
plantation  made  in  it,  in  February  1 793.  Thefe 
two  plantations  comprize  together  about  three 
acres,  and  contain  feven  hundred  plants. 

The  man  who  has  the  care  of  thefe  plantations 
appears  to  underftand  his  employment,  and  keeps 
the  plants  in  good  order :  the  ftem  of  the  vine 
is  about  eight  inches  from  the  ground,  and  the 
earth  around  it  is  well  hoed  and  freed  from  weeds. 
He  does  not  allow  more  than  two  moots  to 
remain  on  each  ftem ;  thefe  are  cut  off  in  the 
enfuing  March,  and  their  place  fupplied  by  other 
young  ones.  The  moots  alfo  are  not  fuffered 

to 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    Of    WIGHT.          303 

to  run  into  luxuriance  -,  but  kept  at  the  length 
of  two  feet,  or  two  and  an  half.  In  September 
1793,  when  I  had  the  pleafure  of  feeing  thefe 
plantations,  every  vine  bore  the  appearance  of 
health  and  vigor.  There  was  fome  little  fruit  on 
two  or  three  of  thofe  which  had  been  firft  planted ; 
but  this  prematurity  was  to  be  attributed  to  their 
being  fituated  near  a  rock,  and  receiving  the 
rays  of  the  fun  ftrongty  reflected  from  it.  The 
vine-dreffer  did  not  expecl  any  confiderable 
quantity  of  grapes  till  the  fourth  year  after 
planting.  He  feemed  to  entertain  no  doubt  as  to 
the  fuccefs  of  his  labors,  and  affured  me  he  had 
never  before  feen  fuch  ftrong  and  profperous 
young  plants  in  any  vineyard. 

But  in  order  to  give  any  poflible  chance  to 
his  experiment,  Sir  Richard  has  not  confined 
himfelf  to  one  mode  of  planting  only.  In  a  bank 
within  his  inclofures  (having  a  flope  of  about 
forty-five  degrees  to  the  South)  he  has  made  a 
terrace  confilting  of  feven  ftages,  formed  of  rough 
ftones  rifing  like  a  flight  of  fteps,  one  above 
another.  Againft  the  perpendicular  face  of  each 

ftage 


304         HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

ftage  are  placed  trellifes,and  on  them  the  vines  are 
intended  to  be  trained  in  the  manner  of  efpaliers. 
The  plants  were  put  in  during  the  month  of 
March,  in  the  year  1793. 

With  refpe£t,  however,  to  this  mode  of  propa- 
gating vines,  it  may  admit  of  doubt  whether  it  be 
likely  to  fucceed  or  not,  owing  to  the  fmall  degree 
of  nourifhment  which  the  plants  can  poflibly  re- 
ceive as  they  now  ftand.  For  although  the  vine 
•when  mature,  will  flourifh  where  there  is  little  foil, 
nay  where  there  is  apparently  no  foil  at  all,  among 
gravel,  flints,  and  rocks,  drawing  fupport  with  its 
minute,  but  far  extending  fibres,  from  fources  im- 
perceptible to  the  human  eye  ;  yet,  I  believe,  in 
its  infant  ftate,  it  requires  more  nutriment,  and 
more  room  for  the  extenfion  of  its  tender  roots, 
than  it  will  find  where  it  is  at  prefent  planted. 

I  cannot  clofe  this  fhort,  and,  I  fear,  imperfect 
account  of  Sir  Richard  Worfley's  vineyard, 
without  adding  every  wifh  for  the  fuccefs  of  an 
experiment  which  difplays  great  public  fpirit,  and 
has  been  attended  with  confiderable  trouble  and 
great  expence. 

CHAP. 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


GHAP.    VII. 

===. 


THE  POOR;  LABORERS;  AND  RATES  OF  WAGES. 

JL  HE  paupers  of  the  ifland  are  extremely  well 
regulated  and  taken  care  of;  a  fyftem  of  manage- 
ment adopted  of  late  years,  and  well  worth  being 
attended  to  and  followed  in  other  diftricls. 

Great  abufes  having  been  formerly  experi- 
enced in  the  management  of  the  poor,  in  the 
different  parifhes  of  the  ifland,  the  gentlemen 
determined  to  adopt  fome  mode  of  remedying 
the  evil;  and  accordingly,  in  1770,  a  general 
meeting  of  the  refpeftable  inhabitants  was  held, 
in  which  it  was  propofed  that  an  a6l  of  parliament 
fliould  be  procured  to  confolidate  the  poor  rates 
of  the  feveral  parifhes,  and  to  erecl:  a  Houfe  of 
Indujlry  for  the  general  reception  of  the  paupers. 

Rr  The 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 


The  propofal  being  agreed  to,  a  bill  was 
accordingly  obtained,  and  a  large  building 
erefted  on  part  of  the  foreft  of  Parkhurft,  eighty 
acres  of  which  were  granted  by  parliament  for 
this  purpofe. 

The  plan  of  this  extenfive  edifice  is  extremely 
good,  it  having  every  convenience  that  can  tend 
to  render  the  inhabitants  healthy,  cleanly,  ufeful, 
and  induftrious.  It  is  capable  of  containing 
feven  hundred  people^  though  there  are  feldom 
above  five  hundred  refident  paupers  ;  two-thirds 
of  whom  are  conftantly  employed  in  manu- 
facturing facks  for  corn,  flour,  and  bifcuit;  and 
kerfeys,  (lockings,  &c.  for  the  ufe  of  the  in- 
habitants of  the  houfe.  The  profits  of  thefe 
operations  are  applied  to  the  fupport  of  the 
eftabliftment,  the  payment  of  the  intereft  due  on 
the  money  borrowed*  for  carrying  it  into 
execution,  and  the  gradual  difcharge  of  the 
principal. 

The  aft  of  parliament  indeed  provided  that  for 
the  firft  twenty  years  after  the  completion  of  the 

*  This  amounted  to/"i8,c»oo. 

plan. 


HISTORY  OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT,  307 


plan,  half  the  profits  arifing  from  the  labor  of  the 
poor  fhould  be  applied  to  the  reduction  of  the 
poor  rates;  and  half  to  the  payment  of  the  furn 
borrowed.  It  being,  however,  found,  that  the 
reduction  thus  made  in  the  former  was  incon- 
fiderable,  it  was  thought  prudent  to  apply  the 
whole  to  the  latter  purpofe,  which  has  been  the 
cafe  for  fome  years  laft  paft.  This  meafure,  not- 
withftanding,  though  founded  in  fenfe  and  reafon, 
has  given  difguft  to  feveral,  who  are  not  difpofed 
to  endure  a  prefent  trifling  inconvenience,  for  an 
eventual  permanent  good;  and  they  talk  loudly 
of  compelling,  by  a  fuit  in  chancery,  an  adherence 
to  the  letter  of  the  a6t  of  parliament. 

The  rates  throughout  the  ifland  were  not 
equalized  at  the  time  of  their  confolidation ;  but, 
that  each  parifh  might  pay  its  fair  proportion  to 
the  new  eftablimment,  an  account  was  taken  of 
the  amount  of  their  poor  rates  refpeftively,  for 
the  feven  years  preceding;  and  an  average  being 
llruck,  this  was  determined  to  be  the  ratio  of  their 
future  payments,  till  reduftions  fhould  be  made 
frojn  the  profits  of  the  houfe.  Hence  it  is  that 
Rr  a  the 


308  HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

the  rates  vary  confiderably  in  different  parts  of 
the  ifland ;  thus,  for  inftance,  Brading  pays  two 
Shillings  and  three  pence  in  the  pound  upon  two- 
thirds  of  the  rent;  Whitwell  two  {hillings  in  the 
pound,  upon  the  rack-rent ;  and  Frefhwater  not 
more  than  one  fhilling  and  three  pence  in  the 
pound. 

Every  praife  is  due  to  the  gentlemen  of  the 
ifland,  for  their  attention  to  the  regulation  of 
this  great  eflablifhment ;  which,  at  the  fame  time 
that  it  exemplifies  the  fojjibility^  points  out  the 
mode  of  rendering  the  mod  unhappy  and  ufelefs 
part  of  the  community,  ferviceable  to  the  com- 
munity and  comfortable  in  themfelves. 

I  have  before  remarked  the  pleafing  contraft 
between  the  laboring  poor  of  the  ifland,  and 
thofe  of  moil  other  parts  of  England. 

This  their  comfortable  ftate  they  chiefly  owe 
to  the  occafional  kindnefles  of  the  farmers,  who  in 
general  bear  a  high  characler  for  benevolence 
and  generofity  to  thofe  who  work  under  them ; 
and  their  living  in  a  great  meafure  upon  potatoes, 
a  wholefome,  nourifhing  food,  and  fufticiently 

plentiful 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.  309 

plentiful  with  them,  as  every  laborer's  family  has 
a  plantation  annexed  to  his  dwelling,  ftocked 
with  this  ufeful  root.  Indeed,  without  thefe 
afliftances,  they  would  be  fcarcely  able  to  fubfift, 
as  the  rate  of  wages  is  but  low  in  the  ifland, 
provifions  dear,  and  the  rents  of  cottages  rather 
extravagant,  being  from  forty  (hillings  to  two 
pounds  fifteen  {hillings  per  annum.  They  are 
indeed  neat  little  dwellings,  built  offtone,  with  a 
little  garden  to  each,  for  the  accommodation  of 
its  tenant. 

The  rates  of  wages,  as  well  as  hours  of  work, 
vary  in  different  parts  of  the  ifland.  In  Brading 
parifh  laborers  have  two  guineas  for  the  harveft, 
month,  and  their  board ;  eighteen  pence  per  day 
for  grafs-mowing,  and  their  beer;  and  one 
{hilling  per  day  during  the  reft  of  the  year,  when 
employed.  Their  hours  of  work  are,  in  winter 
from  feven  to  four,  and  in  fummer  from  fix  to 
five. 

In  the  Southern  and  Weftern  parts  they  get 
fourteen  pence  per  day,  but  give  an  additional 

hour 


310          HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT. 

hour  of  labor,  vifc.  from  five  to  five  in  fummer, 
and  from  feven  to  five  in  winter. 

The  crops,  however,  of  the  ifland  are  fo  large« 
(moft  of  the  land  being  in  tillage)  that  the 
refident  laborers  are  by  no  means  fufficient  for 
the  cutting  down  and  harvesting  of  them.  This 
dearth  of  hands  is  fupplied  from  the  Weftern 
counties,  and  between  three  and  four  hundred 
laborers  annually  pafs  into  the  ifland,  a  little 
before  harveft,  and  hire  themfelves  to  the 
different  farmers,  for  the  month.  The  ufual  wages 
for  this  period  are  two  guineas  if  it  be  peace,  and 
from  forty -five  to  fifty  Ihillings  if  it  be  war  time. 
They  have  their  board  alfo.  For  the  time  they 
are  employed  before  and  after  the  month,  they 
have  two  millings  per  day,  food,  and  liquor. 

During  the  harveft  of  1793,  there  were  nearly 
four  hundred  Dorfetmire,  Devonfhire,  and 
Somerfetfhire  men  employed  in  getting  in  the 
ifland  harvefts ;  and  as  a  warm  prefs  was  at  that 
time  on  foot,  a  general  protection  from  govern- 
ment was  allowed  to  them,  to  operate  during 

their 


HISTORY    OF    THE    ISLE    OF    WIGHT.          311 

their  paflage  from  their  own  habitations  to  the 
theatre  of  labor,  and  back  again.* 

*  Since  writing  the  above,  I  am  informed  that  an 
agricultural  fociety,  on  an  admirable  plan,  has  been 
founded  in  the  ifland,  having  for  its  objeft  the  improve- 
ment of  the  hufbandry  of  the  diftrift.  I  cannot  avoid 
adding  my  warm  wifhes  for  its  fuccefs  and  profperity. 


Coim, 


JOI- 


liomari Coins. 


APPENDIX. 


A  DiJJcrtation  on  Six  Roman  Coins  found  in  the 
IJlc  of  Wight. 

"  The  medal,  faithful  to  its  charge  of  fame, 
Through  climes  and  ages  bears  each  form  and  name  ; 
In  one  fhort  view  fubjefted  to  our  eye, 
Gods,  emp'rors,  heroes,  fages,  beauties  lie." 

JL  HE  Roman  coins  exhibited  in  the  annexed 
tables  were  turned  up  in  ploughing  a  field  to  the 
North  of  Carifbrooke  caftle,  about  fifty  years 
ago ;  and  are  now  in  my  pofleflion. 

They  include  a  feries  of  about  three  centuries; 
and  may  be  confidered  as  affording  an  incontro- 
vertible proof  of  the  prefence  of  the  Romans  in 
the  Ifle  of  Wight. 

Ss  The 


APPENDIX. 


The  firft  [No.  i.]  is  a  coin  of  M.  Viffanius 
Agrippa,  the  fon-in-law  of  the  Emperor  Auguftus, 
by  his  marriage  with  Julia,  the  daughter  of 
Auguftus  and  Scribonia.  He  had  early  efpoufed 
the  caufe  of  O6lavius,  and  rendered  him  fuch 
fignal  fervices  as  fecured  the  warm  friendfhip 
and  lading  attachment  of  the  young  emperor, 
who,  amongft  other  inftances  of  it,  had  him  thrice 
appointed  to  the  confulfhip.  It  was  during  the 
laft  time  of  his  filling  this  office,  that  the  coin  in 
queftion  appears  to  have  been  ftruck.* 

The  face  of  it  reprefents  the  head  of  Agrippa, 
encircled  with  a  rojlral  crownjc  a  reward  he 

*  It  may  be  obferved  that  the  power  of  coining  money 
was  vcfled  in  the  fenate  ;  hence  the  initials  S.  C.  or 
fenatus  confu-lto,  by  the  decree  of  the  fenate,  on  the 
revcrfc  of  moft  of  the  pieces.  It  was  alfo  an  ufual 
compliment,  paid  by  this  body  to  the  emperors,  or  their 
relations,  whenever  any  thing  fignally  glorious  or  fervice- 
able  to  the  ftate  had  been  performed  by  them,  to  ftamp 
the  eircumftance  on  coins,  and  fend  them  into  circulation, 
with  a  few  initials  exprefiive  of  it. 

t  The  engraver  has  made  a  miftake,  omitting  the 
ro/trum,  or  prow,  on  the  front  of  the  crown,  and  making  it 
fimply  a  laurel  chaplet.  The  roftral  crown  was  beftowed 
on  the  man  who  firft  leaped  into  the  enemy's  fhip  during 
*.he  engagement. 

received 


APPENDIX. 


received  from  the  hand  of  the  emperor  in  return 
for  his  gallantry  in  feveral  fea  aftions ;  particu- 
larly in  one  fought  with  Sextus  Pompeius,  to 
which,  and  its  honorable  reward,  Virgil  alludes 
in  the  following  lines : 

"  Parte  alia  vends  et  diis  ./Vgrippa  fecundis 
Arduus  agmen  agens  ;    cui  belli  infigne  fuperbum 
Tempora  navali  fulgent  roftrata  corona."* 

The  neck  of  Agrippa  is  reprefented  as  bare,  and 
the  hair  fliort  and  curling.  Thefe  were  fafhions 
amongft  the  old  Romans,  who  left  both  the  arms 
and  neck  entirely  expofed  to  view ;  a  knowledge 
of  which  circumftance  throws  confiderable  light 
on,  and  gives  additional  beauty  to  that  natural 
piclure  of  jealoufy  fo  admirably  painted  by  the 
Roman  Poet; 


*  Virgil,  JEneid.  VIII,  et  Dio,  lib.  XLIX.  Agrippa 
was  the  fecond  perfon  who  received  the  reward  of  a 
roftral  crown  for  his  naval  pr9wefs ;  the  learned  Varro 
anticipated  him  in  this  honor  about  thirty  years  before, 
Pliny,  III.  ii.  et  VII.  xxx. 

Ss  2  "  Cum 


APPENDIX. 


"  Cum  tu  Lydia  Telephi 

Cervicem  rofeam,  et  ccrea  Telephi 

Laudas  brackia,  vae  meum 

Fervens  difficili  bile  tumet  jecur."* 

"  Ah  !    when  on  Telephus  his  charms, 
His  rofy  neck,  and  waxen  arms, 
My  Lydia's  praife  unceafmg  dwells, 
What  gloomy  fpleen  my  bofom  fwells."t 

The  reverfe  of  this  coin  bears  the  figure  of 
Neptune,  holding  a  trident  in  his  left  hand,  and 
treading  with  his  contrary  foot  on  a  kind  of 
globe. 

The  coin  is  of  brafs,  the  fize  of  the  en- 
graving.^ 

*  Hor.  Carm.  lib.  I.  ode  xiii. 
t  Francis. 

J  The  Romans  very  wifely  {truck  all  their  devices  on 
the  bafer  rnetals,  for  two  reafons ;  that  the  knowledge  of 
the  circumftances  they  were  meant  to  commemorate  might 
be  the  more  univerfally  imparted  ;  and  that  covetoufnefs 
might  not  annihilate  the  monument,  by  defacing  the 
device,  and  melting  the  metal.  It  is  to  be  remembered, 
that  what  we  call  Roman  coins  are  nothing  more  tha.n  the 
common  currency  of  Italy,  in  the  times  of  the  ancients. 

No. 


APPENDIX.  5 

No.  2.  is  a  coin  of  Tiberius  Caefar,  who  was 
adopted  by,  and  fucceeded  Auguftus.  The 
unnatural  brutality  and  infamous  practices  of 
this  difgrace  to  manhood  are  too  well  known,  to 
render  any  detail  of  his  character  neceflary. 
This  coin  appears  to  have  been  flruck  during  his 
fecond  confulfhip ;  in  which  he  obtained,  by  the 
permiflion  of  Auguftus,  the  title  of  Imp.  or 
Imperator,  the  victorious  general,  in  confequence 
of  his  recent  fuccefles  in  Germany  ;  eight  years 
before  the  birth  of  our  Saviour. 

The  reverfe  reprefents  the  figure  of  Vittory, 
ftanding  on  the  rojlrum  of  a  fhip  ;  ornamented, 
as  the  ancients  reprefented  her,  with  a  pair  of 
wings,  and  bearing  in  one  hand  a  chaplet  of  laurel, 
and  in  the  other  a  branch  of  palm  ;*  the  rewards 

*  Alatam  quoque  fingi  pingique  folitam  ob  veloci- 
tatem  dixeris  (quo  enim  citius  viftoria  parta,  ac  breviori 
fpatio  vifti  fugatique  holies,  eo  illuftrior  eft  ac  celcbrior  ;) 
vcl  quod  mobilis  fit,  nunc  his  nunc  illis  fecunda.  Palma. 
Viftorias  tributa,  quod  ejus  rami,  ut  auclor  eft  Ariftotelcs, 
Plutarchus,  Plinius,  et  A.  Gellius,  lib.  III.  Noft.  Alt.  cap. 
vi.  ponderi  impofito  refiftunt,  nee  premi  fe  patiuntur,  imo 
contra  obfiftunt.  Corona  datur/^w?-^,  quia  eft  vinculum, 
quo  et  vicii  hoftes  alligari  folcnt,  aut  vcrius  pracmium  eft 
viftori.  Ant.  Auguft.  Dialog,  ii.  Antiq.  Numiiinat.  p.  23. 

of 


APPENDIX. 


of  thofe  who  had  fignalized  themfelves  in 
battle.* 

"  Adfuit  ipfa  fuis  alls  Viftoria."t 
And  winged  Viftory  herfelf  was  there. 

Nor  has  our  own  great  Poet  forgotten  theie 
appendages  of  the  Goddefs,  in  his  fublime  de- 
fcription  of  the  Mefliah,  when  going  to  the  dif- 
comfkure  of  Satan  and  his  angels  : 

"  He  in  celeftial  panoply  all  arm'd 
Of  radiant  Urim,  work  divinely  wrought, 
Afcended ;    at  his  right  hand  Vi&ory 
Sat  eagle-wing' 'd ;    befide  him  hung  his  bow 
And  quiver  with  three-bolted  thunder  ftor'd, 
And  from  about  him  fierce   effufion  roll'd 
Of   fmoke,    and  bickering    flame,    and   fparkles 
dire."  J 

No.  3.  is  a  coin  ftruck  in  honor  of  Germanicus^ 
on  a  glorious  and  memorable  occafion.  The 
face  of  it  reprefents  him  in  the  habit  of  a  Roman 
foldier,  apparently  in  the  ac~l  of  addreflmg  a  body 

*   "  Lentas  viftoris  praemia  palmce." — Ovid. 
•f  Claud,  de  Sex.  Conf.  Honorii. 
|  Paradife  Loft,  book  vi.  line  760. 

of- 


APPENDIX. 


of  people:  the  reverfe  exhibits  his  triumphal 
chariot,  in  which  he  again  appears.  This  laft 
circumftance  marks  the  time  of  the  medal  being 
coined,  which  was  during  the  confulfhip  of  C. 
Ccelius  Rufus,  and  L.  Pomponius  Flaccus,  in 
the  feventeenth  year  of  the  Chriftian  aera,  when 
Germanicus  received  the  honors  of  a  triumph, 
for  his  victories  over  the  Germans.* 

On  both  the  faces  of  the  coin,  this  hero  is 
rerrefented  as  holding  in  his  left  hand  a  kind  of 
fceptre  furmounted  with  a  bird.  This  is  the 
ftandard  or  eagle  of  the  nineteenth  legion,  one  of 
the  three  that  perifhed  with  the  unfortunate 
Varus,  which  was  recovered  during  the  aufpicious 
campaigns  of  Germanicus,  againft  the  barbarians 
who  had  deceived  and  deftroyed  that  credulous 
commander.t 

Germaaicus 

*  Tacit.  Annal.  II.  cap.  xli. 

f  "  Bruftcros  fuaurentes,  ekpedita  cum  manu  L.  Ster- 
tinius,  miffu  Germanici,  fudit ;  intcrque  csedem  et  pnedam 
repent  undevictjimiK  legionis  aquilam,  cum  Varoamiflam." — • 
Tacit.  Ann.  lib.  I.  "  Ipfe  [Gcnnanicus^  majoribus  copiis 

Marfos 


APPENDIX. 


Germanicus  was  the  fon  of  Antonia  Minor, 
and  Drufus  Major,  and  cut  off  in  the  prime  of 
life,  by  poifon,  at  the  fecret  inftigation  of  the 
Emperor  Tiberius.* 

No.  4.  exhibits  the  head  of  Antonia  Minor, 
daughter  of  Mark  Anthony  and  Oclavia,  and 
mother  of  Germanicus  and  the  Emperor  Clau- 
dius. She  bore  an  amiable  character,  and  met 
with  the  general  fate  of  fuperior  worth  in  thofe 
days — a  violent  death ;  dying  by  poifon  during 
the  reign  of  Tiberius.t  The  coin  was  ftruck 
when  her  fon  Claudius  had  obtained  the  fove- 
reignty,  in  honor  of  his  deceafed  parent.  He  is 
reprefented,  on  the  reverfe,  with  the  clofe  habit 

Marfos  irrumpit,  quorum  dux  Malovendus,  nupcr  in 
deditionem  acceptus,  propinquo  loco  defoflam  Varianae 
legionis  aquilam,  modico  praefidio  fcrvari  indicat.  Mifla 
extemplo  manus,  quae  hoftem  a  fronte  eliceret ,  alii,  qui 
terga  circumgreffi,  rccluderent  humum  :  utrifquc  adfuit 
fortuna." — Tacit.  Annal.  lib.  II. 

*  Sucton.  in  Vit.  Cal\g.  cap.  i.  Tacit.  Annal.  lib. 
I.  et  II. 

I  Tacit.  Annal.  lib.  III. 

and 


APPENDIX.  9 

and  veiled  head  of  the  pontifcx  maximus,  or 
high  prieft,  (for  the  emperors  were  inverted 
with  all  the  offices  of  the  priefthoodj  bearing  in 
his  right  hand  a  kind  of  veflel,  called  a 
Jimpuvium,  anciently  ufed  in  the  facrificial 
rites. 

No.  5.  is  a  coin  of  the  Emperor  Vefpafian, 
(truck  during  his  feventh  confulfhip,  in  the  year 
of  our  Lord  76.  At  this  period  the  empire  was 
bleffed  with  univerfal  peace,  the  emperor  having, 
in  the  preceding  year,  dedicated  and  furnifhed  a 
temple  to  that  goddefs.  Hence  the  figure  of 
Peace  became  a  very  proper  fubjeft  for  the 
reverfe  of  this  coinage,  and  the  fenate,  (who 
regulated  the  mint)  by  adopting  it,  paid  a  noble 
though  tacit  compliment  to  their  emperor, 
through  whofe  exertions  this  blefling  had  been 
procured. 

The  goddefs  is  reprefented  on  the  reverfe  as 

refting  on  a  pillar,  to  fhew  the  duration  and  fe- 

curity  of  the  empire's  quiet.     In  her  right  hand 

Tt  fhc 


IO  APPENDIX. 

{he  holds  an  olive  branch,*  one  of  her  ufual 
emblems : 

"  Ingreditur.  ramumque  tenens  popularis  olivae."t 

In   her   left   a  cornucoplae,   expreffive    of  the 
plenty  produced  by  the  arts  of  peace  : 

"  Interea  pax  arva  colat,  pax  Candida  primura 
Duxit  araturos  fub  juga  curva  boves  ; 

Pax  aluit  vites  et  fuccos  condidit  uvae, 
Funderet  ut  nato  tefta  paterna  metum  ; 

Pace  bidens  vomerque  vigent — "J 

"  Quae  cornu  retinet  divite  copiara."^ 

*  "  In  aliis  plurimis  virgoeft,  [pax]  altera  oleae  ramum. 
altcra  geftans  cornu  copiae.  Virgo  eft,  ut  fimplex  et 
Integra ;  clara  pacis  argumenta.  Bello  namque  virgines 
Contra  jus  ftuprantur  ac  rapiuntur.  Olea  fignum  eft  paci- 
ficatoris,  ut  legati  tefte  Virgilio.  In  cornu  copiae  obferves 
fpicas,  uvas,  aliofque  fruftus,  cum  vomere,  omniaquein  hoc 
cornu,  quod  Acheloi  fuit,  cum  in  tauruni  mutatils 
Herculem  fuperare  conabatur  ;  qui  alterum  fregit  cornu, 
quod  Nymphae  acceptum  floribus  et  pancarpio,  ut  Nafo 
fabulatur,  implerunt." — Ant.  Auguftini  Dialog,  ii.  Antiq. 

i  Ovid,   Metam.  line   7. 
+  Tibullus,   El.   X.  line  i. 

^   Seneca,  Trag.  in  Medea,  de  pace. 

It 


APPENDIX.  11 

It  may  be  obferved  alfo  that  the  flowing  veft  of 
the  figure  appears  to  be  gathered  or  tucked  up 
before.  This  feems  to  be  intended,  by  the 
Roman  mint-mafters,  \vho  had  a  meaning  in 
every  thing,  to  convey  a  ftronger  idea  of  the 
abundance  produced  by  a  ceflation  from  war; 
for  we  are  to  imagine  this  fold  of  the  garment 
filled  likewife  with  the  gifts  of  Ceres  and  Pomona, 
according  to  the  defcription  of  .Tibullus  : 

"  At  nobis,  pax  alma,  veni,  fpicamque  teneto, 
Perfluat  et  pomis  candidus  ante  Jinus." 

The  fixth  and  laft  coin  is  one  of  Galerius 
Valerius  Maximianus,  who,  from  a  very  bafe 
origin,  was  raifed  to  the  purple,  jointly  with 
Conftantius,  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  304.  He 
was  remarkable  for  his  propenfity  to  every  vice 
which  could  difhonor  our  nature;  and  an  in- 
flexible diflike  to  the  Chriftian  religion,  which  he 
perfecuted  with  the  utmoft  rigor.  The  ancient 
fathers  of  the  church  affure  us  his  punifhments 
for  his  iniquities  commenced  evtn  in  this  life,  by 
the  vifitation  of  a  tedious,  horrible,  and  loath- 
Tt2  fomc 


IS  APPFNDIX. 

fome  difeafe,  of  which  he  at  length  expired, 
hateful  to  himfelf  and  detefted  by  all  around 
him.* 

The  reverfe  bears  the  figure  of  the  genius  of 
the  empire,  holding  a  patera^  or  facrificial  plate, 
in  his  right  hand,  and  a  cornucopias  in  his  left ; 
for  fuch  was  the  fanciful  fuperftition  of  the 
Romans,  that  they  not  only  believed  each 
individual  had  his  own  particular  genius  or 
daemon ;  but  that  kingdoms,  ftates,  and  cities 
poffefled  a  fimilar  advantage,  every  one  having  a 
prefiding  intelligence,  perpetually  employed  in 
Averting  evil  and  inducing  good.t 

*   Eufebius,  lib.  VII.    cap.   xv. 

i  "  Varies  cuftodes  urbibus  rr.ens  divina  diftribuit.  Ut 
animae  naftentibus,  itapopulis  iaUiej>  genii  dividuntur."— 
Symmachus. 


A  Copy 


APPENDIX.  13 


A  Copy  of  the  Rate  made  March  ijth,  1653, 
for  the  Maintenance  of  the  Minijler  of  New- 
port. Vide  page  119. 

WHEREAS  this  towne  and  Borough  is 
become  very  populous,  confiding  of  two  thou- 
fand  five  Hundred  Souls  and  upwards,  and  the 
Church  or  Chappell  thereof  is  not  endowed  wth. 
any  means  or  Maintenance  for  the  fubfiftence  or 
livelyhood  of  any  Minifter,  or  Minifters,  to 
preach  the  word  of  God,  or  officiate  therein  as  a 
minifter,  or  minifters ;  By  means  whereof  all 
Godly  minifters  are  utterly  difcouraged  to  take 
the  Care  and  Burthen  of  the  faid  place  and 
people  upon  themfelves,  to  the  great  damage  and 
eternall  hazard  of  the  Soules  of  the  poore  in- 
habitants of  this  fame  towne.  The  wch.  the 
Mayor  and  chief  Burgefles  of  this  Burrough  are 
willing,  as  much  as  in  them  lyeth,  to  remove, 
redrefle,  and  for  the  future  pfent,  it  being  a  duty 
incumbent  on  all  magiflratesj  and  therefore  have 

thought 


14  APPENDIX. 

9UMH»*«MHM0MMiMMMMattMMMM*«*MMM«M»mMmM«*MM^^M 

thought  fitt,  to  conftitute,  ordeyne,  and  appoint, 
and  do  hereby  at  this  pfent  affembly,  conftitute, 
ordeyne,  and  appoint,  That  for  and  towards  the 
maintenance  of  fuch  minifter,  or  minifters,  as 
are,  or  fhall  be  thought  fit,  and  appointed  to  of- 
ficiate in  the  aforefaid  church  or  chappell,  a 
rate,  Tax,  or  Afiefiment,  not  exceeding  the 
fome  of  one  fhilling  and  fixpence  upon  every 
pound,  for  one  whole  yeare,  be  made  on  all  the 
Lands  and  Tents.  lying  w^in  the  fame  Borough, 
and  alfo  on  all  the  Rents  and  perfonall  Eftate, 
and  Eftates,  of  all  the  Inhabitants,  rcfiding  w^in 
the  aforefaid  Burrough,  with  refpecl  to  their  beft 
abilities  in  that  behalfe,  by  the  Mayor,  and  the 
chiefe  BurgefTes  of  the  fame  Burrough,  or  the 
Major  Part  of  them,  together  \vt1n.  Eight,  fix,  or 
four  of  the  able  Inhabitants  refideing  withing  *Y 
fame  Burrough.  And  that  thofe  for  the  fame 
purpofe  fhall  be  from  time  to  time  elefted, 
named,  and  chofer.  by  the  faid  Mayor,  and  chief 
Burgefies  for  the  time  being,  for  that  purpofe.* 

*  Sir  R.  Worfley's   Hiftory,  Append.   No.  XLIV, 


ERRATA. 

frACI 

LINK 

FOR 

READ 

99» 

61 

rifelefs, 

ufclefs. 

tot, 

5, 

natural, 

nature. 

171» 

2» 

twelve, 

ten. 

192, 

8, 

crufh, 

crafh. 

216, 

18, 

difes, 

diics. 

228, 

21, 

OTOf<y»J, 

OTO^yii. 

232, 

16, 

ditto, 

ditto. 

265, 

7» 

Hi>rr»>vt 

fuXfTIJf. 

268, 

3> 

things, 

themes. 

INDEX. 


A 


PACE. 

BORIGINAL  Inhabitants  of  Britain        -  i 

their  favage  ftate  3 

Anecdote  from  Strabo  (note)         .        .        .  5 

Arthur,  prince  of  the  Silures,  oppofes  the  Saxons  19 
Adelwakh,  king  of  the  South  Saxons,  receives  the 

•  ifland             -             -             -  22 

Alfred  defeats  the  Danes             -  25 

Adam  de  Gordon,  warden  of  the  ifland             -  38 

Affeton,  Sir  Richard  de,  warden  of  ditto          -  38 

Annebout,  the  French  admiral,  invades  the  ifland  44 

Alfred,  his  political  regulations  55 

Artillery  provided  by  the  inhabitants  of  the  ifLnd  75 

Arreton  church,  an  account  of                          -  i«6 
Ancient  connection  between  the  ifland  and  the 

continent             -             -          -          -  186 

Aquatic  fowl            -  -                   -           -  199 

Ammodytes,  or  fand-eels  -          -          -218 

Animal  <m>fyi?,  initances  of  228 

Uu 


INDEX. 

Anafarca,  recipe  for  250 

Ammoniac  -  ....  257 

Argilla  apyra  ...  360 

fullonica  ....  260 

marga       -  -         '••         -  261 

Arena  micacea  argentea    -  261 

Alumen  commune  ....  261 

Alderney  cows        .-_''*  .          -  290 


Belgae,  -who  they  were  -  3 

when  they  arrived  in  England  •  -  3 
Britons  ot  Belerium  (or  Cornwall)  trade  with  the 

Phoenicians  -  5 

Britons  lend  ambafladors  to  Rome  for  afliftance  17 

Bede's  account  ot  Saxon  devaftations  (note}  18 
Bernwinus  receives  charge  of  fourth  part  of  the 

ifland  -  -  2* 

Baldwin  de  Redv:jrs,  lord  of  the  ifland  -  30 

Barons,  their  ancient  (late  34 

Beacons  in  the  ifland,  their  number  and  fituation  59 

Bifhop  Wilfred  receives  a  fourth  part  of  the  ifland  95 

Brading  church,  an  account  of  -  -  \\z 

Bin  {lead  church,  ditto  -  117 

Brixton  parith,  ditto  -  -  124 

Brooke  church,  ditto  ...  -  126 

Borough  of  Newport  -  129,  130 

of  Yarmouth  -  129 

Boroughs,  their  nature  in  early  times  (note)  -  133 

Baldwin  de  Redvers  grants  a  charter  to  Yarmouth  140 

Bray,  Sir  Reginald,  leiiee  of  the  ifland  -  1,59 


INDEX. 

!Bolton,  Duke  of,  governor  of  the  ifiand           -  164 

Charles,  Duke  of,  ditto                       .  165 

Harry,  Duke  of,  ditto              -  166 

Bonchurch,  or  St.  Boniface,  fcenery  about  it  191 

Black-gang  chine              ....  196 

Badgers  not  found  in  the  ifland              -           -  204 

Bernard,  or  hermit-crab              -                      -  223 

Bee  orchis            .....  248 

Brading  haven                   ....  295 


Celtae,  the  original  inhabitants  of  Britain        -  i 

migrated  hither  from  Gaul  2 

Carifbrook,  its  probable  derivation  (note)       -  4 

Cornwall,  Phosnicians  trade  thither       -  5 

produces  tin  $ 

Cafliterides  iflands,  why  fo  called  (note)         -  5 

Caefar,  his  expeditions  into  Britain          -  8 

Claudius  in  Bricain           ....  8 

Commercial  occupations,  their  effeft  on  the  mind  9 

Carifbrook,  the  fue  of  a  Roman  ftation  -         -  11 

Cerdic  and  Cinric  conquer  Ifle  of  Wight        -  19 

Cerdic  dies          ....           -         -  20 

Ceadwalla,  king  ojf  Weflex,  conquers  the  ifland  22 

his  cruelty  and  vow  22 

Carifbrook  caflle  attacked  by  the  French           -  42 
Charles   I.  his  caufe  befriended  by  the  Ifle  of 

Wight  gentlemen         ...  -49 

Countefs  of  Portland,  her  gallantry                     50,  51 

Culpeper,  Lord,  governor  of  the  ifland  59 

UU2 


INDEX. 


Carifbrook  caftlc,  ftores  of,  in  Henry  the  Eighth's 

reign  -  70 

Caftle  of  Sandha  n  bay.  ditto  -         -         -71 

Caftle  at  Weft  Cowes,  ditto    -         -  -       7* 

Camden's  character  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  ifland  76 
Culpeper,  Lord,  governor  of  the  ifland  84 

Chnftianity  introduced  into  the  ifland  91 

Converfion  of  the  Saxon  inhabitants  of  the  ifland 

to  Chriftianity    -  ,         -  -       9$ 

Cynbreth,  Abbot  of  Reodford  or  Redbridge,  anec- 
dote of  -  96 
Chriftianity,   its   depraved    ftate    in    the   middle 

ages  -  r  r  99,  100 

Carifbrook  priory  founded  -  ,       101 

granted  to  the  abbey  of  Lyra    lot 
Chapels,  feveral  in  the  ifland     -  -  no,  in 

Carifbrook  church,  an  account  of          -  -120 

Canteria  Manerii  de  Gatcombe  -  -       121 

Chaie  churc'  ,  an  account  of  -  -       12* 

Calbourn  church,  ditto  -  -        125 

Charles  II.  giants  a  charter  to  Newport  -        130 

vifits  Yarmouth  -  145 

Carey,  Sir  George,  governor  of  the  ifland       -       161 
Culpeper,  Lord,  ditto       -  -       163 

Cutts,  Lord,  ditto  -  164 

Cadogan,  Lord,  ditto        -  -  .165 

Climate' of  the  Ifle  of  Wight      -           -  -       168 

Culver  cliff  -  189 

Columba  faxatilis,  or  rock-pigeon  -       189 

Cuttle-fifh  -  -  -  216,217 

Crabs,  large  -  -  -  -  22^ 

Cormorant,  hiftory  of  that  bird  •       239 


IND1X. 


Conferva  polymorpha      •  .  ,  251 

Crithmum  maihimum      -  <•  252 

Chalk          ...  .           .  -256 

Coal  *           -  »  259 

Clover        -           -           -  •     -  -  286 

Cows         ...  .  290 

Cheefe       ......  292 


Panifli  tumuli  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight  (note)  g 

Degeneracy   of  the  Briions  when  deferted   by 

the  Romans       -  -  r  -  -         16 

Danes,  particulars  refpe&ing  them      -  -24 

make  a  defcent  on  the  ifland  25 

Pe  Redvers,  family  of,  lords  of  the  ifland  29,  30 

Deteuce  of  the  ifland  under  its  lords    -  55,  56 

in  the  reign  of  Edward  I.    57,  58 
in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  60-64 
in  the  feventeenth  century  81-83 
Druidifm  the  ancient  religion  of  the  ifland      -         87 
Dimenfions  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight  -  ^       168 

Downs  ot  ditto     -  -  180 

Dunnofe  promontory      •          -  -  191 

-  T  -  248 


Eaftern  coaft,  when  firft  peopled           -  a 
Expeditions  of  Czefar  into  Britain  did  not  amount 

to  a  conqueft  of  the  country  8 

Edward  I.  purchafes  the  lordfhip  of  Ifle  of  Wight  34 


INDEX. 


Emgiration  from  the  ifland  in  fourteenth  century  41 

Eaft-Meden,  watches  in  it  in  1638        -  .  81 

Echo,  a  remarkable  one              -  194 

Eagle,  Job's  fublime  defcription  of  it  -  226 

builds  occafionally  in  Culver  cliff  -  827 

anecdote  of  one     -  -  229 

Echini        -          „          „          .  . 


Fortibus,  William  de,  Earl  of  Albemarle  -         34 

French  invade  the  Ifle  of  Wight         -  •         40 

attack  Carifbrook  caflle           .  -42 

Forts  built  in  the  ifland  by  Henry  VIII.  -         44 

Feudal  fyftem,  its  principles                 -  "65 

Fire-arms  introduced  into  the  ifland  .         74 
Fitz-Ofborne,  William,  founds  Carifbrook  priory   101 

Frefhwater  church,  an  account  of  -       128 
Fortibus,  Ifabella  de,  grants  charter  to  Newport     133 

Francheville,  ancient  name  of  Newtown  -       135 

Female  inhabitants  of  the  ifland          -  .       170 

Fairy  rings,  their  caufe            -             -  -       182 

Frelh water  bay                        -            .  -       196 

cavern       -            .            .  -       198 

cliffs  .       J09 

Foxes  not  found  in  the  ifland               -  -       204 

Falco  iiifus    -             •             -             -  .231 

Fox-glove     -             -             -             -  -       248 

Foflil  (hells   -             -             .             .  -       258 

Fallowing  fyftem        -  278 

Farms,  their  fize        -            m            _  -       283 


INDEX. 


Galatae  or  Gauls,  the  original  inhabitants  of  Britain  i 
Gomerians,  orPhrygians,Celtae  defcended  from  them  2 
Gallia  Belgica,  the  country  of  the  Belgae  -  3 
Godwin,  Earl,  makes  a  defcent  on  the  ifland  26 

Gallantry,  inftance  of,  in  the  Hinders  -          44 

Godfhill  church,  an  account  of  -  115 

Gatcombe  church,  ditto  -  -  -       isj 

Gate,  Sir  Jeffery,  captain  of  the  ifland  -"      158 

Game  of  the  ifland  pieferved  by  E.  Horfey,  Efq.  160 
Growth  of  downs  -  181 

Gryllus  talpa,  or  mole-cricket,  its  hiftory  210,  21 1 
Guillemot,  hiftory  of  that  bird  -  -  238 

Game,  regulations  refpe&ing  it  by  Henry  VIII.  242 
Gold  -  263 

H 

Hengift  and  Horfa,  Saxon  chiefs,  land  Ln  England  17 
Haftings,  battle  of,  when  fought  -  27 

Hereford,  Earl  of,  lord  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight  28 

Henry  VIII.  builds  forts  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight  44 

Harby,  the  feditious  curate  of  Newport  -  50 

Henry  VIII  bull. is  forts  on  the  coaft  of  the  ifland  66 
Holmes,  Sir  Robert,  governor  of  the  ifland  -  85 
builds  a  noufe  at  Yarmouth 

to  accomodate  Charles  II.  -  -  145 

Humphrey,  Duke  of  Gloucefter,  warden  of  the 

ifland  -  -  -  >57 

Horfey,  Edward,  captain  of  the  ifland  -  »6o 


INDEX. 


Henry,  Earl  of  Southampton,  captain  of  the  Ifle 

of  Wight  ....  161 

Hammond,  Colonel,  governor  of  the  ifland    -  16* 

Holmes,  Lord,  ditto  -  166 

Hares,  plenty  of  them  in  the  ifland     -  -  205 

Hermit-crab  ....  2^3 

Hawks  in  Culver  cliff  -  230 

Horfes  -  -  -  -  891 

Hogs  -  -  -  »  -  291 

Houfe  of  Induftry  •  305 


Ifle  of  Wight,  when  fir  ft  peopled  a 

when  peopled  hy  the  Belgae     -  4 

tin  ftaple  removed  thither         *  6 

Iftis,  ancient  name  of  Ifle  of  Wight  -  .6 

Ifle  of  Wight  fubdued  by  Vefpafian                 -  9 

conquered  by  the  Saxons            -  19 

its  inhabitants  murdered               -  20 

laid  wafte  by  Wuipher  22 

given  to  Edelwalch  22 

annexed  to  the  kingdom  of  WefTex  22 

its  population  in  the  (eventh  century  23 

its  ftate  and  Appearance  under  the 

Saxons                        -  24 

attacked  by  the  Danes    -             -  25 
attacked  by  Earl  Godwin  and  his  fon 

Tofti                                        -  26 

conquered  by  the  Normans  27 

given  to  William  Fitz-Ofborne  28 

granted  to  Richard  de  Redwrs  29 


INDEX. 


Ifle  of  Wight  defcends  to  Ifabella  de  Fortibus  33 

purchafed  by  Edward  I.  34 

invaded  by  the  French  -  40 

ditto  -  -  42 

ditto  -  43 

ditto  -  45 

its  defence  under  its  lords  -  55*  5& 
ditto  in  the  reign  of  Edward  I.  57.  58 

its  ancient  religion  87-9* 

Inhabitants  of  the  ifland                        r  -       175 

J 

Jutes,  a  German  tribe  -         19 
Jerom,  Earl   of   Portfmouth,  removed  from  the 

government  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight    -  46 

James  I.  incorporates  Newport.  130 

Yarmouth  -       140 

John  Fitz-Thomas,  warden  of  the  ifland  -       155 
John  de  Langford,  ditto                        -      .       -       156 

Job's  defcription  of  the  eagle  -       226 

K 

Kentifli  fhore  firft  peopled  a 

KotfffftTtfos,  the  Greek  name  for  tin   (note)  -         5 

Kent,  kingdom  of,  eftabliflied  -       18 

King  John  figns  Magna  Charta  -       31 

retires  to  the  Ifle  of  Wight  -       32 

Kingfton  church,  an  account  of             -  -121 

Kaighton  court,  ditto  -     149 

Knowles,  grand  fcenery  there  -     195 

Xx 


INDEX. 


Lenity  of  the  Romans  to  conquered"  nations      -  10 
Londinium,  or   London,    tin    ftaple    removed 

thither                                       -             -  11 

Lords  warden  of  the  ifland,  their  rights             -  147 

Lymington,  Vifcount,  governor  of  the  ifland    -^  165 

Laboring  poor  of  the  ifland        -  176 

Luccomh,  fceriery  about  it        -  191 
Loligo,  or  cuttle-fifh     -                                          -216 

Launce,  or  fand-eel       -             -             -             -  218 

Limpets             -  222 

Lobfters,  of  large  fize              -                           -  224 

Lichen  calcareum         -                          -     "^     -  251 

M 

Marfeillefe  Greeks   difcover    Phoenician   trade 

here               -            -             -            -             -  6 

* 

Marfeillefe  Greeks,  when  they  began  to  traffic 

in  Cornwall                 -  6 

Marfeilles,  tin  fent  thither  6 

Magna  Charta  figned  by  King  John                  -  31 

Mofes  Read,  the  feditious  mayor  of  Newport  49 
Military  characler  of  the  iflanders  in  fixteenth 

century         -  '                         -                           -  76 

Militia  of  the  ifland,  the  prefent,  when  eftablilhed  85 
Monafteries,    the    original    principle   of    their 

foundation                                             -             -  100 

Mottefton  church,  an  account  of  124 

Montagu,  Duke  of,  governor  of  the  ifland        -  165 

Medina  river    -----  174 


INDEX. 


Mole-cricket,  its  hiftory  210,211 

Mytilus  edulis,  or  eatable  mufcle  -  220 

Myrtles                                        -  -  254 

Marga  columbina          -            -  -  261 

Manures           -            -                         -  -  282 

N 

Narbonne,  tin  tranfported  thither  6 

Normans  conquer  England  -  -  27 

Newtown,  village  of,  burnt  -  ~  43 

Northwood,  a  religious  houfe  there  -  -  no 

Newchurch  church  and  pariih,  an  account  of  114 

Niton  church,  ditto  -  115 

Northwood  church,  ditto  -  -  -  117 

Newport  church,  ditto  -  -118 

Newtown  chapel,  ditto  -  -  -  125 

Newport  borough  ...  129,  130 
when  firft  regularly  fends  members 

to  parliament  -  131 

Newtown  borough  -  ~  *35 
contefts  about  the  eleftive 

franchife  there  -  -  *37— *39 

Northern  coaft  of  the  ifland,  its  defcription  -  1 88 

Needle  rocks  -  -  -  -  -  201 


Oratory  of  Burton  founded      -  -  105 
its  ftatutes  -  106 
granted  to  Winchefter  col- 
lege      -  108 


INDEX. 

Orde,  Right  Honorable  Thomas,  governor  of 

the  ifland      ...  -  166 

Ophrys  apifera  -  248 

Ochra  ferri       -             -                           -  -  26 1 

Syriaca  -  261 


Phrygians,    or    Gomerians,    Celtae    defcended 

from  them  « 

Phoenician  navigators  trade  to  Britain                  -  £ 

commerce  declines  here       -  6 
Policy  of  the  Romans  with  refpett  to  conquered 

nations          -             -                           -  13 

Picls  and  Scots,  their  depredations         -  17 

Population  of  the  ifland  in  the  feventh  century  23 
Petition  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  ifland  in  favor 

of  Jerom,  Earl  of  Portland    -  46 

Perfecution  of  Druidifm  by  the  Romans            -  90 

Priory  of  Appulciurcombe  founded        -             -  108 

Priory  of  St.  Crofs  given  to  Wmchefter  college  109 

Portland,  Earl  of,  captain  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight  162 

Jerom,  Earl  of,  ditto               -             -  162 

Portfmouth,  Earl  of,  ditto                                     -  166 

Polecats  not  found  in  the  ifland             -             -  204 

Porpefles           -                                                        -  214 

Pi fum,  or  pea- crab                                                 -  221 

Patella  vulgata,  or  common  limpet        -             -  222 

Puffin,  hiftory  of  231-233 

Plotmore           -  2,59 

Potatoes            -             -              -             -             -  280 

P.jrkliurft  foreft                                                      -  293 

Poor  rates         •>                                                    -  307 


INDEX. 


Queen  Elizabeth  increafes  the  Britifti  marine   -       45 
Quarr,  abbey  of,  founded  b)  Baldwin,  Earl  of 

Devon     -  -     103 

taxation  of  its    lands   in   the 

fifteenth  century  -     104 

dilapidated     ...     105 
the   abbot  of,  warden  of  the 

ifland        -  -      16 


R 

Romans  in  Britain                                  -  8 

lenient  to  conquered  nations    -  10 

acquire  the  Ifle  of  Wight                       .  \  i 

Roman  coins  found  in  the  ifland                         -  12 

Romans  entirely  forfake  Britain             f  \j 

Roger  de  Breteville,  lord  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight  28 

rebels,  is  imprifoned,  and 

lofes  his  property                                               -  29 
Richard  de  Redvers   receives   a  grant  of  the 

ifland  -  -29 

Regulations  for  internal  defence  of  the  ifland     -  39 

Ruflel,  Sir  Theobald,  flain  by  the  French  -  40 
Religious  tenets  of  the  Saxons  92,  93 
Richard  de  Redvers,  founder  of  Appuldurcombe 

priory                 -             -  108 

grants  charter  to  Newport  131 

Richard  de  Aflfeton,  warden  of  the  ifland          -  1,55 

Rivers  of  the  ifland       ....  174 


INDEX. 


Razor-fifli  -  -  219 

Razor-bill,  hiftory  of  that  bird  -  -  235 

Rock-famphire             -  -  2,52 

Roads               -             -             -  -  -  286 


Southern  coaft  of  England,  when  firft  peopled  2 

Strabo,  an  anecdote  from  -  "5 

Scilly  iflands,  why  called  CafTiterides  (note}     -         5 
Spirit  ot  freedom  extingmfhed  by  luxury  -        14 

Saxons  land  in  England  -  -  -17 

conquer  Britain  -  -  -        18 

Shower  of  blood  falls  in  the  Ifle  of  Wight  (note)     30 
Sandown  fort  -  -  -  66 

eflablifhment  of,  in  fixteenth  century    67 
Sharpnode  block-houfe  -  -  -       69 

Strength  of  the  ifland  in  1625  -  77-80 

Saxons,  their  fyftem  of  religion  -  92,  93 

St.  Helen's  priory,  when  founded  and  by  whom     108 
Shanklin  chapel,  an  account  of  -  113 

St.  Boniface  church,  ditto  -  -     113 

St.  Nicholas  chapel,  ditto         -  120 

Shorwell  church,  ditto  -  -  123 

Shalfleet  church,  ditto  »  -     126 

Sir  John  Lifle,  warden  of  the  ifland     -  -     155 

Sir  Henry  Ties,  ditto  -  156 

Sydenham,  Colonel,  governor  of  the  ifland        -     163 
Stanley,  Hon.  Hans,  ditto        -  166 

Soil  of  the  ifland        -  -  -  -     170 

Springs  of  the  ifland      -  -  -  -     174 

Sandown  bay      -  -  -  -190 


INDEX. 

Shanklin  chine 

Steephill,  rude  frenery  of  -  - 

St.  Catherine's,  ditto  - 

St.  Chriftopher's  cliff  «» 

Sharks,  occafionally  on  the  Owes  of  the  ifland 

Sand-eel          -             «  .  . 

Siliqua,  or  razor-fifh  .  . 

Shells               -             .  _  . 

Swallows          -              -  -  . 

Submarine  plants          -  -  - 

Stone                 .             .  -.  _ 

Sulphur            -             -  -  - 

Sheep               -            -  .  _ 


Tin  produced  in  Cornwall        -             -  ^ 

purchafed  by  the  Phoenicians           -  j 

the  derivation  of  its  name  (note)      -  $ 

ftaple  removed  to  the  Ifle  of  Wight  -         6 

Tacitus  quoted  fnotej               ~  % 

Tumuli  in  the  ifland                   -             -  g 

Tacitus  quoted  (note)               -             -  g 

Tin- ftaple  removed  from  the  ifland  to  London  1 1 

Tacitus  quoted  (note)                -             -  12 

Tiberius,  coins  of  that  emperor  in  the  ifland  12 

Thanet,  ifle  of,  Saxons  firft  land  there  -       17 

Tofli,  Earl,  makes  a  defcent  on  the  ifland  -       26 

Tyrrel,  Sir  Hugh,  flain  by  the  French  -       42 

Tenure  of  land,  terms  of  it  in  the  thirteenth 

century                   -              -            -  '59 

Tenets  of  the  Druids                              -  -       88 

Thorley  church,  an  account  of  127 


INDEX. 


Theobald  Ruflel,  warden  of  the  ifland               -  156 

Timber  of  the  ifland                             '    -             -  171 

Tobacco-pipe  clay                     -             -             •  260 

Turnips                                          •  285- 

U  and  V 

Veneti  of  Gaul  employed  in  tranfporting  tin    -  6 

Vefpafian's  fuccefles  in  Britain              -  p 

conqueft  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight  9 

Veftis,  or  Ve£la,  Roman  name  for  Ifle  of  Wight  1 1 

view  of  it  under  Roman  government  j  3 

Vernun,  William  de,  lord  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight  31 

UnderclifF,  a  land-flip                 -                           -  193 

Vipers  in  the  ifland                    -  206 

their  hiftory                   -            -          207,  208 

Vineyard,  Sir  R.  Worfley's                   -  300 

W 

Withgar  receives  the  Ifle  of  Wight  from  Cerdic  so 

murders  all  the  remaining  Britons  in  it  21 

calls  Carifbrook,  Withgarifburg            -  «i 

Wulpher  lays  wafte  the  ifland                -  22 

Wilfred,  Bifhop,  receives  a  fourth  part  of  the 

ifland             -             -             ...             -  22 

William  the  Conqueror  acquires  England         -  17 

William  Fitz-OCborne  receives  the  Ifle  of  Wight  *j 

Worfley's  tower  built               -             -             -  66 
Weft-Cowes  caftle  built            -             -             "67 

its  eftablifhraent  in  fixteenth 

century                                    -             -  67 

Watches  and  wards  kept  in  the  ifland  in  1638  81 


INDEX. 

i 

Weft  Meden,  watches  kept  there  in  1638  -       8* 

Whitwell  church,  an  account  of           -  -      1 14 

Weft  Cowes  chapel,  ditto        -  -     1 18 
Walleran  de  Ties,  conftable  of  the  Ifle  of  Wight    155 

William  Ruflel,  warden  of  ditto  -     1,55 

Worfley,  Sir  James,  captain  of  the  ifland  -     159 

Richard,  ditto             -  160 ' 

Webb,  General,  governor  of  the  ifland  -     164 

Worlley,  Rt.  Hon.  Sir  Richard,  ditto*  -     166 

Woods,  the  largeft  in  the  ifland,  where  -     174 

Wootton  river             -             -             -  174 

Woodcocks                   -  244 
Wheat             -----     273 

Wages             -  309 


Yarmouth,  town  of,  burnt  by  the  French           -  43 

caitle  built                -             -             -  66 

caftie,  ftore.s  belonging  to  it  in  Henry 

the  Eighth's  reign      -                                          -  68 

Yeomanry  cavalry  of  the  ifland,  when  eftablifhed  85 

Yaverland  church,  an  account  of            -  113 

Yarmouth  church,  ditto                                   -  127 

borough  -     129,  140—144 

Yar  river                                                  •            -  J74 

Yeomanry  of  the  ifland                                        -  176 


FINIS. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


k 


Form  L9-Series  4939 


AnXA   ^^     '   '  '"  "  " 
000  883  140     6 


DA 
£-70 


