The Enigma of Franceschi’s Falso Scontro
Paolo Bonavoglia
Mathesis Venezia c/o Convitto Liceo ”Marco Foscarini”
Cannaregio 4941 I 30121 Venezia
paolo.bonavoglia@mathesisvenezia.it
Abstract
Franceschi’s recently discovered folder of
writings sheds new light on his Cifra delle
Caselle, and Falso Scontro ciphers; in fact
he had in mind a uera ziffra (true cipher)
a concept that, in a suggestive parallel,
resembles the perfect Shannon cryptosys-
tem, while the Falso Scontro (fake key) ci-
pher closely resembles Vernam cipher.
1
Introduction
Hieronimo di Franceschi(1540-1600), his Cifra
delle Caselle and his Falso Scontro ciphers are
mentioned by several authors in the cryptographic
literature, but both the man and the ciphers were
almost unknown until the recovery of the caselle 1.
And now a recently found folder of papers2 , en-
titled ”Scritture del sec.o Franceschi Writings by
sec. Franceschi”, sheds new light on Franceschi’s
cryptographic philosophy. First of all in several
letters to the Council of Ten3 he boasted his cipher
was a ziffra uera, a true cipher, as opposed to old
ciphers. Franceschi argues that these old ciphers,
also known as nomenclators and used all over Eu-
rope, are no true ciphers since every sign of them
can be deciphered in one and only one letter or syl-
lable or word, the one reported by the scontro (the
key sheet) so it id possible for a good professor of
ciphers, to decrypt them.
But Franceschi had designed another remark-
able cipher, the Falso Scontro. It is the main sub-
ject of this paper, using his newly found papers,
1See for more details: (Bonavoglia, 2019a)
2They are in ASVe, CX Cifre, chiavi e scontri di cifra
... busta 6. Franceschi’s papers are difﬁcult to read, he is
very verbose, obsessive and argumentative in describing his
ciphers against his opponents; and he is reluctant to give tech-
nical details while listing the merits of his ciphers
3The Consiglio di Dieci, mostly spelled brieﬂy as Conso
di X, here also CX, was a powerful court and executive organ
of the Republic, made of ten noblemen elected by the Major
Council. six ducal councilors and the Doge himself, so the
Ten were really Seventeen.
to ﬁnd the roots of Franceschi’s invention, and in
a reverse logic to link them to modern cryptogra-
phy. So, ﬁrst of all, let’s start from the end, from
the formal deﬁnition of a perfect cipher given by
Claude Shannon in his paper of 19494, that looks
very close to Franceschi’s not so formal deﬁnition
of true cipher, almost four centuries before. The
reader already expert in this matter can safely con-
tinue to section 4.
2
Shannon’s Deﬁnition of a Perfect
Cipher
Claude Shannon in 1949 deﬁned a perfect cryp-
tosystem using the uncertainty function H(),
equivalent to the information used in computer sci-
ence, and to the entropy used in physics, that gives
a measure of the uncertainty, here in particular of
a given text5.
Uncertainty should be zero when we are cer-
tain, here when we do know exactly the text; the
maximum value should be when we know noth-
ing about the text. A good measure is the number
n of possible cases (texts) usually a huge number,
so it is better to use the mathematical function of
logarithm, the logarithm of the number of possible
values; this is consistent with the case of certainty
since log(1) = 0, and for the case of n equally
probable values H = log(n). The base of the log-
arithm is not important, it is just a change of the
unity of measure. Here we will use base two, as
it is in computer science. Using base 2 H can be
interpreted as the number of binary devices neces-
sary to store the information, for instance to store
numbers in the range 0..15 one need log2(16) = 4
four bits, for example 4 lamps (on/off) ...
This deﬁnition is good only if all values are
equivalent, have the same probability. In the gen-
eral case, where we have different probabilities pi,
4See (Shannon, 1949) and also (Shannon, 1948)
5For more details see (Bauer, 2007) p. 491.
the deﬁnition requires a sort of weighted average:
having n possible cases i = 1..n with probability
pi the uncertainty is:
H = −
n
∑
i=1
pi log2 (pi)
(1)
If the probabilities are all equal, pi = 1
n then one
can simplify this formula: H = −∑n
i=1
1
n log2
1
n =
−n1
n(−log2 n) = log2(n), reducing to the ﬁrst def-
inition seen above, H = log2(n):
The simplest case is the binary one, where only
two equally probable events are possible, like an
urn containing red and white balls in equal quan-
tity, so p(W) = p(R) = 1
2 and H = log2 2 = 1. This
value has been taken as the unity of measure of H,
uncertainty alias information, called bit.
The opposite case is when there is no uncer-
tainty at all, for instance an urn containing only
white balls. Then p(White) = 1 →H = log2(1) =
0), here we have uncertainty zero, as expected.
Coming to letters of a text, the uncertainty of
a single letter using a 26 letter alphabet depends
on many things; ﬁrst, if the letters are extracted
at random from an urn containing 26 balls each
of them labeled with one of the letters; then ex-
tracting a letter at random we have p =
1
26 is :
H = log2(26) ≈4.7bit
This result has an interesting meaning: to rep-
resent a letter of the alphabet one needs 5 bits of
information, for instance ﬁve lamps that could be
on or off, or ﬁve binary numbers 0 or 1 or ﬁve
circles that can be holes or not. This is the case
of Baudot code, a telegraphic code used around
1900, that used a paper tape having, for each row,
ﬁve dots punched or not, that is 5 bits, codifying
alphabet letters, numbers and various signs into a
5 bit string. So letter A is codiﬁed into 11000 a
binary representation of number 24, B is codiﬁed
into 10011 binary for 19 and so on6. Of course in a
text written in a natural language, the letters have
very different probability, for instance the proba-
bility of a letter E in an English text is p(E) =
0.1144 = 11.44%, while p(Z) = 0.0026 = 0.26%;
this means that the uncertainty, alias information,
alias entropy, is quite less than 4.7 and that a com-
pression of data is possible.
According to Shannon, a cryptosystem is said
to be perfect if the two following conditions are
both satisﬁed, where P is the plaintext, and C is
the ciphertext
6The full Baudot code may be easily found on the web.
H(P) = HC(P)
H(C) = HP(C)
(2)
the ﬁrst equation, translated in human readable
language, sounds: the knowledge of the plaintext
is the same either we know the cipher text, either
we do not know it. In other words the knowledge
of cipher text gives no information about the plain
text. And vice versa in the second equation. After
that Shannon deﬁnes a cryptosystem as ”indepen-
dent key if a similar condition is true for the plain
text and the keytest:
From all this a pair of interesting consequences
follows, for a perfect cryptosystem:
• If a given good plain text P is encrypted using
key K producing the cipher text C one can
always invent a fake key FK that translates
C into any other required fake plain text FP.
See below, section 6.
• If an enemy gets a couple of plain text P and
the corresponding cryptogram C, he can eas-
ily recover the key used K, but this is useful
only to decrypt C into P, already in his hands;
in other words possession of the key is here
completely useless.
The key used with such a perfect cipher, must be
used once and only once, this is the reason these
ciphers are called One Time Pad, shortly: OTP.
All this is wonderful in the theoretical world,
but very difﬁcult to fully implement into a real en-
crypting tool. Indeed a cipher of the like had been
presented 30 years before Shannon, but lacked the
most important piece to be really a perfect cipher.
3
Vernam Cipher
The Vernam cipher was ﬁrst introduced by Gilbert
Vernam in 1919 who patented a cryptosystem
based on the XOR addition, symbol ⊕and on the
already mentioned Baudot code. Every letter or
sign of the plain text P is converted into a sequence
of 5 bits, so a text of 50 characters will require 250
bit. As a key you must use a random sequence
K of 250 and make the XOR addition, bit by bit;
the resulting sequence of bits is the cryptogram
C = P⊕K.
About the XOR addition, it is simply an addi-
tion modulo 2 with only two numbers 0 and 1; the
possible cases are only 4: 0 ⊕0 = 0;
0 ⊕1 =
1;
1 ⊕0 = 1;
1 ⊕1 = 0. One can also inter-
pret it in a geometrical way, as the concatenation
of only two possible rotations 0 as no rotation, 1
as a rotation of a ﬂat angle, 180o. So, it is intuitive
that 1⊕1 = 0.
A XOR addition has a surprising and useful
property: it is identical with its inverse, the sub-
traction modulo 2, as can be easily veriﬁed. So
XOR is also the deciphering function P = C ⊕K.
Finally the Vernam cipher should use a key to-
tally disordered and inﬁnite7. This is necessary;
using a ﬁnite key repeated periodically, statistical
cryptanalysis is possible and the cipher is not per-
fect.
In conclusion the Vernam patent gives only a
simple way to implement a polyalphabetic system
into an electric device; but to be a perfect cipher
it lacks the most important piece, a generator of a
truly random sequence of bits.
Indeed many devices to generate random se-
quences were invented, particularly encrypting
machines, like Lorenz and Siqaba, and nowadays
software tools, algorithms, are used to produce se-
quences of random numbers, but these are always
pseudo-random.
4
Franceschi’s View: Old Ciphers vs
True Ciphers
Now, let’s do a 400 year leap backward, Venice in
the 1500s, when Hieronimo di Franceschi was the
top deputy of ciphers.
As stated above a folder of Franceschi’s papers
was recently found in the Venetian Archives ASVe
Consiglio di Dieci (CX), Cifre, chiavi e scontri di
cifra busta 6.new. It has many letters about the
Cifra delle Caselle but also about the cifra del
Falso Scontro mentioned in section 1.
In several letters to the CX Franceschi argues
that the ciphers used in the present by the CX, ba-
sically nomenclators, were not true ciphers, and
he calls them ziffre uecchie (old ciphers), because
a ciphertext got with one of these ciphers had only
one possible solution, indeed each cipher sign had
one and only one meaning, the one found in the
scontro(the key-sheet). This means it had inside
all the information about the text, and there were
already methods using frequency analysis, well
known also to Venetian cifristi, to decrypt them
without knowing the scontro.
7Indeed Vernam didn’t require this.
It was Joseph
Mauborgne another well known American cryptographer to
state that the cipher was much stronger using an inﬁnite and
disordered sequence of bits.
Here is the original text8:
Queste ziffre essendone alcune composte de
simplici lettere et altre de lettere sillabe et al-
cune dittioni come `e detto sono per necessit`a sot-
toposte all’obligo de simili caratteri per la qual
simiglianza de caratteri quando fussero intercette
non possendo esse riceuer mai altro senso dif-
ferente, se non l’istesso che `e formato sotto quel
scontro, con che `e stata scritta.possono esser sot-
toposte al pericolo di esser interpretate senza
l’incontro pi`u facilmente er pi`u difﬁcilmente sec-
ondo la diligentia et negligentia di chi le scriue.
Onde per questa causa la ziffra da me ricordata
fu accettata per esser quella impossibile d’esser
mai cauata senza l’incontro, quando bene fusse
intercetta, et capitasse in mano di professore che
ne sapesse ancor formar di tal natura.
In contrast, he boasted the his cipher produced
a ciphertext that had no information about the
plaintext, because each sign of the encrypted text
could stand for any letter, just changing the key.
This aspect was underlined a few years before by
Bellaso, 9, who in his ﬁrst booklet of 155310 wrote
also that the key length was not important and in
fact he recommended a short word or a verse easy
to remember.
Franceschi knew the ciphers of Bellaso11 but
was at least aware that a long and disordered key
was better. And such is the key of the caselle.
5
The Cifra delle Caselle
The Cifra delle Caselle12 is a superencrypted ci-
pher invented by Franceschi about 157613.
8English: These ciphers, some being composed of simple
letters, others of letters, syllables, and a few words, as told,
are necessarily under the obligation of correspondent charac-
ters, and for this obligation, were they intercepted, since they
could not mean other different meaning than the one estab-
lished by the key used to write it, they are under the danger
to be interpreted without the key, more easily or more hardly
according to the diligence and negligence of the writer.
Therefore for this reason the remembered cipher of mine was
accepted, being the one impossible to be decrypted without
the key, even if intercepted, and happened in the hands of a
professor that knew how to write similar ciphers.
9It is a property of the polyalphabetic ciphers, Bellaso
does not seem aware that this independence could be ex-
tended to a whole test only with an inﬁnite contrasegno. Was
Franceschi aware of this?
10(Bellaso, 1553)
11Bellaso’s ﬁrst booklet was presented and printed in
Venice, Bellaso’s book is listed among Zuan Francesco
Marin’s papers in the 1578 post mortem inventory, and
Franceschi mentions several times Bellaso in his letters.
12See (Bonavoglia, 2019a) and (Bonavoglia, 2020)
13A recently found ﬁle of Franceschi’s papers shows that
caselle came after the ﬁrst mode of Falso Scontro, probably
as a simpliﬁcation of it to meet the objections of Z.F. Marin,
then main deputy to ciphers of the time: introduction of the
grid with windows (the caselle) to facilitate arithmetic oper-
Cipher A16-36 alphabet
a b c d e
f
g h
i
l m n o p q r
s
t
u z
16 13 1 15 2 4 19 20 8 14 7 17 18 10 9 12 5 11 3 6
36 33 21 35 22 24 39 −28 34 27 37 38 30 29 32 25 31 23 26
Figure 1: The A 16-36 cipher, used as ﬁrst step of encryp-
tion. The 20 letters are encrypted with two homophones dif-
fering by 20: A with 16 36, ... equivalent to a modulo 20
arithmetic. Only H ha a single cipher 20. There was also a
small dictionary of 60 words in the range 40..99.
Figure 2: The grata Germania (Holy Roman Empire, 
Prague being the seat of Emperor Rudolf II); with 8 win-
dows of 3 numbers, giving 24 columns and 26 lines, for a 
total of 624 numbers. On the right a message encrypted with 
this grid, a letter dated Jan 23, 1581, from Prague by Vene-
tian ambassador A. Badoer. ASVe CX Cifre, chiavi e scontri 
di cifra ... busta 4 - ASVe CCX Lettere degli Ambasciatori in 
Germania, b.12 c.155.
1. A small cipher called A 16-36, having an al-
phabet of 20 letters with 2 homophones, and
a 60 words dictionary. See ﬁgure 1
2. A polyalphabetic cipher using a paper grid
with windows (caselle) for a key of 624 num-
bers. See ﬁgure 2.
So to encrypt you have to use the cipher A 16-
36 to convert letters into a sequence of numbers
pi(i is the ordinal of the letter in the text); now you
subtract the ﬁrst number k1 of the grid from p1 the
ﬁrst of the plain text; calculate c1 = p1 −k1 and
write it inside the window under the number k1; if
k1 > p1 then use the highest homophone as p1 or
add 20. and so on ci = pi−ki. All this is equivalent
to a modular difference: ci = pi −ki
(mod 20)14
To decrypt you put the encrypted sheet under
the grid, and add every number of the grid with the
ations; two homophones equivalent to an arithmetic modulo
20 to keep numbers in the interval 1..19; swap roles of ad-
dition and subtraction; added a small nomenclator, while the
fake key option was apparently absent.
14Only for letters; for words in the range 40..99 it is a nor-
mal difference.
number under it in the window; the resulting num-
ber is the cipher of the plain letter, given by the
A 16-36 cipher; mathematically: pi = ci + ki or,
calling P = (p0 ... pi ... pn) and in a similar way
K and C you can write the encryption formula, us-
ing modern algebraic symbolism, in a very simple
way:
C = P−K
(mod 20)
(toencrypt)
P = C +K
(mod 20)
(todecrypt)
(3)
that is valid for alphabet letters, not for words
that having a cipher in the range 40..99 do
not requite modulo 20 arithmetic.
Apparently
Franceschi did not realize that these 60 words did
not add strength to the cipher in an appreciable
measure.
All this recalls Vernam cipher; the A 16-36 ci-
pher vs the Baudot code to codify letters into num-
bers; the subtraction/addition modulo 20 vs the
XOR modulo 2 operation.
5.1
Was the Cifra delle Caselle really Safe?
But was this cipher perfect, in Shannon’s sense, or
near to perfection?
The problem here is the key, the grid of 624
numbers, exactly one page; that is enough for short
messages, for longer the page must be reused,
worse it remained in use for years, so the key
is disordered but ﬁnite and the cipher is not per-
fect.
Theoretically methods used to break Vi-
gen`ere could be used here also, knowing the size
of a grid/page, well visible on the cipher sheet,
one could simply divide the cryptogram into 624
(or fewer) cryptotexts, the ﬁrst with all the ﬁrst
numbers of each page, the second with the sec-
ond numbers of each page and so on, getting 624
MASC15 cryptograms. But these messages were
of course very short, not enough for a statistical
cryptanalysis.
One should collect tens of mes-
sages for that, not a light task. So the cipher is
not perfect but very strong, surely much stronger
than other polyalphabetic ciphers of the age like
Bellaso and Vigen`ere that recommended the use
of short keys, easy to remember16. That is better
for ease of use, while caselle is much better for the
safety of the cipher. Bellaso in his second book-
15MASC is a very common acronym for Mono-Alphabetic
Substitution Cipher.
16Of course, using Bellaso’s of Vigen`ere’s tables with an
inﬁnite and disordered key never to be reused, one has a per-
fect cipher.
let17, apparently realized this problem and recom-
mended also a poem or a verse as a long key easy
to remember by heart. Such a key is clearly not
disordered.
Trying to answer the question above: caselle
was not perfect but on the right path to perfection.
6
The Idea of a Fake Key
As seen above in a perfect cipher the encrypting
formula can be inverted, from any cryptogram C
one can get any other plain-text FP just using the
key FK = FP−C
(mod 20).
This is the basic idea for a Falso Scontro ci-
pher; if the fake key FK ends up in the hands of
the enemy he will get the fake message FP.
But, what could be the practical use of this de-
vice? Could it be of interest in the real world?
Indeed it was.
On August 26, 158718 the CX
approved Franceschi’s Falso Scontro cipher to be
used for communications with the embassies in
Paris and Constantinople.19
there are two huge
grids with the indications, embassy in France and
embassy in Constantinople.
That day the CX
wrote20
[...]et
essendo
ancora
grande-
mente `a proposito che per ogni caso
d’inquisitione, o di uiolenza che fussi
fatta da’ Turchi, per intender il con-
tenuto delle Ziffre Nostre, ui sii celata
sempre la uera intelligenza de gli auisi
et cose Nostre, il ﬁdelisso seco del
Senato Hier.mo di Franceschi[...] si `e
offerto di dare oltra quella delle caselle
introdotta da lui, una nuova Ziffra di
simili non pi`u usata,
Franceschi had this new idea in mind for many
years, and now had the opportunity to see his in-
vention tested on the road, one key for Paris and
one for Constantinople. But how did this cipher
17(Bellaso, 1555).
18As stated above the idea was much older, a cipher of the
like, most likely the ﬁrst mode, was approved by CX in 1573,
but never used for the opposition of Z. F. Marin.
19Indeed in busta 6.3 of the collection ASve Cifre, Chiavi e
Scontri di cifra ...
20English: [...] and since it is still largely appropriate that
in case of inquisition, or of violence that might be done by
the Turks, to understand the content of our ciphers, the true
intelligence of the notices and our affairs, the most faithful
secretary of the Senate Hieronimo di Franceschi [...] offered
to give in addition to the one of the caselle introduced by him,
a new cipher of similar no longer used,
Figure 3: This huge grata in parchment has 20 colummns 
of 3 numbers each and 31 rows, for a grand total of 1869 
numbers. It is likely the grid to be used with the Falso Scontro 
cipher, ﬁrst mode. ASVe CX Cifre, chiavi e scontri di cifra ... 
busta 6.3.
work? Long research inside the Venetian Archives 
ﬁnally resulted in the good luck to ﬁnd papers, 
notes and examples about this cipher. More than 
detailed instructions Franceschi writes down the
merits of his cipher and some examples; it was 
anyway more than enough to ﬁll a good part of 
the puzzle, leaving a few pieces unsolved.
7 Franceschi and the Falso Scontro
So, we now have a lot of pieces of the puzzle 
falling to their place, let us see a list of the main 
documents found21 .
• Several loose sheets bearing a complete example of use
in the ﬁrst mode, see ﬁgure 5.
• A large scontro, a nomenclator labeled N. 11 in the
Franceschi’s book of cipher starting in August 1578.
There is a signature of Franceschi, bottom right, assert-
ing this n.11 cipher is the one approved by the CX on
1587, 31 August. See ﬁgure 7 and 9.1.
• The CX decree of August 26, 1587 approving the Falso
Scontro with only a generic description of the basic
idea.
• Two huge grids,ready for France and Constantinople.
See ﬁgure 3
• A sheet signed by Franceschi describing two modes of
use of this cipher, with a few details. See ﬁgure 4.
• A sheet signed by Franceschi having at its top an ex-
ample of the second mode, using a square; the same
example is found in many other sheets of busta 7.
• A memory dated January 1606, and a booklet, June
1606, by Pietro Partenio the archrival of Franceschi,
saying this cipher could not be used because too slow,
21The exact chronological order can not be determined, be-
cause most papers have the usual signature at the beginning:
”... io Hiermo di Franceschi ...” but no date. An approximate
date was induced by mentions of persons or of events. For
instance if Z. F. Marin is mentioned as a living person, we are
before 1578; if the CX decree of August 1587 is mentioned
we are after that date ...
being a letter by letter cipher, and dangerous because
the fake key required a square.
Franceschi himself gave the following sum-
mary description22 of the properties of his cipher,
that could be used to implement a fake key cipher
in two different modes.
8
Falso Scontro, 1st Mode
Here is the sheet signed by Franceschi listing the
seven merits, called condicioni, of the ﬁrst mode
of the cipher23
Ha la ziffera mia queste condicioni
di grandissimo comodo e utile
1. Leuar da questa palese si pu`o un signiﬁcato ﬁnto come
si uuole, falso et uerisimile . Sopra l’istessi caracteri,
poi si manifesta l’auiso uero securo et in tutto nascosto
ad ognuno.
2. E facil a componer in qual ci uoglia lingua, et impos-
sibile che s’intenda mai se non da colui che da me
prima conoscenza la chiaue, o contrasegno con il quale
s’apre l’interior mio rinchiuso.
3. Si mutano le chiaui o segni ad inﬁnito, n´e scoprir si
possono bench´e altre ﬁate alcuna di quelle insegnata
s’hauesse.
4. Non u’entra alcun carattere inutile o uano, n´e scriue
per sillaba, o dicione, ma ciascuna lettera scriui per
22This list of properties shows a strong resemblance to
the 13 Bellaso’s Singolar qualit`a delle cifre in his 1564
booklet, for instance Franceschi’s 2nd is similar to Bel-
laso’s 7th, Franceschi’s 4th to Bellaso’s 4th ... see (Bellaso,
1564). But Bellaso’s ciphers had very little in common with
Franceschi’s, above all Bellaso never uses numbers and arith-
metical operations.
23English:
My cipher has these conditions of great comfort and useful
1. One can extract from this plain-text a fake text as you
like, false and plausible.
Over the same characters
thereafter the true notice safe and hidden from anyone.
2. Easy to compose in any language and impossible to be
ever understood, except by the one that will know the
key or contrasegno with which one opens the inside
closed meaning.
3. One changes keys or signs ad inﬁnitum, and they can
not be discovered even if sometimes one had some of
the used by them.
4. There are no useless or superﬂuous characters no sylla-
bles or words. But every letter is written with a letter
both in the false sense than in the truthful one.
5. One can understand the intention written without the
fake notice or the fake alphabet any contrasegno that is
is of minor time or fatigue.
6. To write the before said cipher, one can have the assis-
tance of a scribe without danger nor any dubious that
my concepts could be known, until with the sign I will
reveal to the one having need of it.
7. In the sealed letter there is all that is needed to send
other messages if it isn’t done for the reply. But it must
be agreed that the respondent should not be informed
before by me in any way.
.
Figure 4: Franceschi’s condicioni that make the cipher con-
fortable and useful.ASVe CX Cifre, chiavi e scontri di cifra ... 
busta 6, carte del sec. Franceschi.
una lettera s`ı nel senso bugiardo, come nel utile24
5. Intender si pu`o la intencion secura senza l’uso del
auiso ﬁnto ouer suo alfabeto alcun, o contrasegno, il
che `e assai di minor tempo e fatica.
6. Nel componer la ziffra predetta, hauer si pu`o l’aiuto
d’un scrittore, senza pericolo n`e dubitacion alcuna
d’esser conosciuto l’animo mio, ﬁnch´e co’l segno io
reuelar`o non lo habbia a chi far`a bisogno.
7. Nella litera sigillata u’`e quello che si ricerca ne accadi
per ci`o spedir altri messaggij se non per la replica, In-
teso per`o che’l rispondente in alcun modo sia da me
prima accennato.
Point 4 indicates a letter by letter, monoalpha-
betic cipher, both for the true and fake text; this is
in strong conﬂict with cipher N. 11, a nomenclator
with hundreds of ciphers for syllables, words etc.
A possible explanation is that N. 11 had to do with
the second mode not with the ﬁrst, another one is
that N. 11 was simply abandoned.
8.1
An Example of the First Mode
Using the previous incomplete information, I tried
to guess a possible implementation of the ﬁrst
mode; the encrypting procedure requires an addi-
tion of the plaintext, previously encoded into num-
bers and the key; the deciphering a subtraction25;
ﬁnally, a set of four paper sheets with a complete
example was found in busta 726 completing the
24This property closely recalls Bellaso’s 4th singolar
qualit`a in his 1564 booklet, (Bellaso, 1564).
25Similar to Vernam, where the letters were converted into
numbers by Baudot Code and then XOR additioned to ran-
dom numbers.
26ASVe CX Cifre, chiavi e scontri di cifra ... busta 7
Figure 5: A complete example of the ﬁrst mode. The red 
letters were added for a better link to the text. ASVe CX Cifre, 
chiavi e scontri di cifra ... busta 7.
puzzle.
The alphabet for the plaintext is a normal 1:1 
scrambled alphabet (MASC) with numbers in the 
range 1..1927, the fake alphabet is different but of 
the same type, MASC; the key is a random se-
quence of numbers in the range 10..79 so the sum 
(ciphertext) is alway two digits: 11..79; the exam-
ple does not show it, but it is very likely the key 
can be easily written using a grid like those of the 
caselle maybe one of the huge, visible in ﬁgure 3, 
sufﬁcient to cover a rather long message.
So the fake key included also a fake alphabet, 
different from the true, a superﬂuous device for 
secrecy? For this purpose Vernam used a public 
code or alphabet the Baudot.
Here is the procedure based on Franceschi’s ex-
amples and seven conditions: I will use the con-
ventional names Alice, Bob and Eva28
1. Alice and Bob exchange in some safe way
the secret key K (here 23 55 30 35...) with in-
27In the examples not every letter appears, and 0 or 20 are
not used, so it is not sure which of the two was used.
28For those who do not know: Alice is the sender, Bob
the receiver of the message; Eva is the spy that intercepts the
message and tries to decipher it
structions.
2. Alice uses the key K to encrypt the real mes-
sage P (Il Signor Turco sta benissimo), into
cryptogram C = P + K. By subtracting the
fake message FP (Omnipotens sempiterne
deus) from C you get the key FK = C −FP
3. Alice sends by courier the cryptogram C and,
hidden in a sealed envelope, FK and the fake
alphabet.
4. If the message C arrives undisturbed to Bob,
he will decipher C with the good key K re-
ceived earlier by Alice, retrieving the real
message P = C −K.
5. Bob will use the FK safely received by Alice
as the new good key K29 to encrypt the next
message to Alice, and generate a new ran-
dom sequence of numbers FK for a new fake
messageFP30. In this sense FK may stay also
for Future Key.
6. If Eva captures the courier and under threat
gets the cryptogram C and the key FK, she
will decipher the fake message FP =C−FK.
7. It remains to be understood what happens if
Eva opens the sealed envelope with FK. New
keys to be generated and exchanged?
8. The play can go on back and forward ad in-
ﬁnitum always with a new key, and the key
will always travel before being used for en-
crypting the message.
Even if Eva under-
stands that FK is a fake, FK is and will be of
no use for her. Consistent with Franceschi’s
last condition.
It was possible to implement a software tool
doing all the job, leaving also the option to reuse
FK as the new K, or to generate a new random
key (this would require a new exchange of key be-
tween Alice and Bob). The software tests conﬁrm
that the procedure works ﬁne, but it is question-
able if the successive fake keys could be consid-
ered really random, being formed by arithmetic
operation with the true and false message, in a re-
cursive formula Ki = P + Ki−1 −FP. More, this
formula is not stable, numbers can go out of the
range [0...99]; the fake key should be normalized
inside the range [21...79] before using it as the
29One can argue that such a system may be classiﬁed as an
autokey rather than an OTP; indeed the classical autokey uses
only the original message, so it is a classiﬁcation issue.
30This point is not documented by the example, like the
previous; it seems the simplest way to fully implement point
3 of Franceschi’s conditions: ¡i¿Si mutano le chiaui o segni
ad inﬁnito ...¡/i¿
Figure 6: Software simulation of the Falso Scontro proce-
dure. One can get the true message using the green button,
the false message using the red button.
new key.
A possibility for Eva would be to seize the
sealed envelope, open it with a tool leaving the en-
velocpe intact, copy the key, put it inside the en-
velope back in its place, leaving Alice and Bob
unaware. Next time Eva will be able to read the
message31.
9
Falso Scontro, 2nd Mode
These are Franceschi’s condicioni for the second
mode33:
Nel modo secondo
1. Non da suspicion alcuna tal che in palese liberamente
scriuer si puo con caratteri, sillabe et dicioni usate ogni
aperto concetto latin o volgar et in quale altra si uoglia
lingua ancora.
2. Il detto palese che si uede, non `e conosciuto per enigma
coperto neancho da chi lo porta. Bench´e iui sia la chi-
aue del secreto nascosto di qualunque imaginacion o
fantasia.
3. `E facil a componer et difﬁcil anzi impossibile ad esser
leuata se non con l’auiso del contrasegno mio vario
per`o ad inﬁnito.
Here the information is too scarce to arrive at
a solid conjecture; it looks like Franceschi simply
swapped the roles of plaintext and ciphertext.
31In his Codebreakers Kahn writes that such devices did
exist in the 1700s in Vienna where the imperial secret services
were able to open a letter, read it, and close it in a systematic
way.32. Was a similar thing possible for the sealing wax in
the 1500s?
33English:
1. It gives no suspicion at all for it can be written as a
plaintext with letters, syllables and words used every
day, in Latin or Vulgar or any other language.
2. The visible plain text is not recognized as an enigma,
not even by the courier. Even if it is the key of any
imaginable or phantastic secret.
3. It is easy to write and difﬁcult, impossible to decrypt,
except with the aid of my contrasegno key, but various
to inﬁnity.
Figure 7: A cut of Ziffra n.11 inside Franceschi’s book, 
the alphabet is highlighted with a red dotted frame. ASVe CX 
Cifre, chiavi e scontri di cifra ... b. 4 f. 16 c. 74.
9.1 Ziffra N.11 and its Hidden Square
These conditions may have some link with this ci-
pher N.11 found in 1578-87 Franceschi’s book of 
ciphers, visible in ﬁgure 7. Another hint comes 
from the bottom right note of the second sheet, the
deciphering list (per trazer that is to extract, to de-
cipher):34
Ziffra No 11 Nouissima per trazer, fatta da
me Hiermo di Franceschi seco in essecution della
deliberation dell’Eccelso Conso di X, sotto di 26
Agosto 1587 la qual `e registrata in ﬁne del pre-
sente libro.
At ﬁrst look it seems the usual XVI century
Venetian nomenclator, but there is an unusual al-
phabet with six homophones for each letter: the
numbers written as exponents, are in the range
1..20 and if the ciphers are rearranged and com-
pleted like in ﬁgure 8 a partial table of addition
modulo 20 appears.
The other letters b, e .. z. have numbers mostly
in the range 1..20, a few between 21 and 99, and
represent syllables, numbers, and words.
The best ﬁtting example35 is present in many
copies in the Archives and shown in table 4 and
works ﬁne using the square conjectured in ﬁgure 8.
The ﬁrst sign is L15 ; looking in row L for the num-
ber 15 one ﬁnds column q, the next sign d8 has in
row d the number 8 at column u and so on getting
a plain text: Quanto io Hieronimo di Franceschi
mi sono dim written above in the example.
q
u
a
n
t
o
i
o
h
i
e
r
o
n
i
m o
d
L15 d8 a20 q8 c10 b5 d13 a2 n3 b15 u19 b19 u15 s12 d13 c5 L4 f 11
i
f
r
a
n
c
e
s
c
h
i
m
i
s
o
n o
d
i m
u5 s19 m5 m9 o19 c20 c1 t14 r9 s15 d15 g8 o10 i17 r6 L3 L4 z9 s3 c6
(4)
Another sheet found in busta 7 has only the letters
of this cryptogram:
L d a q c b d a n b u b u s d c L f
u s m m o c c t r s d g o i r L L z s c
34English: Figure N. 11 Very new for trazer, made by me
Hieronimo di Franceschi secretary in execution of the reso-
lution of the Most Excellent Council of X, under August 26,
1587 which is registered at the end of this book.
35Trying to decrypt the same cryptogram using ziffra N.11
Figure 8: Alphabet of Franceschi’s cipher N. 11, with six
homophones, and below the same arranged and enlarged to
a square, a table of subtraction modulo 20, with a diagonal
of 20 instead of the 0 we would expect today. The rows in
red are those corresponding to the homophones above. This
square table ﬁts perfectly Franceschi’s example.
9.2
Partenio’s own Falso Scontro
All
this
closely
recalls
the
last
cipher
of
Pietro Partenio (1538-1620), the archrival of
Franceschi36, in his booklet of June 160637 using
a square very similar to Franceschi’s one, shown
in ﬁgure 9.
The example given by Partenio is: good mes-
sage ”Vi sono in Brescia capi ribelli”, fake mes-
give inconsistent result, so that cipher may have been a ﬁrst
try later abandoned.
36The dispute between Franceschi and Partenio can now
be seen in a new light, not only a clash of [bad] characters,
but also as a clash between two different methods of cryptog-
raphy; Franceschi was a supporter of polyalphabetic ciphers,
such were his ziffre uere, and he despised nomenclators like
ziffre uechie.
Partenio defended nomenclators, syllabaries
and dictionaries, possibly reinforced by a super-encryption
and ﬂaunted contempt for encrypting letter by letter. On the
nomenclator-polyalphabetic question in the Renaissance, see
(Kahn, 1996), chapter: ”On the origin of a species”.
37(Partenio, 1606). A cipher almost surely derived from
this second mode, that may help here.
A feew months before,
Jan 30,
1606,
talking of
Franceschi’s Falso Scontro, in a letter to the CX, Partenio
wrote38
[...]
perch´e se il .q.
magniﬁco segretario Franceschi
uoleua dar senso ﬁnto alla sua cifra la quale per lunghezza
et difﬁcolt`a non si `e potuto adoprare; bisognaua in occa-
sione di leuarlo che si cauasse con il solo quadrato, che in
tal senso diuentaua scontro, il quale portaua seco due mor-
tali oppositioni; prima di lunghezza estrema scriuendosi a
lettera per lettera, poi per mezo di esso quadrato hauerebbe
dato sospetto del uero senso, sapendosi che lui adopraua una
casella o grada.
Indeed a quadrato (square) is found in the mentioned ci-
pher in the 1606 booklet of ciphers39
Figure 9: The square used in Partenio’s last cipher; booklet
of 1606 last page.
sage ”Dalle sue parole io spero buona pace”. Al-
ice transposes this good message using a key trans-
position:
i r c n i a v a b n c a i a i b p r s a i o e l o e i s l
and now uses the square in ﬁgure 9 so: take the
ﬁrst letter I of the transposed text and looks in the
row I for the number under the ﬁrst letter of the
fake message D: she ﬁnds number 10, and writes
this number above the letter i as an exponent and
so on; she will get the cryptogram:
i10r15c8n17i18a13v11a10b15n11c18a4i14a10i3b5p6r9s6a16i12o4e17l13o13e4i2s16l12
If Eva intercepts this cryptogram and uses the
previous procedure, looking for the number inside
the square, she will get the fake message. Indeed
an experienced codebreaker may become suspi-
cious by noting that the letters used as a basis have
the frequency distribution of a natural language,
and could understand that the numbers are just a
diversion.
9.3
A Plausible Conjecture about the Last
Mode
The
best
interpretation
I
could
guess
by
Franceschi’s
three
conditions,
example
and
Partenio’s last cipher, assuming the square as
a table of addition to avoid calculations, and a
swap between plain-text and cipher-text, is the
following:,
• Alice encrypts a message into a plain non
suspicious text FP using the good square and
the numbers used inside a sealed envelope,
together with a fake square that produces a
fake message;
• Bob receives FP and using the good square
and the numbers in the sealed envelope trans-
lates it into the good text.
• If Eva intercepts the non suspicious message
FP, she may not realize it is a cryptogram;
but even if she opens the envelope, and uses
the numbers with the fake square she gets a
fake message.
It is just a conjecture, and this second mode
remains an enigma, many pieces of the puzzle are
still missing and can only be guessed.
10
Conclusions
In addition to the almost complete reconstruction
of the Falso Scontro cipher, a suggestive parallel
emerges from this research: Franceschi’s idea of a
uera ziffra resembles Shannon’s idea of a perfect
cryptosystem40, and the Falso Scontro ﬁrst mode
cipher resembles Vernam cipher41.
If the procedure of the ﬁrst mode was the one
conjectured above, it had a disordered and inﬁ-
nite key, or at least a huge one, one of the ﬁrst,
maybe the ﬁrst of this kind; possible previous can-
didates are Trithemius’s Orchema42, p. 567, but
Trithemius dancing letters were not really disor-
dered and a similar cipher of the Codice Urbinate
dated 1501-1505 digitized and published by the
Vatican Apostolic Library43; it is attributed to Fed-
erico da Montefeltro, but since he died in 1482, the
attribution is likely wrong.
The Falso Scontro although ofﬁcially adopted
by the CX in 1586 as seen above, was, as far as we
know, never used. As Partenio wrote, the cipher
was seen as too long and difﬁcult44.
40One may argue that this statement is exaggerated: as-
suming that obviously ”resembles” is not the same as ”is
equivalent”, here I’m speaking only of the basic idea of a
perfect cipher, not of the mathematical formulation, some-
thing well beyond the mathematics of the sixteenth century.
Franceschi’s statement that using a uera ziffra, given any de-
sired fake-text one can always ﬁnd a fake-key good to get it,
hints that his basic idea was similar to Shannon’s about the
indipendence between plaintext and ciphertext, and between
plaintext and key.
41Both use addition/subtraction to encrypt/decrypt; in the
ﬁrst mode Franceschi clearly is aware that to be unbreakable
and to allow the fake key, the key must be long at least as the
ciphertext; the caselle did not satisfy any more this require-
ment and the fake key was also dropped.
42See (Trithemius, 1613)
43Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana: Manoscritti digitalizzati
- Urb.lat.948
44Inside the draft of the ﬁnal 1599/1600 relation of the ﬁve
noblemen called to examine the Partenio vs Franceschi dis-
pute, one reads that the day of the ﬁnal test, Piero Amai, son
of Agostino Amadi and the pupil of Franceschi, apologized
for not wanting to participate in this contest using the casella
... not being very good at adding and subtracting, he did not
feel suitable for that test. Franceschi died not long after, and
his ciphers died with him.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks to the archivists of the State
Archives of Venice, for the helpfulness shown, and
to Richard Bosch, Portland, Oregon for reviewing
the English language.
References
Bauer, F. L. (1991 - 2007). Decrypted secrets: Meth-
ods and Maxims of Cryptology. Springer, Berlin.
Bellaso, G. B. (1553). La cifra del sig. Giouan Battista
Bellaso, gentil’huomo bresciano ... Venezia.
Bellaso, G. B. (1555). Noui et singolari modi di cifrare
de l’eccellente dottore di legge messer Giouan Bat-
tista Bellaso nobile bresciano, con le sue regole &
essempi con somma & chiara breuit`a composti .. L.
Britannico, Brescia.
Bellaso, G. B. (1564). Il vero modo di scrivere in cifra.
L. Britannico, Brescia.
Bonavoglia, P. (2019a). The cifra delle caselle a xvi
century superencrypted cipher. Cryptologia.
Bonavoglia, P. (2019b). Hieronimo di franceschi and
pietro partenio: two unknown venetian cryptolo-
gists.
Uppsala. Link¨oping University Electronic
Press.
Bonavoglia, P. (2020).
A partenio’s stegano-crypto
cipher. Uppsala. Link¨oping University Electronic
Press.
Kahn, D. (1967 - 1996). The codebreakers. Scribner,
New York.
Partenio, P. (1606). Cifre di Pietro Partenio. Mano-
scritto, Archivio di Stato di Venezia, Venezia.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of com-
munication. The Bell System Technical Journal.
Shannon, C. E. (1949). Communication theory of se-
crecy systems. The Bell System Technical Journal.
Trithemius, I. (1507 - 1613).
Libri Polygraphiae.
Lazari Zetzneri, Argentorati (Strasbourg).
