off  fcr  Rome,  to  abjure  the  Proteftant  religion.  Lord  Peter- 
borough's inftruclions  was  as  follow  : 

"  Jnftru£tions  to   our  right  trufly  and   right    well- 

«  ANNF   "R      beloved  coufin  and  counfellor.    Charles,    Earl   of 

'  Peterborow  and  Monmouth  :  Given  at  our  Court 

at  St.  James's,  aid  of  February,  1711-12. 

"  The  raking  into  our  ferkms  confideration  the  great  endeavours 
that  are  ufed  to  pervert  our  good  coufui,  the  Electoral  Prince  of 
Saxo  ny,  to  the  fuperftitious  worfhip  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and 
the  infinite  prejudice  and  diflionour  the  Proteftant  intcreft  would 
fuffer,  if  fo  confiderable  a  Prince,  in  whofe  country  the  ref<>r- 

cnatioir 


CORRESPONDENCE,    &C.  3!  I 

which  your  Majefty  received  from  the  Em- 
prefs  Dowager  Amelia  on  the  late  Em- 
peror's death.  Mr.  Whit  worth  was  direct- 
ed fome  time  ago  to  make  an  excufe  for 
your  Majefty's  delay  in  writing. 


mation  firft  began,  fhould  abandon  the  principles  of  our  moft  holy 
religion,  think  it  a  duty  incumbent  on  us  to  prevent,  as  far  as  in 
ws  lies,  fo  fatal  a  blow.  For  that  end,  we  have  taken  the  refolu- 
tion  of  fending  you  to  the  faid  Prince,  v/hom  you  are  to  join,  if 
pofTible,  before  his  arrival  at  Rome,  yet  in  fuch  a  manner,  that  your 
falling-in  with  him  may  appear  merely  accidental  :  but  whether 
you  meet  him  on  the  road,  or  find  him  at  Rome,  you  lhall  take  a 
proper  opportunity  to  deliver  our  letter  to  him,  accompanying  it 
withexpretfions  of  our  friendship,  and  real  concern  for  his  prof- 
perity.  You  fhail  endeavour  to  infinuate  yourfelf  into  his-  good 
opinion,  and,  as  occafion  offers,  urge  the  ftrongeft  argumems  you 
can  for  keeping  him  fteady  to  the  Proteflant  religion.  If  you  find 
your  reprefentations  make  any  impreffion  upon  his  mind,  you  lhall 
then  open  to  him  the  fubjeft  of  your  commUIion,  and  declare,  that 
we  have  difpatched  you  to  him  on  purpofe  to  let  him  know  that 
we  have  ftili  the  fame  earneft  defire  of  feeing  him  which  we  have 
fo  often  exprefled  ;  and  that  if  he  perfifts  in  thofe  good  refolu- 
tions  he  formerly  had,  to  adhere  firmly  to  the  religion  in  which 
he  was  educated,  he  may  depend  upon  a  friendly  and  honourable 
reception  in  our  Court,  in  cafe  his  inclination  or  the  fituationof  his 
affairs  bring  him  this  way.  If,  upon  difcourfe  with  him,  you 
ihall  difcover  that  he  apprehends  himfelf  under  a  neceffity  of  ab- 
juring his  religion,  to  avoid  the  dangers  and  difficulties  he  will 
otherwise  be  expofed  to,  and  that  he  has  an  inclination  to  make 
his  efcape,  you  may  concert  with  him  the  proper  meafures  for 
refcuing  him  out  of  the  hands  he  is  in,  and  bringing  him  fafe 
to  our  dominio'ns,  or  thofe  of  any  other  Proteftant  Prince  or  State. 
"If  you  fhould  happen  to  be  arrived  at  Turin  when  thefe  our 
